TOWN OF HUDSON, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains ALP Supp. No. 15, current through
Ordinance passed 9-1 6-97
AlvfERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION
432 Walnut Street Cincinnati, Ohio 45202-3909 (513) 421-4248
CODE OF THE TOWN OF
HUDSON, NORTH CAROLINA
The Charter and the
General Ordinances of the Town
ORDAINED AND PUBLISHED
BY ORDER OF THE
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
The North Carolina League of Municipalities
101 0 Raleigh Building
Raleigh, North Carolina
FOREWORD
This Code of Ordinances for the Town of Hudson is provided by the North Carolina League of Municipalities
as part of its services program. Technical staff assistance has been provided by Public Research
and Management, Inc., of Atlanta, Georgia, which was responsible for the organization, codification,
indexing and plinting of the Code
The Code consists of:
The Charter and all local acts which are not a part of the Charter document;
State laws which govern the organization and procedure of the municipal governing body. These
laws control in situations to which they apply unless the Charter provided otherwise; and
The Code of Ordinances, which includes citations referring to official source and date of original
ordinances; those without citations which represent new ordinances.
This Code is designed to serve as a complete compilation of ordinances and as a reliable reference
guide. The parts, chapters and articles of the Code follow in logical order. The table of contents, the
sectional analysis at the beginning of each chapter, and the indices provide sufficient points of reference
for all elements of the Code.
The League offers a full range of services to supplement this Code and to keep it current. It is published
in loose-leaf form so that all new ordinances may be plinted for inclusion on a regular basis.
A periodic update-supplement service is available from the League, secured through an agreement
between the Town and the League, whereby the Town would send new ordinances and amendments
to the League, which would plint replacement pages for the Code. Also, the League will supplement
the sections on State laws and local acts as amendments, changes or new enactments occur in the
General Assembly.
We gratefully acknowledge the cooperation and assistance rendered by the municipal officials in the
preparation of this Code.
S. Leigh Wilson
Executive Director
North Carolina League of Municipalities
iii
AN ORDINANCE TO ADOPT AN OFFICIAL CODE OF ORDINANCES
FOR THE TOWN OF HUDSON, NORTH CAROLINA
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWN OF HUDSON THAT:
Section 1. The following compilation of ordinances, Chapters 1 - 12 inclusive, is hereby adopted
as the official code of ordinances of the Town of Hudson, North Carolina.
Section 2. (a) All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Town of Hudson enacted
on or before September 7, 1976, and not included within this Code, or recognized and continued in
force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance,
except as provided in Section 3.
(b) To the extent that ordinances or portions of ordinances included within this Code are the
same in substance as ordinances in effect prior to the adoption of this Code, it is intended that they be
treated as continuations and not as new enactments or amendments, in order that all rights and
liabilities that have accrued are preserved and may be enforced.
Section 3. This Code of Ordinances contains all of the general and permanent ordinances of the
Town of Hudson, but it does not contain, and is not intended to affect, the following classes of
ordinances or actions having the effect of ordinances:
1. Annexation Ordinances;
2. Budget Ordinances or Amendments thereto;
3. Bond Orders and Ordinances;
4. Ordinances granting a franchise;
5. Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the exercise of the power of eminent domain;
6. Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the levy of special assessments;
7. Ordinances amending the charter of the Town of Hudson, pursuant to Article 5, Part 4 of
Chapter l 60A, General Statutes of North Carolina;
8. Ordinances, resolutions, or orders naming, renaming, or closing a street;
9. Resolutions of any type;
10. Ordinances or resolutions redrawing the boundaries of wards or election districts.
Section 4. No provision of this ordinance is intended, nor shall be construed, to affect in any
way any rights or interests (whether public or private):
(a) Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of which might be sustained or
preserved by reference to any provision of an ordinance repealed by the adoption of this Code.
(b) Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in reliance upon, action heretofore
taken pursuant to or within the scope of any ordinance repealed by the adoption of this Code.
Section 5. No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal, judicial or administrative
or otherwise) pending on the effective date of this ordinance by or against the Town of Hudson
or any of its departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this
Code.
Section 6. If any portion of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Code which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
Code are declared to be severable.
Section 7. A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk and it shall be
the express duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized by the Clerk, to insert in their designated places
all duly adopted amendments to this Code, and to extract from this Code all provisions which may be
from time to time duly repealed. A copy of this Code shall be available for all persons desiring to
examine it during reasonable times, under the supervision of the Town Clerk.
Section 8. It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any
Supp. No. 2, 12-77 iv
part or portion of this Code, or to alter or tamper with the Code in any manner whatsoever which
will cause the ordinances of the Town of Hudson to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating
this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in Section 14-4 of
the General Statutes of North Carolina.
Section 9. This ordinance, and the Code of Ordinances which it adopts, shall be in full force and
effect from and after the 7th day of September, 1976. (Ord. of 9/7 /76, as amended by Ord. of 10/77)
/sf W. F. Nichols, Mayor
ATTEST:
/sf Evelyn Raby, Town Clerk
Supp. No. 2, 12-77 iv.1
Section 1 The Charter C-1
Section I
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4
Section 5
Section 6
Section 7
Section 8
Section 9
Section 10
Section l I
DIVISION I
The Charter
Town ineorporuted: torporn !e powers.
C'orpur:.ite lhnits.
Corporate limits extended.
Number of Con1missioners.
Non1ination and election.
Officers.
Elections.
Taxes.
Powers of C'on1mi~sioners.
V:.icuncies.
Alcoho!ie control.
Section 1 Town incorporated;
powers.
corporate
The Town of Hudson. in the County of
Caldwell. State of North Carolina, be and the
same is hereby incorporated and made a municipal
corporation by the name and style of Hudson.
with all the powers. rights and privileges conferred
upon towns and cities by chapter l 60A of
The Code of North Carolina, not inconsistent
with the special provisions of this. act. (Pr. Laws
1905,C.239,Sec. I J
Section 2 Corporate limits.
The corporate limits of the Town of Hudson in
Caldwell County are hereby defined and located
as follows:
Beginning at a stake in the center of the C. &
N. W. Railway tracks at a point about 3/4 of a
mile North of the depot. and runs North 58
degrees East to the West margin of the right of
way of Highway No. 321A. thence northwardly
with the margin of the said highway 630 feet;
thence crossing the highway and running North
58 degrees East with Fifth Avenue northeast
1000 feet; thence South 31 degrees East I 080
feet to the old line: thence with said old line
South 87 degrees 30 minutes East 1520 feet:
thence South 27 degrees 30 minutes East 2240
feet to a new street: thence with said street northwardly
320 feet to Fourth Avenue northeast;
thence northward with Fourth Avenue northeast
'.1.00 feet: thence North 58 degrees 30 minutes
East 160 feet; thence South 36 degrees East 400
feet: thence South 12 degrees East 300 feet;
thence South 83 degrees East 175 feet; thence
South 80 degrees East 260 feet; thence South 41
degrees East 125 feet: thence North 69 degrees
East 4 7 5 feet to the center of Gunpowder Creek;
thence up said creek in a northerly direction 2534
feet to the bridge on Mount Herman Road;
thence with the center of the old Mount Herman
Road North 49 degrees 15 minutes East 222 feet;
thence North 42 degrees 56 minutes East 527 .28
feet; thence North 42 degrees 56 minutes East
71.04 feet to a point in the paved portion of
Highway No. 321: thence with the center of said
highway South 39 degrees East 3765 feet to a
point in the Hudson School property: thence with
said line North 87 degrees 30 minutes East 650
feet to the South corner of the said school lot:
thence still with the line of the school lot South 2
degrees 30 minutes West 720 feet to center of
Highway No. 321A; thence with the center of
said highway about 39 degrees East 1700 feet:
thence leaving the highway runs North 59 degrees
West 600 feet: thence North 80 degrees West 450
feet: thence North I degree East 150 feet: tl1ence
South 87 degrees 15 minutes West 320 feet:
thence North 2 degrees 30 minutes East 1200 feet
to Cedar Valley Avenue: thence with said avenue
westwardly 1650 feet to Eiohth Avenue
southeast: thence with Eicl1th Ave1;ue southeast
southward 700 feet to a s";,1a1I road: thence wiih
said road southeasterly 200 feet: thence southwardly
and parallel with and 200 feet distant
from Eighth Avenue southeast 880 feet: thence
South 86 degrees 2 minutes East 703 feet: thence
South 1 degree West 904 feet: thence South 2
degrees 25 minutes West 475 feet to the center of
the creek: thence up the creek. passing Highway
No. 321A and the C. & N. W. Railway trestle
3000 feet to the old highway bridge. now
abandoned: thence North 77 degrees 2'!.-i'ninutes
175 feet: thence North 55 deorees 55 minutes
West 87 feet: thence North 41d~grees40 minutes
West 667 feet: thence North -22 degrees 56
minutes West' 578 feet: thence North 87 deorees
30 minutes West 760 feet: thence South.4 de~rees
West 600 feet: thence South 87 degrees 30
minutes West 240 feet: thence North 4 deorees
East 600 feet: thence North 87 decree; 30
minutes West 1480 feet to the Caja Mountain
Road: thence North 28 degrees 30 minutes West
3640 feet: thence North 85 degrees West 780
feet: thence North 4 degrees East 640 feet to
First Avenue, northwest; thence southwest with
said avenue I 000 feet to Eighth Street northwest:
thence with the meanders of said street northward
1680 feet to Caldwell Avenue; thence North
27 degrees 30 minutes West 1680 feet: thence
South 87 degrees 30 minutes East 2640 feet to
the beginning. (H.B. 1057, 6/14/65, Sec. I)
Section 3 Corporate limits extended.
(a) From and after the 20th day of June,
1967, the effective date of thls annexation, the
following territory shall be annexed to and
become a part of the Town of Hudson. and the
corporate limits of the Town of Hudson, shall on
said date be extended to include said territory
more particularly described by metes and bounds
as follows:
Section 3 The Charter C'-2
BEGINNING at the center of the bridge over
Gunpowder Creek on U.S. Highway 32I-A at a
distance of 1465 feet from the intersection of
State Road 1162 with U.S. 321-A, and runs with
the center of Gunpowder Creek approximately
7938 feet to the center of the bridge on State
Road 1160; thence with said road North 49
degrees 15 minutes East 222 feet; thence North
42 degrees 56 minutes East 527.28 feet; thence
same course 71.04 feet to the center of U.S. Highway
321, at a point 96 feet North of the center of
State Road 1160; thence with the center ofU. S.
Highway 321; South 39 degrees 33 minutes East
3765 feet to the center of the bridge over Gunpowder
Creek; thence same course 270 feet to the
Northeast boundary line of the School property;
thence with that line North 87 degrees 30
minutes East 650 feet. South 2 degrees 30
minutes West 720 feet to the center ofU. S. Highway
3 21; thence with the center of said highway
about South 34 degrees 00 minutes East 1700
feet more or less to a point in said highway;
thence South 65 degrees 45 minutes West 750
feet more or less: thence South 66 degrees 15
minutes West 1900 feet more or less; thence
South 0 degrees 15 minutes East 900 feet more or
less; thence South 4 degrees 00 minutes West 460
feet more or less to the center of Little Gunpowder
Creek; thence up said creek with its
various meanders 3000 feet more or less to the
bridge on an old road; thence with the old road
(now abandoned) North 77 degrees 29 minutes
West 175 feet. North 55 de'grees 55 minutes West
87 feet, North 41 degrees 40 minutes West 667
feet. North 22 degrees 56 minutes West 578 feet
to the old Town Boundary line; thence with that
line North 87 degrees 30 minutes West 760 feet;
thence South 4 degrees 00 minutes West 600 feet;
thence North 87 degrees 30 minutes West 240
feet; thence North 4 degrees 00 minutes East 600
feet to a point in the old boundary line; thence
with that line North 87 degrees 30 minutes West
1480 feet; thence North 28 degrees 30 minutes
West 3640 feet; thence North 85 degrees 00
minutes West 780 feet; thence North 4 degrees 00
minutes East 640 feet to State Road 1156; thence
with State Road 1156 in a southwestwardly direction.
1850 feet more or less; thence North 5
degrees 00 minutes East 970 feet more or less;
thence North 87 degrees 00 minutes East 462 feet
more or less; thence South 5 degrees 00 minutes
West 650 feet: thence North 87 degrees 00
minutes East 350 feet more or less to State Road
1158; thence with State Road 1158 1680 feet
more or less to State Road 1159; thence North 27
degrees 30 minutes West 1680 feet to the old
Town comer; thence in the old line South 87
degrees 30 minutes East 2720 feet more or less to
the center of U.S. Highway 321-A: thence with
the center of said highway 2480 feet more or less
to the beginning.
(b) The Board of Commissioners does hereby
specifically find and declare that the above
described territory meets the requirements of
G.S. 160-453.4, in that:
(I) Provide for extending, at the time of
annexation. police protection. garbage collection.
street maintenance service to the area
to be annexed on substantially the same basis
and in the same manner as such services are
provided within the rest of the municipality
prior to the annexation.
(2) The Town of Hudson will within the time
provided by law provide for extension of water
mains into the area to be annexed so that
property owners in the area to be annexed will be
able to secure public water according to the
policies in effect in the Town of Hudson and
extending water to individual lots and
subdivisions.
(3) Funds for which will be provided for from
surplus from revenue already on hand, and from
revenue anticipated from taxation and other
sources already provided.
(c) It is the purpose and intent of the Town of
Hudson to provide services to the area being
annexed under this ordinance, as set forth in the
report of plans for services approved by the Board
of Commissioners on the 20th day of June. 1967.
and filed in the offke of the Clerk for Public
Inspection.
From and after the date of annexation the
Town of Hudson will extend police protection.
garbage collection, and other necessary services
in the same manner as such services are provided
within the rest of the town prior to annexation.
and will within the time prescribed by law provide
for extension of water mains. not already
extending into the area to be annexed so that
property owners therein will be able to secure
public water according to the policies in effect
in the Town of Hudson.
(dJ The Board of Commissioners uoes hereby
specifically find and declare tlrnt, on .the effective
date of annexation prescribed in Section (a)
hereof, the Town of Hudson will have sufficient
funds appropriated in the amount of $25,000.00, 
to finance the estimated cost of construction of
water facilities found necessary in the report of
plans for services to extend the basic water
system of the Town of Hudson into the area to be
annexed under this ordinance.
(e) From and after the effective date of this
annexation, the territory annexed and its citizens
Section 3 The Charter C-3
and property owners shall be subject to all debts,
laws, ordinances and regulations in force in the
Town of Hudson, and shall be entitled to the same
privileges and benefits as other parts of the Town.
(f) The newly annexed territory described
hereinabove shall be subject to Town taxes levied
for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1967, and
annually hereafter.
(g) The Mayor of the Town of Hudson shall
cause an accurate map of the annexed territory
described in Section (a) hereof, together with a
duly certified copy of this ordinance, to be
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of
Caldwell County, and in the office of the Secretary
of State at Raleigh.
(h) Notice of the date of adoption of this
ordinance shall be published once in a newspaper
having general circulation in the Town ofHudson.
(Ord. of 6/20/67)
Section 4 Number of Commissioners.
The number of members upon the Hudson Board
of Commissioners will consist of six ( 6)
Commissioners and a Mayor. The Hudson
municipal elections may be administered by the
Caldwell County Board of Elections, as
authorized by N. C. General Statute, Chapter 163,
Article 23, and the Hudson General Municipal
elections shall be conducted at the time provided
byN. C. General Statute 163-279. Beginning with
the general elections conducted in 1975 those
three (3) candidates for Commissioners receiving
the highest number of votes will be elected to
serve four ( 4) year terms, and those (3) candidates
for Commissioners receiving the next highest
number of votes will be elected to serve (2) year
terms. The Mayor's term of office shall be for two
(2) years and shall be elected at the time of the
general elections as provided for in GS 163-279.
In all following municipal elections
Commissioners will be elected to serve four ( 4)
terms, and the Mayor's term of office will
continue at a two-year (2) term. (GS Chapter 163,
Article23 [Resolution adopted 1-11-72]; GS 163-
279; GS !60A-10!, 102 [Ordinance adopted 5-6-
75])
Section 5 Nomination and election.
Any person seeking the office of Mayor or
Commissioner of the Town of Hudson must meet
the qualifications and requirements set forth in,
and must file for said offices in accordance with
the NC General Statutes Chapter 163, Article 24.
(GS 163-294.2)
Section 6 Officers.
The officers of said town shall consist of a
mayor and six commissioners, a chief of police
and such other policemen as in the judgment of the
mayor and commissioners may be necessary for
the preservation of the peace and good order of
said Town. The said commissioners are hereby
authorized to appoint a mayor pro tern, and a clerk
and treasurer, each of whom may also be one of
the commissioners. (Pr. Laws 1905,C.239,Sec.3)
Section 7 Elections.
All elections held in the Town of Hudson,
Caldwell County, after the ratification of this Act,
shall be held under the provisions of Chapter 163
of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
(H.B.421,C.647,4/9/51, Sec. I)
Section 8 Taxes
Pursuant to the Machinery Act (NC General
Statutes Chapter I 05) and NC General Statute
Chapter 160A, Article 9 the governing body of the
Town of Hudson is empowered by the State of
North Carolina to levy, within the limitations set
out in said statutes, taxes on property having a
situs within the Town. The governing body shall
also be empowered to levy any and all other taxes
and assessments permitted by the North Carolina
General Statutes. (N. C. General Statute Chapter
105; NC General Statute Chapter 160A, Article 9
& IO)
Section 9 Powers of Commissioners.
The commissioners shall have the power to
make any and all by-laws, regulations or
ordinances that they may deem necessary for the
peace, health, convenience, good order and
general upbuilding of the Town. (Pr.Laws
1905,C.239, Sec. 7)
Section 10 Vacancies.
Any vacancies occurring in any elective office
of the Town shall be filled by appointment of the
Board of Commissioners for the remainder of the
unexpired term in accordance with G. S. 160A-63.
Volume 3D, 1974 Cumulative Supplement.
Section 11 Alcoholic Control.
The manufacture or sale of spirituous, vinous or
malt liquor is allowed as regulated by the North
Carolina Alcoholic beverage control commission.
(Amended 7/18/2017)
Section I.I Use of the Code and Penalties 1-1
DIVISION II
CODE OF GENERAL ORDINANCES
CHAPTER 1
Use of the Code and Penalties
Section 1.1 Definitions and rules of construction.
Section 1.2 Provisions considered as continuations of existing
ordinances.
Section 1.3 Section designations.
Section 1.4 Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinances.
Section 1.5 Criminal penalty; not exclusive remedy; continuing
violations.
Section 1.6 Severability of parts of Code.
Section 1. 7 Damaging ordinances prohibited.
Section 1.1 Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all
ordinances, the following definitions and rules of
construction shall be observed unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Board of Commissioners
or the context clearly requires otherwise.
Board. The words "the Board" shall mean the
Board of Commissioners of the Town of Hudson.
Computation of time. The time within which
an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day; and
if the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal
holiday, that day shall be excluded.
County. The word "county" shall mean the
County of Caldwell, in the State of North
Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender
shall include the feminine and neuter.
Joint authority. All words giving a joint
authority to three or more persons or officers
shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
Mayor. The words "the Mayor" shall mean the
Mayor of the Town of Hudson.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a
calendar month.
Number. Words used in the singular include the
plural, and words used in the plural include the
singular number.
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to
include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed".
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a
building or land, shall include any part owner,
JOlllt owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or
tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of
such building or land.
Person. The word "person" shall include a
corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit,
as well as an individual.
Personal property. The words "personal
property" include every species of property
except real property as herein defined.
Preceding, following. The words "preceding"
and "following" shall mean next before and next
after respectively.
Property. The word "property" shall include
real and personal property.
Real Property shall include lands, tenements
and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any
portion of a street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of
pedestrians.
Signature. The words "signature" or "subscription"
include a mark when the person cannot
write.
State. The word "state" shall be construed to
mean the State of North Carolina, except as
otherwise provided.
Street. The word "street" shall mean and
include any public way, road, highway, street,
avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct,
or bridge and the approaches thereto within the
Town.
Tenant. The words "tenant" or ''occupant"
applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such
building or land whether alone or with others.
Time. Words used in the past or present tense
include the future as well as the past and present.
Town. The words "the town" shall mean the
Town of Hudson in Caldwell County, North
Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
Writing. The words "writing" and "written"
shall include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters.
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar
year.
Section 1.2 Provisions considered as continuations
of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as
they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to
this Code and included herein, shall be considered
as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Section 1.3 Section designations.
The headings of the several sections of this
Code printed in bold-face type are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
section and shall not be deemed or taken to be
Section 1.3 Use of the Code and Penalties 1-2
titles of such sections nor as any part of the
section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall
they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
Section 1.4 Effect of repeal or expiration of
ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by
virtue of any provision contained therein, shall
not affect any right accrned, any offense committed,
any penalty or punishment incurred or
any proceeding commenced before the repeal
took effect or the ordinance expired.
When an ordinance which repealed another
shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance
shall not be revived without express words to that
effect.
Section 1.5 Penalty for violations; criminal penalty
not exclusive remedy; continuing
violations.
(a) In accordance with G. S. 160A-l 75, and
unless this Code of Ordinances provides otherwise,
violation of any provision hereof shall be
a misdemeanor as provided in G. S. 14-4, punishable
upon conviction by a fine not exceeding
$50 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30
days. An ordinance may provide by express statement
that the maximum fine or term of imprisonment
to be imposed for its violation shall
be some figure or number of days less than the
maximum penalties prescribed by G. S. 14-4.
(b) By express statement, an ordinance contained
herein may provide for its enforcement
by other remedies, as authorized in G. S.
160A-l 75, including the imposition of civil
fines, the ordering of appropriate equitable relief,
including injunctions, or a combination of such
remedies.
(c) An ordinance may provide, when appropriate,
that each day's continuing violation shall
be a separate and distinct offense.
Cross Reference: G. S. 160A-175, authorizing municipalities
to employ alternate remedies in the enforcement of local ordinances,
is set out in the Related State Laws portion of this Code.
Section 1.6 Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
Board of Commissioners that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses, and phrases of this
Code are severable and if any phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall
be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid
by the valid judgment or decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality
or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and
sections of this Code since the same would have
been enacted by the Board without the incorporation
in this Code of any such unconstitutional or
invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or
section.
Section 1.7 Damaging ordinances prohibited.
No person shall tear or deface any of the Town
ordinances.
Section 2.1 Administration 2-1
Section 2.1
Section 2.2
Section 3.3
Section 2.4
Section 2.5
Section 2.6
Section 2.7
Section 2.8
Section 2.9
Section 2.10
Section 2.11
Section 2.12
Section 2.13
Section 2.14
Section 2.15
Section 2.16
Section 2.17
Section 2.18
Section 2.19
Section 2.20
Section 2.21
Section 2.22
Section 2.23
Section 2.24
Section 2.25
Section 2.31
Section 2.32
Section 2.33
Section 2.34
Section 2.35
Section 2.36
Section 2.3 7
Section 2.38
Section 2.39
Section 2.40
Section 2.41
Section 2.42
Article 1
Board of Commissioners
Organizational meeting of Board.
Same; Mayor pro Ternpore; disability
of Mayor.
Regular meetings.
Special meetings.
Quorum.
Minutes.
Mayor to preside over Board.
Mayor not to vote except to break tie.
Committees.
Voting.
Franchises; technical ordinances.
Article2
Ordinances
Effective date.
Ordinances confined to one subject.
Official copy.
Ordinances appropriating money.
Ordinance book.
Article3
Officers and Employees
Office of Mayor.
Offices of Clerk and Finance Officer.
Other officers and employees.
Employees' bonds.
Article 4
Finance and Purchasing
Disbursement of funds.
Purchasing.
Article 5
Emergencies
State of emergency; curfew authorized.
Same; enforcement.
through 2.30 reserved.
Article 6
Title.
Purpose.
Authority.
Coverage.
Policy.
Public and confidential information
defined.
Designation of records custodian.
Custodian's responsibilities.
Request procedure.
Request review procedure.
Objection procedure.
Custodian's determination in
Objections.
Article 1
Board of Commissioners
Section 2.1 Organizational meeting of Board.
(a) The organizational meeting of the Board shall be
held on the date and atthe time of the first regular
meeting in December after the results of each
regular municipal election have been certified.
At the organizational meeting the newly elected
Mayor and Commissioners shall qualify by
taking the oath of office prescribed in Article VI,
Section 7 of the Constitution.
(b) The Organization of the Board shall take place
notwithstanding the absence, death, refusal to
serve, failure to qualify, or nonelection of one or
more members, but at least a quorum of the
members must be present. (See G.S. 160A-68)
Section 2.2 Same; Mayor Pro Tempore;
disability of Mayor.
At the organizational meeting, the Board shall
elect from its members a Mayor Pro Tempore to serve
at the pleasure of the Board. A Commissioner serving
as Mayor Pro Tempore shall be entitled to vote on all
matters and shall be considered a Commissioner for all
purposes, including the determination of whether a
quorum is present. During the absence of the Mayor,
the Board may confer upon the Mayor Pro Tempore
any of the powers and duties of the Mayor. If the
Mayor should become physically or mentally
incapable of performing the duties of the office, the
Board may by unanimous vote declare that they are
incapacitated and confer any of the Mayor's powers
and duties on the Mayor Pro Tempore. Upon the
Mayor's declaration that he is no longer incapacitated,
and with the concurrence of a majority of the Board,
the Mayor shall resume the exercise of their powers
and duties. (See G. S. 160A-70)
Section 2.3 Regular meetings.
The regular meetings of the Mayor and Board of the
Town of Hudson shall be held on the third Tuesday of
each month, at six (6) o'clock p.m. at the Town Hall
unless otherwise designated by the Board. (Amended
7/18/2017)
Section 2.4 Special meetings.
The Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore, or any two
members of the Board may at any time call a special
Board Meeting by signjng a written notice stating the
time and place of the meeting and the subjects to be
considered. The notice shall be delivered to the Mayor
and each Commissioner or left at their usual dwelling
place at least six ( 6) hours before the meeting. Special
meetings may be held at any time when the Mayor and
Section 2.4 Administration
all members of the Board are present and consent
thereto or when those not present have signed a written
waiver of notice. Only those items of business
specified in the notice may be transacted at a special
meeting unless all members are present or have signed
a written waiver ofnotice. (See G. S. 160A-71).
2-1.1
Section 2.5 Administration 2-2
Section 2.5 Quorum.
A majority of the membership of the Board of
Commissioners shall constitute a quorum and no
official business of the Town shall be transacted
by the Board unless a quorum is present. The
number required for a quorum shall not be
affected by vacancies. A member who has withdrawn
from a meeting shall be counted as present
for purposes of determining whether or not a
quorum is present. (See G.S. 160A-74)
Section 2.6 Minutes.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk to be present
at all meetings of the said Town Board to keep in
a book provided for that purpose full and
accurate minutes of all the proceedings of the
Board. Such minutes shall be open to the inspection
of the public. The results of each vote shall
be recorded in the minutes and upon request of
any member of the Board the ayes and noes upon
any question shall be taken. (See G.S. l 60A-72)
Section 2.7 Mayor to preside over Board.
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the
Board and in his absence the Mayor Pro Tempore
shall preside. (See G. S. 160A-70)
Section 2.8 Mayor not to vote except to break
tie.
The Mayor shall not have the right to vote on
any question before the Board except when there
are equal numbers of votes in the affirmative and
in the negative. (See G.S. 160A-69)
Section 2.9 Committees.
The Mayor and Commissioners may create such
committees of the Board for special purposes as
they deem best.
Section 2.10 Voting.
(a) No member shall be excused from voting
except upon matters involving the consideration
of his own financial interest or official conduct.
In all other cases, a failure to vote by a member
who is physically present in the Board chamber
or who has withdrawn without being excused b;
a majority vote of the remaining members
present, shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.
The question of the compensation and allowances
of the members of the Board is not a matter
involving a member's own financial interest or
official conduct.
(b) An affirmative vote equal to a majority of
all the members of the Board not excused from
voting on the question in issue (including the
Mayor's ;-ate in case of an equal division) shall be
required to adopt an ordinance, take any action
having the effect of an ordinance, authorize or
commit the expenditure of public funds or make
ratify, or authorize any contract on behalf of th~
Town. In addition, no ordinance nor any action
having the effect of any ordinance may be fmally
adopted on the date on which it is introduced
except by an affirmative vote equal to or greater
than two-thirds of all the members of the Board
(not including the Mayor). (See G.S. 160A-75)
Section 2.11 Franchises; technical ordinances.
(a) No ordinance making a grant, renewal,
extension, or amendment of any franchise shall
be fmally adopted until it has been passed at two
regular meetings of the Board, and no such grant,
renewal, extension, or amendment shall be made
otherwise than by ordinance.
(b) Any published technical code or any
standards or regulations promulgated by any
public agency may be adopted in an ordinance by
reference subject to G.S. 143-138(e). A technical
code or set of standards or regulations adopted by
reference in an ordinance shall have the force of
law within the Town. Official copies of all technical
codes, standards, and regulations adopted by
reference shall be maintained for public inspection
in the office of the Clerk. (See G.S.
160A-76)
Section 2.12 Administration 2-3
Section 2.12
ARTICLE2
Ordinances
Effective date.
All ordinances shall be effective after the ratification
thereof except ordinances specifying some other
effective date or ordinances required by state law to be
effective only after having met specific date
requirements. (See G. S. I 60A-7 5)
Section 2.13 Ordinances confined to one
subject.
All ordinances shall be confined to one subject
except appropriation ordinances which shall be
confined to the subject of appropriations only.
Section 2.14 Official copy.
A true copy of an ordinance, which has been duly
enacted by the Board, signed by the Mayor, and
attested to by the Clerk shall be known as an official
copy of any ordinance for the Town. All ordinances
or a true copy thereof shall be inserted in this code in
the proper chapter.
Section 2.15 Ordinances appropriating money.
No appropriation ordinance or an ordinance to alter
or repeal an appropriation ordinance shall be enacted
at any meetiog other than a regnlar meetiog except by
a unanimous vote of the entire Board.
Section 2.16 Ordinance book.
The Clerk shall file a true copy of each ordinance,
until it is codified in this code, in an ordinance hook
separate and apart from the Board' minute book. The
ordinance book shall be appropriately indexed and
maintained for public inspection in the office of the
Clerk. (See G. S. 160A-78)
Section 2.17
ARTICLE3
Officers and Employees
Office of Mayor.
It shall be the duty of the Mayor to cause all
ordinances of the Town to be enforced, to attend and
preside over all meetiogs of the Board. It shall further
be the duty of the Mayor to within thirty days after the
close of each year to require a report to the Board from
the various departments of the Town govermnent for
the previous year and recommend such adjustments as
found to be fit, and the Mayor shall perform such other
duties as the Board may from time to time require. The
Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the Town.
(See G. S. 160A-69)
Section 2.18 Offices of Clerk & Finance Officer
(a) The Clerk (referred to in this Code as the
"Clerk" shall be appointed by the Board of
Commissioners. The Clerk shall:
(I) Give notice ofmeetiogs of the Board;
(2) Attend all meetings of the Board and
regularly and fairly record all of its proceedings as
provided in Section 2.6 hereof;
(3) Keep an ordinance book as provided in
Section 2.16 hereof;
( 4) Perform such other duties as the Board may
from time to time require. (See G. S. 160A-l 71: G. S.
159). (Amended 7/18/2017)
(b) The Office of the Finance Officer shall:
(1) Keep true, accurate, and just books of
accounts of the dealings and transactions of the Town,
which books shall show at all times the true condition
of the said Town, its resources and liabilities and the
disposition and use of the monies coming under the
control of the Town;
(2) Keep or cause to be kept in a safe place all
monies, records and accounts;
(3) Disburse funds for the various purposes of
the Town only when an appropriation for such purpose
has been made in the annual budget and the
disbursement is authorized by the Board of
Commissioners; and
( 4) Perform such other duties as the Board may
from time to time require. (See G. S. 160A-171: G. S.
159) (Amended 7/18/2017)
Section 2.19 Other officers and employees.
Such other officers and employees that are deemed
necessary shall be appointed by the Board. All officers
and employees shall serve atthe pleasure of the Board
and receive such compensation as from time to time
may be prescribed by the Board. (See G. S. l 60A-146)
Section 2.20 Employees' bonds.
The Clerk, Finance Officer and other officers or
Section 2 .20 Adtninistration 24
employees required by the Board shall, before
entering upon their duties, post bond in amounts
specified by the Board. All bond premrnms shall
be paid from Town funds. Provided, that when
two officers are combined, such as Clerk and
Treasurer, only one bond shall be required. (See
G.S. !60A-65; G.S. 105; G.S. 159)
ARTICLE4
Finance and Purchasing
Section 2.21 Disbursement of funds.
No money shall be disbursed from the Town
treasury except on order of the Board in session
and then only if the item for which the disbursement
is made has been provided for in the annual
budget except in the case of an extreme
emergency. (See G.S. 159)
Section 2.22 Purchasing.
(a) Before any order is given for items to be
paid by the Town or any purchase made by any
Town employee, a purchase order must first be
obtained from the Town Clerk.
(b) Any Town employee purchasing goods
without a purchase order from the Town Clerk
will be hel.d responsible for the cost of same.
Section 2.23 Ad1ninistration 2-5
ARTICLES
Emergencies
Section 2.23 State of emergency; curfew
authorized.
(a) A state of emergency shall be deemed to
exist whenever, during times of great public crisis,
disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar public
emergency, for any reason, municipal public
safety authorities are unable to maintain public
order or afford adequate protection for lives or
property.
(b) In the event of an existing or threatened
state of emergency endangering the Jives, safety,
health and welfare of the people within the
Town, or threatening damage to or destruction of
property, the Mayor of the Town is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue a public
proclamation declaring to all persons the
existence of such a state of emergency, and, in
order to more effectively protect the lives and
property of people within the Town, to place in
effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter
authorized.
(c) The Mayor is hereby authorized and
empowered to limit by the proclamation the
application of all or any part of such restrictions
to any area specifically designated or described
within the corporate limits of the Town and to
specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt
from all or any part of such restrictions law
enforcement officers, firemen and other public
employees, doctors, nurses, employees of
hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty
military personnel whether state or federal;
on-duty employees of public utilities, public
transportation companies, and newspaper,
magazine, radio broadcasting, and television
broadcasting corporations operated for profit;
and such other classes of persons as may be
essential to the preservation of public order and
immediately necessary to serve the safety, health,
and welfare needs of the people within the Town.
(d) The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such
state of emergency or all or any part of the
restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances
warrant or when directed to do so by the Board.
of Commissioners.
(e) During the existence of a proclaimed state
of emergency, the Mayor may impose by proclamation
any or all of the following restrictions:
(1) Prohibit or regulate the possession off
one's own premises of explosives, firearms,
ammunition, or dangerous weapons of any kind
and prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other
disposition thereof;
(2) Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of
beer, wine or intoxicating beveraoes of any kind
and their possession or consu;ption off one';
own premises;
(3) Prohibit or regulate any demonstration,
parade, march, vigil or participation therein from
taking place on any of the public ways or upon
any public property;
( 4) Prohibit or regulate the sale of crasoline kerosene, naptha or any other explo"s ive or'
inflammable fluids or substances
(5) Prohibit or regulate travel' upon any public
street, alley or roadway or upon any other public
property except by those in search of medical
assistance, food or other commodity or service
necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves
or their families or some member thereof;
(6) Prohibit or regulate the participation in or
carrying on of any business activity and prohibit
or regulate the keeping open of places of business,
places of entertainment and any other places of
public assembly.
(f) Any proclamation may be extended,
altered, or repealed in any particular during the
continued or threatened existence of a state of
emergency by the issuance of a subsequent
proclamation.
(g) During the existence of a proclaimed state
of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person
to violate any provision of. any restriction
imposed by any proclamation authorized by this
section.
Section 2.24 Same; enforcement.
The Mayor of the Town, and in his absence,
Mayor Pro Tempore, and in the absence of both
such officials the Chief of Police of the Town, be
and they are hereby authorized to enforce the
preceding section for such periods of time as they
shall deem necessary.
Section 2.31 Administration 2-6
ARTICLE6
Privacy of Personnel Records
Section 2.31 Title.
This Article shall be known as the "Town of
Hudson Personnel Records Privacy Ordinance."
(Ord. of 10/5/76, Art. I, Sec. 1)
Section 2.32 Purpose.
The Town enacts the following sections to
provide a procedure to (1) allow for the legal
disclosure or denial of disclosure of both public
and confidential personnel information, (2)
allow an employee to question, and correct, if
necessary, any information filed in his/her
personnel file, (3) designate a capable town employee
as records custodian, and ( 4) contribute
to the modern personnel system maintained by
the Town. (Ord. of 10/5/76, Art. I, Sec. 2)
Section 2.33 Authority.
This personnel information request and objection
procedure is hereby established pursuant
to the General Statutes Chapter !60A-168.
(Ord. of 10/5/76, Art. I, Sec. 3)
Section 2.34 Coverage.
This procedure shall govern the disclosure or
denial of disclosure of all personnel records and
information. Furthermore, this procedure shall
govern employees, objections to information
contained in the personnel files and shall provide
recourse to such objections. (Ord. of 10/5/76,
Art. I, Sec. 4)
Section 2.35 Policy.
It is the Town's policy to abide by the provisions
of G. S. Chapter 160A-168, and other
State statutes, concerning the privacy of personnel
records of town governments in North Carolina.
Further, it is the Town's policy to protect
clearly confidential personnel information and
records from disclosure to the public and to
receive and review objections from Town employees
concerning information in their personnel
files as maintained by the Town. These
objections may be made against material employees
feel to be incorrect, unfair, or inappropriate
for Town use and retention. It is the
Town's policy, upon proper request, openly to
disclose requested personnel information which
has been determined to be a matter of public
record by appropriate statute. It is the Town's
policy to disclose confidential information only
when such disclosure meets the requirements
set forth in the General Statutes of North
Carolina. (Ord. of 10/5/76, Art. II, Sec. I)
Section 2.36 Public and confidential information
defined.
(a) Pursuant to G.S. 160A-168, the following
eight items of information abont local government
employees are matters of public record
and may be made public upon proper request:
(I) Employee's name;
(2) Employee's age;
(3) Date of original employment;
(4) Current job title;
(5) Current salary;
(6) Date and amount of the most recent
change in salary;
(7) Date of the most recent change in job
classification;
(8) Office to which the employee is currently
assigned.
(b) All other information in an employee's
personnel file is confidential according to G.S.
l 60A-! 68 (l53A-98) and is open to inspection
only in the following instances:
(I) The employee or his/her duly authorized
agent may examine all portions of his/her personnel
file except (i) letters of reference solicited
prior to employment, and (ii) information
concerning a medical disability, mental or physical,
that a prudent physician would not divulge
to a patient.
(2) A licensed physician designated in writing
by the employee may examine the employee's
medical record.
(3) A Town employee having supervisory
authority over the employee may examine all
material in the employee's personnel file.
(4) By order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
any person may examine such portion
of an employee's personnel file.
(5) An official of an agency of the State or
Federal government, or any political subdivision
of the State, may inspect any portion of a personnel
file when such inspection is deemed by
the official having custody of such records to be
inspected to be necessary and essential to the
Supp. No.1, 3-77
Section 2.36 Administration 2-7
pursuance of a proper function of the inspecting
agency, but no information shall be divulged for
the purpose of assisting in a criminal prosecution
(of the employee), or for the purpose of assisting
in an investigation of (the employee's) tax
liability. (Ord. of 10/5/76, Art. II, Sec. 2)
Section 2.37 Designation of records custodian.
The Town Clerk is hereby appointed as the
custodian of Town personnel records as they
pertain to this Article. This is not meant to
imply that the person appointed as records custodian
is necessarily in charge of the day-to-day
maintenance of personnel records as maintained
by the Town, although the two (2) duties may
be performed by the same person. (Ord. of
10/5/76, Art. III, Sec. I)
Section 2.38 Custodian's responsibilities.
The personnel records custodian, for purposes
of this Article, is responsible for the proper
functioning, maintenance and documentation of
the procedures established by and in accordance
with this Article. The custodian is responsible
for the operation of this procedure pursuant
to G.S. 160A-168 subject to the final approval
of the Town Administrator. The custodian shall
(1) receive all requests for information and
objections from employees, (2) make a deter-.
mination concerning requests for information in
accordance with this Article, (3) provide complete
and accurate documentation for the procedures
listed in the Article, (4) keep a cumulative
list of all requests for information and
responses given for a 12-month period, and (5)
perform such other duties as necessary or
required by the Town Administrator to assure
the proper and legal operation of the procedures
outlined in this Article. (Ord. of 10/5/76, Art.
III, Sec. 2)
Section 2.39 Request procedure.
All requests for personnel records information
must be made in writing to the custodian of
personnel records on a Request for Personnel
Information form. The written request must
include (1) the information sought, (2) reasons
for requesting the information, and (3) the
signature and standing of the person requesting
the information. The completed Request form
should then be submitted to the records custodian
for review. (Ord. of 10/5/76, Art. IV,
Sec. 1)
Section 2.40 Request review procedure.
The custodian, upon request of a completed
Request form, shall determine whether the
Request pertains to information which is a matter
of public record or to information which
must be held as confidential. If a Request is for
public information, the custodian shall attempt,
within one (I) week (five (5) work days) of the
date of the Request, to provide the person
requesting the public information with the requested
material. The Request form shall be
stamped "Approved Public Information" and a
copy of the Request form returned to the
person receiving the public information. If a
Request is determined to pertain to confidential
information, the following procedure must
be followed:
(I) The custodian shall first determine whether
or not the Request for confidential information
meets the requirements for the disclosure
of confidential information as provided for by
G.S. 160A-168 and enumerated in Section 2.36.
(l) Upon determination described above, the
custodian shall complete the Privacy Law
Determination form.
(3) Upon completion of the Determination
form, the custodian shall perform the following:
a. If the Request for confidential information
is approved under paragraph (2) above, a copy
of the Request information shall be provided to
the person requesting such information. The
custodian shall formally caution the person
receiving the confidential information concerning
the confidentiality of the information
he/she has received. Additionally, the custodian
shall require the person requesting the confidential
information to sign the statement appearing
on the Determination form agreeing to guard
carefully the confidentiality of the information.
b. In the event the person receiving confidential
information톜efuses to sign the statement
referred to in paragraph (3)a above, the information
shall be withheld from disclosure.
c. If the Request for confidential information
is denied, a copy of the Determination form,
including explicit and clear information concerning
the denial, shall be provided to the
person whose Request was denied.
d. The actions to be taken in paragraphs (I)
and (2) above must be completed within one (I)
Supp. No. 1, 3~77
Section 2 .40 Ad 1ninistratit>n
week (five (5) work days) of the date of the
Request. (Ord. of 10/5/76, Art. IV, Sec. 2)
Section 2.41 Objection procedure.
All official complaints or objections made by
Town employees concerning any information
contained in their personnel files must be made
to the personnel records custodian on an Employee's
Objection Notice form. The written
request must include (!) the employee's name,
(2) identification of the objectionable material,
and (3) any supporting text, documents, or
statements which help to clarify the objection.
The completed Objection form should then be
submitted to the custodian for review. (Ord. of
10/5/76, Art. V, Sec. I)
Section 2.42 Custodian's determination in objections.
The records custodian must review and study
each employee's Objections and make a determination
based on the following rules:
(I) If the custodian finds that the employee's
complaint is valid and the personnel records
material under Objection is incorrect and/or
inappropriate, the personnel material shall either
be (I) corrected and returned to the files, or
(2) removed from the files and destroyed, at the
discretion of the custodian with the approval of
the Town Administrator. If the material is
removed from the files and destroyed, the employee's
Objection form shall be placed in a
special Objections file.
(2) If the custodian finds that the employee's
complaint is invalid and the personnel records
material under Objection is correct and/or
appropriate, the personnel material shall remain
in the personnel files. However, the employee's
Objection form shall be filed with the material
objected to and a copy of the Objection form
shall be filed in a special Objections file.
(3) The actions outlined in paragraphs(!) and
(2) above should be completed within one (!)
week (five (5) work days) of the date of the
employee's Objection. (Ord. of 10/5/76, Art. V,
Sec. 2)
2-8
Supp. No. 1, 3w77
Section 3.1
CHAPTER3
Police
Section 3 .1 Organization
Section 3.2 Board to have control.
Section 3.3 Chiefofpo!ice.
Section 3.4 Oath of Office; holding other offices.
Section 3.5 Unifonns.
Section 3.6 Powers and duties of policemen.
Section 3. 7 Extraterritorial jurisdiction of policemen.
Section 3.8 Resisting police prohibited.
Section 3.9 Carrying concealed handguns prohibited
on Town property.
Section 3.10 Auxiliary Police Division for the Town of
Hudson Police Department
Section 3.1 Organization.
Police
The police department of the Town shall consist ofa chief
and as many policemen as the Board shall from time to
time determine and elect and as many special policemen
as the Mayor and Board may deem necessary to appoint
for special purposes.
Section 3.2 Board to have control.
The Board shall have general supervision over the police
department. The Board may suspend, for cause, any
member of the police department until the next regular
meeting at which time final disposition shall be made.
Section 3.3 Chiefof Police.
The chief shall have control over the police department
under the supervision of the Board. The chief shall keep
the Board informed of the department's activities and
make such reports that the Board may from time to time
require, and he shall perform such other duties as may be
required of him by the Board.
Section 3.4 Oath of office; holding other offices.
Each person appointed or employed as Chief of Police,
policeman, or auxiliary policeman shall take and
subscribe before some person authorized by law to
administer oaths/ the oath of office required by Article VI,
Sec. 7, of the Constitution. The oath shall be filed with
the Clerk. The offices of policeman, Chief of Police and
auxiliary policeman may be held concurrently with any
other appointive office pursuant to Article VI, Sec. 9 of
the Constitution. (See G.S. 160A-284)
Section 3.5 Uniforms
All police officers shall wear uniforms as shall be
provided by the Town and shall keep such uniforms in a
neat and clean condition, and shall surrender all uniforms
and equipment upon leaving the police service of the
Town if such uniforms and equipment were furnished by
the Town.
3.1
Section 3.6 Powers and duties of policemen.
Each policeman shall:
(1) Have within the corporate limits of the Town all
of the powers invested in law-enforcement
officers by statute or common law;
(2) Have power to serve all civil and criminal
process that may be directed to him by any
officer of the General Court of Justice;
(3) Rigidly enforce all laws, ordinances and
regulations of the Town and the State of North
Carolina:
(4) At all times preserve the peace, protect the
property and safety of the citizens of Hudson
(See G.S. 160A-285)
Section 3.7 Extraterritorial jurisdiction of
policemen.
(a) In addition to their authority within the
corporate limits policemen shall have all the
powers invested in law-enforcement officers by
statute or common law within one mile of the
corporate limits of the Town.
(b) When any offense is committed within the
corporate limits of the Town or within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction under circumstances
that would authorize a police officer to arrest the
offender without a warrant, the officer may
pursue the offender outside the jurisdiction for
the purpose of making an arrest during such
offender's immediate and continuous flight from
that territory. Any officer pursuing an offender
outside the corporate limits or extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Town shall be entitled to all of
the privileges, immunities, and benefits to which
he would be entitled ifacting within the Town,
including coverage under the Workmen's
Compensation laws. (See G. S. 160A-286)
(Section (b) amended 6117114.)
Section 3.8 Resisting police prohibited.
No person shall resist the police while in the discharge of
their duty, by force, words or threats, or any attempt to
excite others to resistance, or in any other manner obstruct
them in the performance of their duty.
Section 3.9 Carrying concealed handguns
prohibited on Town property.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) below, all
persons are prohibited from carrying concealed
handguns as defined in G.S. 14-269 in Town
owned buildings, their appurtenant premises and
parks.
(b) This prohibition shall not apply to the following
persons:
APL Supp. No. 14
Police
(1) Officers and enlisted personnel of the
forces of the United States when in
discharge of their official duties as such
and acting under orders requiring them
to carry arms and weapons;
(2) Civil officers of the United States
while in the discharge of their official
duties;
(3) Officers and soldiers of the militia
and the national guard when called into
actual service;
( 4) Sworn law enforcement officers;
(5) Animal Control officers,
( c) A conspicuous notice shall be posted
at each entrance to any property forth in
(a) above stating: "Possession
of weapons or carrying a concealed
handgun is prohibited."
( d) Any person in violation of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be fined
$500.00 or imprisoned for six months or
both.
( e) Weapons possessed in violation of
this section are hereby declared to be
contraband. The Chief of Police or his
designee shall hold such weapon for
disposal pursuant to court
order, in the absence of any court order,
the weapon shall be destroyed. (Ord. of
9-12-95)
Section 3.10 (Adopted 06/04)
AN ORDINANCE ADDRESSING AN
AUXILIARY POLICE DIVISION
FOR THE TOWN OF HUDSON
POLICE DEPARTMENT
WHEREAS, pursuant to North
Carolina General Statutes 160A-282 (a)
and (b), a Town may, by ordinance,
provide for the organization of an
auxiliary police staff made up of
volunteer members; and,
WHEREAS, by enactment of an
ordinance, the Town may provide that
while undergoing official training, and
while performing duties on behalf of the
Town pursuant to orders or instructions
of the Chief of Police of the Town,
auxiliary law-enforcement personnel
shall be entitled to benefits under the
North Carolina Workers-Compensation
Act, and to any fringe benefits for which
such volunteer personnel qualify.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT
ORDAINED by the Board of
Commissioners of the Town of Hudson,
that there is hereby established within
the Town of Hudson Police Department,
as a division thereof, an auxiliary police
division, with the auxiliary police
division being a volunteer organization,
whose members shall serve without
compensation, composed of as many
members as may from time to time be
determined by the Town of Hudson
Chief of Police, and approved by the
Town Manager.
3-2
Section 4.1 Fire Protection and Prevention 4-1
CHAPTER4
Fire Protection and Prevention
Section 4.1
Section 4.2
Section 4.3
Section 4.4
Section 4.5
Section 4.6
Section 4.7
Section 4.8
Section 4.9
Section 4 .10
Section 4.11
Section 4.12
Section 4.13
Section 4.14
Section 4.15
ARTICLE I
Fire Department
Organization.
Duties of Chief.
Same; duties as Fire Inspector.
General authority at fires.
Following fire equipment.
Interferring with fuemen or fire apparatus.
Only firemen may ride on trucks without permission.
Interfering with fire alarm apparatus.
Giving false alarm of fire forbidden.
Protection of fire hose.
Fire protection outside of Town.
ARTICLE 2
Fire Hazards
Encumbrances before or on flre exit.
Passageways in places of public assemblage to be
kept open, exit doors not to be fastened.
Lots kept free from fire hazard.
Buildings constituting fire hazards.
ARTICLE 3
Fire Limits
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 1
Fire Department
Section 4.1 Organization.
The department may from time to time adopt
its own rules and regulations governing the
department. However, any such rules and regulations
shall include provisions for at least one
training period each month.
Section 4 .2 Duties of Chief.
The du ties of the Chief:
(1) General control of the department, the
personnel, apparatus and fire alarm systems.
(2) To command the department and supervise
the fire-fighting and extinguishing of all fires and
to have the authority to keep away from the
vicinity of all fires, any and all idle, disorderly or
suspicious persons.
(3) He shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
trucks 톋nd other equipment of the fire department
each and every week to ascertain that such
equipment is being kept in proper condition.
Section 4.3 Same; duties as Fire Inspector.
(!) The Chief is to assume the functions of
Fire Inspector. As such, he (or his designated
agent) shall have authority to enter any and all
premises, at a reasonable time, for purposes of
inspection.
(2) Routine Inspections .. He shall make annual
inspections of all structures located within the
fire district.
(3) "Inspections Upon Complaint. He shall,
upon receipt of a complaint, forthwith investigate.
( 4) He shall investigate the causes of fires and
shall keep records of his findings as to origin,
location, owner, extent of damage, injury, and
amount of insurance carried. The findings must
be reported to the North Carolina Insurance
Commissioner at regular intervals.
(5) He shall cause the removal of fire hazards
by serving proper order to ow;1er or agent of
premises in question, such order to state a
reasonable time limit. Failure to comply with
such order shall be considered a misdemeanor.
Section 4.4 General authority at l!res.
( 1) The officer in command shall have authority
to summon aid and no citizen so summoned
may refuse help in extinguishing the
fire or in protecting exposed property.
(2) During the continuance of a fire, the fire
chief, or his assistant shall have authority to
call upon any citizen to render assistance in
pulling down or demolishing any building or
in removing goods or furniture from a building
on fire or in danger of fire, but not without
the consent of the officer of the fire department
or the police department who may
be in charge.
(3) It shall be unlawful to congregate on the
streets or alleys near a fire in a manner which
would interfere with the activities of the fire
department.
(4) In the event of an alarm of fire the
appartus of the fire department, responding to it,
shall have the right-of-way in and upon all streets,
lanes, alleys, and other public ways.
(5) The drivers of vehicles, upon the approach
of fire apparatus, shall immediately bring their
vehicle to a stop on the right hand side of the
Section 4.4 Fire Protection and Prevention 4-2
street in the direction in which they are facing
and shall not move their vehicle until such
apparatus has passed.
Section 4.5 Following fire equipment.
It sha!l be unlawful to follow any fire apparatus
which is responding to a call, by automobile
or any other vehicle, unless such is used for
transporting firemen to the scene of fire, at a
distance closer than one city block, or to pass
such apparatus or to park within the same block
in which fire is in progress.
Section 4.6 Interfering with firemen or fire
apparatus.
No person shall interfere with a fireman in the
discharge of his duty, or hinder him in the
performance of said duty; nor shall any person
other than members of the fire department loiter
about any fire station, or change, handle, or
meddle in any manner with any fire engine or any
other fire apparatus.
Section 4.7 Only firemen may ride on trucks
without permission.
No person other than a bona fide member of
the fire department shall mount any fire engine,
wagon or apparatus before it leaves the station or
while on its way to or from a fire, or at any other
time, unless by permission of the driver or officer
in command of such engine, wagon or other
apparatus.
Section 4.8 Interfering with fire alarm apparatus.
No person shall interfere carelessly or willfully
with the fire alarm system or injure the poles,
wires, boxes, or other apparatus connected therewith.
Section 4.9 Giving false alarm of fire forbidden.
No person shall give or cause to be given any
false alarm of fire by means of the fire alarm
system or otherwise.
Section 4.10 Protection of fire hose.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to drive over, or in any way damage
or mutilate any fire hose while in use at a .fire or
otherwise.
Section 4.11 Fire protection outside of Town.
In the event that the Town agrees with the
county, or the owners of property outside the
Town, to provide fire protection therefor, any
employee of the fire department, while engaged
in any duty or activity outside the corporate
limits of the Town pursuant to orders of the Fire
Chief or Board, shall have all of the jurisdiction,
authority, rights, privileges, and immunities, including
coverage under the workmen's compensation
laws, which they have within the corporate
limits of the Town. (See G.S. !60A-293)
Section 4.12 Fire Protection and Prevention 4-3
ARTICLE2
Fire Hazards
Section 4.12 Encumbrances before or on fire
exit.
No person shall at any time, place any encumbrances
of any kind whatsoever before or upon
any fire escape, balcony or ladder intended as a
means of escape from fire. It shall be the duty of
every member of the police department who
shall discover any fire escape encumbered in
any manner to immediately notify the owner
or owners, their agent or agents, tenant or tenants,
to remove such encumbrance and encumbrance
shall thereupon be immediately
removed.
Section 4.13 Passageways in places of public
assemblage to be kept open, exit
doors not to be fastened.
All doors, aisles and passageways within and
leading into or out of the theatres, churches and
all other places of public assemblage, shall, during
the entire time which any show, performance,
service, exhibition, lecture, concert, ball or other
assemblage may be held therein, be kept adequately
lighted and free from easels, signs, standards,
campstools, chairs, sofas, benches and any
other article or articles that might obstruct or
delay the exit of the audience, congregation or
assemblage; and doors of such buildings while
occupied shall not be fastened so that they
cannot easily be opened by anyone from within.
No person shall sit or stand or remain seated or
standing, nor shall the owner or operator of such
place allow any person to remain seated or
standing, nor shall the owner or operator of such
place allow any person to remain, in any such
place of public assemblage in any aisle under any
circumstances, or in any exit, or passage required
for the safe exit of the assemblage. Clear passage
from all exits and on outside sidewalks of all
theatres and other places of public assemblage
shall be maintained at all times. No aisle, passageway
or stairway in any store shall be obstructed
with tables, show cases or other obstructions
during the hours such store is open to the public.
Section 4.14 Lots kept free from fire hazard.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or
suffer rubbish, refuse or articles of combustible or
inflamable nature to accumulate or remain on any
lot or premises.
Section 4 .1 S Buildings constituting fire hazards.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person
or persons owning a building in the Town to
allow such building to become in such bad repair
or condition as to endanger from fire a neighboring
building, and any person owning any such
building in bad repair, who shall fail to repair the
same within thirty days after notice to repair
from the Board, then in such event the Board
shall condemn such building and cause same to be
torn down and removed.
Section 5 .I Streets and Sidewalks 51
Section 5.1
Section 5.2
Section 5.3
Section 5.4
Section 5 .5
Section 5.6
Section 5.7
Section 5.8
Section S.9
Section 5.10
Section 5.11
Section S.12
Section 5.13
Section 5.14
Section 5.15
Section 5.16
Section 5.17
Section S .l 8
Section 5.19
Section 5.20
Section 5.21
Section 5.22
Section 5.23
Section 5.24
CHAPTERS
Streets and Sidewalks
ARTICLE I
Damaging Streets and Sidewalks
Permit to dig in streets.
Sidewalk construction.
Street repuir.
Excavations; leaving unprotected.
Strel!ts not to be damaged.
House moving..
Darnai::e to bddg.es and culverts.
Damage to liihts and sip:n.o;.
ARTICLE 2
Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks
Assembly on sidewalk.
P3.I1des and demonstrations; definitions.
Same; permit required.
Same; requirements and issuance of permits.
Same; certain activities prohibited.
Same; revocation of permit.
Same; interference prohibited.
Same; additional regulations applicable to picketing.
Same; exceptions.
Display of goods prohibited.
Placing objects on streets and sidewalks.
Construction near sidewalk.
Sheds and awnings.
Culvert construction.
Raihoad cxossings; regulation.
Same; bridges and underpasses.
ARTICLE 3
Use and Cleanliness of Streets and Sidewalks
Section 5.25 Throwing or burning trash on street prohibited.
Section 5.26 Tree trlmmlngs.
Section 5.27 Snow and ice re1noval.
Section 5.28 Playing ball on streets prohibited.
Section 5.29 Use of nails and tacks restricted.
ARTICLE 1
Damaging Streets and Sidewalks
Section 5 .1 Permit to dig in streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to dig any hole, ditch or excavation
of any kind whatsoever, on any street in the
Town without first securing a permit therefor in
writing from the Town Cleric
Section 5 .2 Sidewalk construction.
No sidewalk of any description shall be built
by any individual, finn or corporation of any
brick, wood, or other material without a written
permit from the Town.
Section 5.3 Street repair.
It shall be the duty of every person, firm or
corporation, who shall open or dig a ditch, trench
or hole in any street, public alley or sidewalk of
the Town, to put the said street, public alley or
sidewalk in as good condition in all respects as 톓t
was before.
Section 5.4 Excavations; leaving unprotected.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation making any excavation for any purpose
whatsoever in any of the streets or sidewalks
to fail to securely cover such excavations with
plank or place ropes around the same three feet
from the ground or fail to place a sufficient
number of red lights around such excavation
before dark and to keep such light burning all
night every night such excavation shall be open.
Section 5 .5 Streets not to be damaged.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to drag, or run, or cause to be
dragged or run any harrow or ot11er implement,
engine, machine or tool upon any aspllalt, bithu
lithic, warrenite, or other permanently paved
street of the Town which shall be liable, in any
way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall
also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the
same manner.
(b) It shall be unlawful to load or unload, or
have any cleat track machine upon any street in
Hudson. Owners will be liable for any damage
caused to streets by said machines. (Ord. of
5/5/64)
Section 5 .6 Honse moving.
No person shall move any house or building
upon or across the public streets or sidewalks
without the written consent of the Board and
the proof of sufficient insurance as required by
State law or regulations to cover damage done
to such street or sidewalk or to any property
of any person.
Section 5 .7 Damage to bridges and culverts.
No person shall injure or misplace any part of
any bridge, culvert, ditch and drain or other
property belonging to or used by the Town, or
shall place any obstruction in any culvert, ditch
or drain, to prevent the free flow of water on or
over the streets of the Town.
l.
(
Section S.8 Streets and Sidewalks 5-2
Section 5.8 Damage to lights and signs.
No person shall injure, tamper with, remove or
paint upon or deface any sign, sign post, street
light, traffic signal or bulletin board or other
municipal property upon the streets and sidewalks
except employees of the Town in performance
of their duties.
ARTICLE2
Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks.
Section 5.9 Assembly on sidewalk.
All crowds or assemblages of persons that shall
congregate on the streets or sidewalks of this
Town, thereby obstructing the street to the
orderly flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic
shall be dispersed by the police, and any
person who refuses to obey the warning of
the officer shall be deemed to violate this section.
Section S.10 Parades and demonstrations; definitions.
For the purpose of Sections 5.10 through 5.17,
the following terms shall have the definitions
ascribed:
(1) "Block" is that portion of any street lying
between its intersections with other streets.
(2) "Parade" is any assemblage of two or more
persons participating in or operating any vehicle
in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or
procession of any ltind in or upon the public
streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or other public
grounds or places.
(3) "Person" is any person, frrrn, corporation,
partnership, association, or other organization,
whether formal or informal.
(4) "Picket line" is any two or more persons
formed together for the purpose of making
known any position or promotion of such persons,
or on behalf of any organization or class of
persons.
(5) "Group demopstration" is any assembly
together or concert of action between or among
two or more persons for the purpose of protesting
any matter or of making known any position or
promotion of such persons, or of or on behalf of
any organization or class of persons, or for the
purpose of attracting attention of such assembly.
Section S.11 Same; permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to organize,
conduct or participate in any parade, picket line
or group demonstration in or upon any street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public place within the
Town unless a permit therefor has been issued by
the Town in accordance with the provisions of
this Article.
Section 5.12 Same; requirements and issuance of
permits.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall issue
(
Section 5.12 Streets and Sidewalks 5-3
permits as required in the preceding section, and
in the issuance thereof he shall:
(I) require a written application for permit to
be filed not less than twenty-four (24) hours in
advance of such parade, picket line, or group
demonstration which application shall specify the
time and place for the commencement of any
such picket line and the time, place, route, and
duration of any such parade or group demonstration.
(2) refUse to issue such permits for parades,
picket lines or group demonstrations to commence
before sun-up or terminate after sundown.
(3) refUse to issue such permits for parades or
group demonstrations to be held at the same time
and place as those designated in a permit issued
pursuant to a written application previously
received by the Chief of Police or his designee.
( 4) require that the application for a permit
specify whether or not minors below the age of
eighteen years will be permitted to participate.
(5) require that the application for a permit
shall specify and the permit shall designate the
person or persons in charge of the activity. Such
person shall be required to accompany the
parade, picket line, or group demonstration and
shall carry such permit with him at that time.
Such permit shall not be valid in the possession of
any other person.
Section 5 .13 Same; certain activities prohibited.
The following acts or activities, when performed
or undertaken in conjunction with or as a
part of, any parade, picket line, or group demonstration,
are hereby prohibited and declared
unlawful:
(I) The carrying on or about the person any
firearm, or any weapon or article, including but
not limited to blackjacks, nightsticks, or flashlights
which by their use would constitute a
deadly weapon;
(2) The taking or keeping of any dog or other
vicious animal, whether leashed or unleased.
Section S.14 Same; revocation of permit.
The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit
granted for a parade, picket line, or group
demonstration for any of the following causes:
(1) The violation by any participant of Section
5.13 of this Article;
(2) The failure to comply with the terms and
conditions of the permit.
Section 5.15 Same; interference prohibited.
No person shall hamper, obstruct. impede, or
interfere with any parade, picket line. or group
demonstration being lawfully conducted under
authority of a permit duly issued by the Chief
of Police.
Section 5.16 Same; additional regulations applicable
to picketing.
Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to
the following additional regulations:
(I) Picketing may be conducted only on the
sidewalks reserved for pedestrian movement, and
may not be conducted on the portion of a street
used primarily for vehicular .traffic;
(2) Not more than ten pickets promoting
the same objective shall be permitted to use
either of the two sidewalks within a single block
at any one time:
(3) Pickets may carry written or printed pla
cards or signs not exceeding two feet in width
and two feet in length promoting the objective
for which the picketing is done; provided, the
words used are not derogatory, defamatory or
inflammatory in nature;
( 4) Pickets must march in single file and not
abreast and must not march closer together than
fifteen feet, except in passing one another. Pickets
shall not be allowed to walk more than five
feet from the curb line and shall be in continuous
motion.
(5) If pickets promoting different objectives
desire to use the same sidewalk for picketing
and such use would result in the presence of
more than ten pickets thereon, the Chief of
Police shall allot time to each group of pickets
for the use of such sidewalk on an equitable basis.
Section 5.17 Same; exceptions.
Sections 5.10 through 5.16 shall not apply to:
(I) Funeral precessions;
(2) Any governmental agency acting within
the scope of its functions.
Section S.18 Display of goods prohibited.
No person shall place for display or sale any
goods, wares or merchandise of any kind upon
any of the sidewalks of said Town, which would
obstruct free passage of pedestrians.
Section 5 .19 Placing objects on streets and sidewalks.
No brick, stone or wood or other substances
obstructing the free passage of persons and
(
Section 5 .19 Streets and Sidewalks 54
vehlcles shall be placed or suffered to lie in any of
the alley ways, streets or other routes, of the
Town, nor shall any person place on or in any of
the streets, sidewalks or alley ways of the Town
any boxes, crates, casks, or barrels of any
description, or any other obstruction of any kind.
Provided that any person erecting a building, may
with permission place building material for
immediate use on the streets in such a way as to
not interfere with the usual traffic.
Section 5.20 Construction near sidewalk.
Before building or remodeling at any place
where the same is in close proximity to the
sidewalk an overhead covered passageway shall be
constructed so as to leave the sidewalk unobstructed
and provide safe and easy passage.
Section 5.21 Sheds and awnings.
No person shall erect or repair over any
sidewalk or street any wooden shed or awning or
any wooden shed for the support of an awning or
erect upon any street or sidewalk any post for the
support of any awning. If any person shall violate
thls Section then each day that the above
forbidden structure shall remain after notice shall
constitute a separate violation. Provided that this
shall not be construed to prevent the erection
over the sidewalk of cloth awnings supported
upon metallic frames finnly suspended from the
building, and at least seven feet above the level of
the sidewalk.
Section 5 .22 Culvert construction.
No person shall install a culvert less than tw~lve
inches in diameter in any driveway leading off
a Town street or avenue in Hudson. (Ord. of
8/6/63)
Section 5.23 Railroad crossings; regulation.
(a) The Board may direct, control, and prohibit
the laying of railroad tracks and switcht!s in
public streets and alleys. All railroad trai;:ks,
crossings and bridges shall be constructed so as
not to interfere with drainage patterns or with the
ordinary travel and use of the public streets and
alleys.
(b) The costs of constructing, reconstructing,
and improving public streets and alleys, including
the widening thereof, within areas covered by
railroad cross-ties, including cross timbers, shall
be borne equally by the Town and the railroad
company. The costs of maintaining and repairing
such areas after construction shall be borne by
the railroad company.
(c) At each railroad grade crossing hereinafter
designated in this subsection, the railroad operating
trains or locomotives or rolling stock of any
kind over such crossing shall maintain at all times
suitable crossing gates, which shall be closed when
any train, locomotive or other rolling stock is
passing over, or approaching톘ear to the crossing
for the purpose of passing over, the same. The
grade crossings at which crossing gates shall be so
maintained are located as provided in Appendix I,
Section 101 of this Code, which is hereby made a
part of this section. In lieu of the foregoing, the
railroad may install and maintain hlghway grade
crossing automatic flashing light signals with or
without short arm gates.
(d) At each railroad grade crossing hereinafter
designated in this subsection, the railroad
operating trains, locomotives or rolling stock of
any kind over the same shall either:
(I) Give timely warning of the approach of
each train, locomotive or other rolling stock, by a
crossing watchman then on duty; or
(2) Cause each train, locomotive or other
rolling stock to .be brought to a stop before
entering onto the crossing and to be preceded by
a flagman on foot who shall give timely warning
that it is about to enter upon the crossing. The
grade crossings to which this subsection applies
are provided in Appendix l, Section 102, of this
Code, which is hereby made a part of this section.
(e) At each railroad grade crossing hereinafter
designated in thls subsection, the railroad
operating trains, locomotives or other rolling
stock of any kind over the same may install and
maintain hlghway grade crossing automatic
flashing light signals, and such railroad operating
trains, locomotives or rolling stock of any kind
over said crossing shall either:
(1) Give timely warning of the approach of
each train, locomotive or other rolling stock by a
crossing watchman then on duty; or
(2) Cause each train, locomotive or .other
rolling stock to be brought to a stop before
entering on such crossing and to be preceded by a
flagman on foot who shall give timely warning
that it is about to enter upon the crossing; or
(3) Install and maintain highway grade
crossing automatic flashing light signals with or
without short arm gates. The grade crossings to
whlch this section applies are provided in
Appendix I, Section 103, of this Code, which is
hereby made a part of this section.
(
\
Section 5 23 Streets and Sidewalks 5.5
(f) The Town shall bear ninety percent (90%)
of the costs of waming signs, gates, lights, and
other safety devices at grade crossings, and the
railroad company shall bear ten percent (l 0%)
of the costs. The costs of maintaining warning
signs, gates, lights, and other safety devices installed
after January I. 1972 shall be borne
equally by the Town and the railroad company.
The maintenance shall be performed by the railroad
company and the Town shall pay annually
to the railroad company fifty percent (50%) of
these costs. In maintaining maintenance cost
records and determining such costs, the Town and
the railroad company shall use the same methods
and procedures as are now or may hereafter be
used by the State Highway Commission. (See G.S.
160A-298)
Section 5.24 Sarne; bridges and underpasses.
(a) The Board may require that a grade
crossing be eliminated and replaced by a railroad
bridge or by a railroad underpass, if the Board
finds as a fact that the grade crossing constitutes
an unreasonable hazard to vehicular or pedestrian
traffic. In such event, the Town shall bear ninefy
percent of the costs and the railroad company
shall bear ten percent of the costs. If the Town
constructs a new street which requires a grade
separation and which does not replace an existing
street, the Town shall bear all of the costs.
If a railroad company constructs a new track
across at grade, or under, or over an existing
street, the railroad company shall pay the entire
cost thereof. The Town shall pay the costs of
maintaining railroad bridges over streets, except
that the Town shall pay the costs of maintaining
street pavement, sidewalks, street drainage, and
street lighting where streets cross under railroads.
(b) Whenever the widening, improving or other
changes in a street require that a railroad bridge
be relocated, enlarged, heightened or otherwise
reconstructed, the Town shall bear ninety percent
of the costs and the railroad company
shall bear ten percent of the costs. (See G. S.
160A-298)
ARTICLE3
Use and Cleanliness of
Streets and Sidewalks
Section 5 .25 Throwing or burning trash 011
street prohibited.
No paper, straw, lemon peel, banana peel,
watermelon rind or any trash of any kind shall be
thrown or swept upon any sidewalk or street of
the Town, nor shall any trash, refuse, or rubbish
be burned thereon.
Section S .26 Tree trimmings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or
allow to be placed any tree trimmings or shrubbery
on any street or sidewalk.
Section 5 .27 Snow and ice removal.
Every occupant of a store building in front of
which the sidewalk is paved with stone, brick,
asphalt or cement, shall remove snow. ice or other
obstruction from such sidewalk at the earliest
possible time and as soon as the weather permits.
Section 5.28 Playing ball on streets prohibited.
No person shall play ball or bat or catch ball on
any of the streets of the Town.
Section 5 .29 Use of nails and tacks restricted.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person
to drive any nails or tacks in the telephone,
telegraph or electric light poles, or in any house
or store situated on any sidewalk or street of the
Town except with the permission of the owner.
Municipal Utilities
CHAPTER6
Article 1 and Article 2
ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE FOR
ENFORCEMENT OF THE CITY OF
LENOIR'S WATER AND SEWER
ORDINANCES WITHIN THE
CORPORATE BOUNDARIES OF THE
TOWN OF HUDSON
WHEREAS, as a result of the agreement
between the Town of Hudson and the City
of Lenoir dated August 5, 1999, the City of
Lenoir owns and operates the water and
sewer system within the corporate
boundaries of the Town of Hudson; and
WHEREAS, the City of Lenoir has
Water and Sewer Ordinances in place to
govern the operation of their Water and
Sewer System.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT
ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWN OF
HUDSON, NORTH CAROLINA, that the
Town of Hudson officially adopts the City
of Lenoir's Water and Sewer Ordinances
and replaces the Town of Hudson's Water
and Sewer Ordinances as stated under
Chapter 6 - Municipal Utilities Article 1
and Article 2 in the Town of Hudson's Code
of Ordinances with the Water and Sewer
Ordinances for the City of Lenoir; and,
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that the
Town of Hudson, by and through its duly
elected Board of Commissioners, permits
the duly designated officials of the Town of
Hudson to enforce, within the Town of
Hudson, Lenoir's Water and Sewer
Ordinances as the Ordinances may be
modified or amended from time to time.
Adopted this the 11th day of September,
2007.
A copy of City of Lenoir's Water and Sewer
Ordinances begins on page 6-2 - A copy is
also available on the Town of Hudson
Website at www.townofhudsonnc.com -
Code of Ordinances Page - Municipal
Utilities
Section 6.3
ARTICLE3
Electric
(Reserved)
Municipal Utilities 6-25
ARTICLE4
Cable Television
Section 6.38 Regulation of basic service tier rates and
related equipment, installation and service
charges.
(a) The Town will follow the FCC Rate Regulations
in its regulation of the Basic Service Rates and Charges of the
Company and any other cable television operating in the
Town, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent
provisions in the Franchise; and
(b) In connection with such regulation, the Town will
ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the
views of interested parties; and
(c) The Town Manager or his or her designee, is
authorized to execute on behalf of the Town and file with
the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are
now or may hereafter be required by the FCC Rate
Regulations in order to enable. the Town to regulate Basic
Service Rates and Charges. (Ord. of 11-16-93)
ALP Supp. No. 14
Section 7 .1
Section 7 .2
Section 7 .3
Section 7.4
Section 7 .5
Section 7 .6
Section 7 .7
Section 7.8
Section 7 .9
Section 7 .10
Section 7 .I J
SeCtion 7 .12
Section 7 .13
Section 7 .14
Section 7 .15
CHAPTER 7
Traffic
ARTICLE I
Words and Phrases Defined
Def1nition of words and phrases.
Vehicles.
Bicycles; motorcycles.
Railroads; streetcars.
Traffic; right-of-way.
Stopping; parking.
Official time standard.
Person; driver; pedestrian.
Police.
Streets, etc.
Roadway; highway.
Intersection; crosswalk.
Zones.
Traffic control.
Districts.
ARTICLE 2
Traffic Administration
Traffic
Section 7. \ 6 throu.h section 7 .25 reserved.
ARTKLE 3.
Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations
Section 7 .26
Section 7 .27
Section 7 .28
Authority of police and fire department .
Obedience to police and fire department ~ffic1als.
Persons propelling push carts or riding anunals to
obey traffic regulations.
Section 7 .29 Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices
Section 7 -30
Section 7 .31
Section 7 .32
restricted.
Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
Authorized emergency vehicles.
Operation of vehicles and streetcars on approach of
authorized emergency vehicles.
Section 7 .33 through section 7 .36 reserved.
Section 7 .3 7
Section 7 .38
Section 7 .39
Section 7.40
Section 7 .41
Section 7 .42
Section 7 .43
Section 7 .44
Section 7.45
Section 7 .46
Section 7 .4 7
Section 7 .48
Section 7.49
ARTICLE 4
Traffic-Control Devices
Authority to install traffic.control devices
Specifications for traffic-control. .
Obedience to official traffic.control devices.
When traffic devices required for enforcement
purposes.
Traffic-control signal legend.
Pedestrian control signals.
{.'lashing signals.
Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
Interference with official traffic-control devices on
railroad signs or signals.
Authority to establish play streets.
Traffic lanes.
ARTICLE 5
Speed Regulations
General.
Exceptions.
Section 7 .50
Section 7 .51
Section 7 .52
Section 7.53
Section 7 .54
Section 7 .55
Section 7 .56
Section 7.57
Section 7 .5 8
Section 7 .59
Section 7 .60
Section 7 .61
Section 7 .62
Section 7 .63
Section 7 .64
Section 7 .65
Section 7 .66
Section 7 .67
Section 7 .68
Section 7 .69
Section 7. 7 0
Section 7. 71
Section 7. 7 2
Section 7 .73
Section 7 .74
Section 7 .75
Section 7. 7 6
Section 7 .77
Section 7. 7 8
Section 7 .79
Section 7 .80
Section 7 .81
Section 7 .82
Section 7.83
Section 7 .84
ARTICLE 6
Turning Movements
7-1
Required position and method of turning at
intersections.
Turning markers.
Authority to place restricted turn signs.
Obedience to no-turn signs.
Limitations on turning around.
ARTICLE 7
One-\Vay Streets and Alleys
Authority to sign one-,vay streets and alleys.
One-way streets and alleys.
ARTICLE 8
Special Stops Required
Through streets designated. (Reserved)
Authority to erect stop signs.
Intersections where stop required.
Signs to bear the word "Stop."
Vehicles and streetcars to stop at stop signs.
Emerging from alley, drive\vay, or building.
Stop when traffic obstructed.
Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train.
ARTICLE9
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
Following fire apparatus prohibited.
Crossing f""ue hose.
Driving through funeral or other procession.
Drivers in a procession.
Funeral processions to be identified.
When permits required for parades and processions.
Vehicles shall not be driven on a sidewalk.
Limitations on backing.
Riding on motorcycles.
Clinging to vehicles.
Controlled access.
Boarding or alighting from public conveyances or
other vehicles.
Unlawful riding.
Entering, jumping on, or riding vehicles without
permission.
Persons riding must stay inside.
Not more than three persons permitted in front
seat.
Trains blocking crossing regulated.
Speed limit for trains.
Mobile homes.
Reserved.
ARTICLE 10
Pedestrians' Rights and Duties
Section 7 .85
Section 7 .86
Section 7 .87
Section 7 .88
Section 7 .89
Pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals.
Pedestrians' right of way in cross walk.
Pedestrians to use right half of cross walk.
Crossing at right angles.
\Vhen pedestrian shall yield.
Section 7.1
Section 7.90 Prohibited crossing.
Section 7. 91 Pedestrians walking along roadways.
Section 7.92 Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.
Section 7.93 Drivers to exercise due care.
ARTICLE II
Regulations for Bicycles
Section 7.94 Effect of regulations.
Section 7.95 Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles.
Section 7.96 Obedience to traffic-control devices.
Section 7, 97 Riding on bicycles.
Section 7.98 Riding on roadw:i.ys ::md bicycle paths.
Section 7.99 Speed.
Section 7.100 Emerging from alley or driveway.
Section 7.101 Clinging to verucles.
Section 7.102 Carrying articles.
Section 7.103 Parking.
Section 7.104 Riding on sidewalks.
Section 7.105 Lamps and other equipment on bicycles.
ARTICLE 12
Method of Parking
Section 7.106 Standing or parking close to curb.
Section 7.107 Signs or markings indicating angle parking.
Section 7,108 Obedience to angle-parking signs or markings.
Section 7 .109 Lights on parked vehicles.
ARTICLE 13
Stopping, St::mding, or P2rking Prohibited
in Specified Places
Section 7.110 Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited. No signs
required.
Section 7.111 Parking not to obstruct tf2ffi.c.
Section 7 .112 Parking in alleys.
Section 7.113 All-night parking prohibited.
Section 7.114 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
Section 7.115 Parking adjacent to schools.
Section 7.116 Standing or parking on one-way roadways.
Section 7.117 No stopping, standing, or parking near hazardous or
congested places.
Section 7.118
Section 7.119
Section 7.120
Section 7.121
Section 7 .122
ARTICLE 14
Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
Standing in passenger curb loading zone.
Standing in freight curb loading zone.
Public carrier stops and stands.
Stopping, standing, and parking of busses and taxicabs
regulated.
Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
ARTICLE 15
Stopping, Standing or Parking Restricted
or Prohibited on Certain Streets
Section 7.123 Application of article.
Section 7.124 Regulations not exclusive.
Section 7.125 Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
TT2ffic
Section 7.126
Section 7.127
Section 7.128
Section 7.1
Parking time limited on certain streets.
Parking signs required.
No thru truck tnffic.
ARTICLE 1
Words and Phrases Defined
Definition of words and phrases.
7-2
The following words and phrases when used in this
Chapter shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Article.
Section 7.2 Vehicles.
(a) Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon
a highway, except devices moved by hwnan power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(b) Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is
self-propelled.
(c) Commercial vehicle. Every vehicle designed,
maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of
property.
(d) Authorized emergency vehicle. Vehicles of the fire
department, police vehicles and such ambulances and
emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public
service corporations.
(e) A free-wheeled vehicle having dual tires on one or
more axles, or having more than two axles, designed for the
transportation of cargo rather than passengers. Includes
tractor trucks, trailers and semi-trailers when used in
combination, any vehicle that would require Commercial
Driver's License in order to operate, or any vehicle that
exceeds 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. Excludes those
two-axle, four or six tired vehicles that may be classified as
a truck for registration purposes, but which have operating
characteristics similar to those of a passenger car. (Ord. of 6-
18-96)
Section 7.3 Bicycles; motorcycles.
(a) Bicycle. Every device propelled by hwnan power
upon which any person may ride, having two tandem
wheels.
(b) Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a saddle
for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more
than three wheels in contact with the ground.
Section 7-4 Railroads.
(a) Railroad. A carrier of persons or property upon
cars, operated upon stationary rails.
ALP Supp. No. 14
Section 7.4
(b) Railroad train. A steam engine, electric or other
motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated
upon rails.
Section 7.5 Traffic; right-of-way.
(a) Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals,
vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together
while using any street for pwposes of travel.
(b) Right of Way. The privilege of the immediate
use of the road way.
Traffic 7-2.1
ALP Supp. No. 14
Section 7 .6 Traffic
Section 7.6 Stopping; parking.
(a) Stop. When required means complete cessation
of movement.
(b) Stop, stopping, or standing. When prohibited
means any stopping or standing of a
vehicle whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer
or traffic-control sign or signal. .
(c) Park. When prohibited means the standmg
of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading.
Section 7.7 Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named herein they
shall mean standard time or daylight saving time
as may be in current use in this Town.
Section 7 .8 Person; driver; pedestrian; equestrian.
(a) Person. Every natural person, firm, copartnership,
association, or corporation.
(b) Driver. Every person who drives or is in
actual physical control of a vehicle.
(c) Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
(d) Equestrian. Any person riding a horse.
Section 7.9 Police.
(a) Police officer. Every officer of the municipal
police department or any officer authorized
to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
(b) Traffic division. The traffic division of the
police department of this Town, or in the event a
traffic division is not established, then said term
whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to
the police department of this Town.
Section 7.10 Streets, etc.
(a) Street or highway. The entire width between
the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public for purpose of travel.
(b) Private road or driveway. Every way or
place in private ownership and used for travel
by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by
other persons.
(c) Roadway. That portion of a street or
highway improved, designed or ordinarily used
for travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
7-3
In the event a highway includes two or more
separate roadways the term "roadway" as used
herein shall refer to any such roadway separately
but not to all such roadways collectively.
(d) Sidewalk. That portion of a street between
the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway,
and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.
( e) Alley. A thoroughfare through the middle
of a block.
(f) Block. The portion of any street located
between two intersections adjacent to each other.
Section 7.11 Roadway; highway.
(a) Laned roadway. A roadway which is
divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for
vehicular traffic.
(b) Through highway. Every street or highway
or portion thereof at the entrances to which
traffic from intersection streets or highways
is required by law to stop before entering or
crossing the same and when stop signs are erected
as provided in this act.
(c) Controlled-access highway. Every highway,
street, or roadway in respect to which owners or
occupants of abutting property or lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from
the same, except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public
authority having jurisdiction over such highway,
street, or roadway.
Section 7.12 Intersection; crosswalk.
(a) Intersection. The area embraced within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral curb
lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines
of the roadways of the two highways which join
one another at or approximately at right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon
different highways joining at any other angle may
come in conflict.
Where a highway includes two roadways 30
feet or more apart, then every crossing of each
roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate
intersection.
(b) Crosswalk. That part of a roadway at an
intersection included within the connections of
the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides
of the highway measured from the curbs, or in
the absence of curbs from the edges of the
traversable roadway.
Section 7 .12
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
Section 7 .13 Zones.
(a) Safety zone. The area or space officially set
apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of
pedestrians and which is protected or is so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be
plainly visible at all times while set apart as a
safety zone.
(b) Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a
curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles
during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
( c) Passenger curb loading zone. A place adjacent
to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
(d) Freight curb loading zone. A space adjacent
to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles
during the loading or unloading of freight or
passengers.
Section 7 .14 Traffic control.
Traffic
(a) Official traffic-control devices. All signs,
signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent
with this chapter placed or erected by authority
of a public body or official having jurisdiction,
for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding
traffic.
(b) Traffic-control signal. Any device, whether
manually, electrically, or mechanically operated,
by which traffic is alternately directed to stop
and to proceed.
Section 7 .15 Districts.
(a) Business district. The territory contiguous
to and including a highway when within any 600
feet along such highway there are buildings in use
for business or industrial purposes, including but
not limited to hotels, banks or office buildings,
railroad stations, and public buildings which
occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side
or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
(b) Residence district. The territory contiguous
to and including a highway not comprising a
business district when the property on such
highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in
the main improved with residences or residences
and buildings in use for business.
74
ARTICLE2
Traffic Administration
Section 7.16 through 7.25 reserved.
Section 7 .26
ARTICLE3
Enforcement and Obedience to
Traffic Regulations
Section 7 .26 Authority of police and fire department
officials.
(a) It shall be the duty of the officers of the
police department or such officers as are assigned
by the Chief of Police to enforce all
street traffic laws and all of the State vehicle
laws applicable to street traffic.
(b) Officers of the police department or such
officers as are assigned by the chief of police are
hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws,
provided that, in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the police department
may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(c) Officers of the fire department, when at
the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police
in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
Traffic
Section 7 .27 Obedience to police and fire department
officials.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of a
police officer or fire department official.
Section 7 .28 Persons propelling push carts or
riding animals to obey traffic
regulations.
Every person propelling any push cart or riding
an animal or animal-drawn vehicle, shall be
subject to the provisions of this ordinance applicable
to the drive of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this ordinance which by
their nature can have no application.
Section 7 .29 Use of coasters, roller skates, and
similar devices restricted.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by
means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar
device, shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so
crossing such person shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not
apply upon any street while set aside as a play
7-5
street as authorized by ordinance.
Section 7.30 Public employees to obey traffic
regulations.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to
the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in
the service of the United States Government,
this State, County or Town, and it shall be unlawful
for any said driver to violate any of the
provisions of this Chapter, except as otherwise
permitted in this Chapter or by State statute.
Section 7 .31 Authorized emergency vehicles.
(a) The driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or
when in the pursuit of an actual suspected
violator of the law or when responding to but not
upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise
the privileges set forth in this section, but subject
to the conditions herein stated.
(b) The driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle may:
(I) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions
of this Chapter;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop
sign, but only after slowing down as may be
necessary for safe. operation;
(3) Disregard regulations governing direction
of movement or turning in specified directions
and exceed the prima facie speed limits so long
as he does not endanger life or property.
(c) The exemption herein granted to an authorized
emergency vehicle shall apply only when
the driver of any said vehicle while in motion
sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust
whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when
the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted
lamp displaying a light visible under riormal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500
feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an
authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle need not be equipped with or display a
light visible from in front of the vehicle.
( d) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve
the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions
protect the driver from the consequences of his
reckless disregard for the safety of others.
Section 7 .3 2
Section 7 .32 Operation of vehicles on approach
of authorized emergency
vehicles.
Traffic
(a) Upon the immediate approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle equipped with at least
one lighted lamp exhibiting light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of
500 feet to the front of such vehicle other than a
police vehicle when operated as an authorized
emergency vehicle, and when the driver is giving
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell;
(1) The driver of every other vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way and shall immediately
drive to a position parallel to, and as close as
possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the
roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop
and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer.
(2) Upon the approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle, as above stated, the motorman
of every street car shall immediately stop such car
clear of any intersection and keep it in such
position until the authorized emergency vehicle
has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
(b) This section shall not operate to relieve the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of
all persons using the highway.
Section 7.33 through 7.36 reserved.
ARTICLE4
Traffic-Control Devices
7-6
Section 7.37 Authority to install traffic-control
devices.
The Town shall place and maintain trafficcontrol
signs, signals, and devices when and as
required under the traffic ordinances to make
effective the provisions of said ordinances, and
may place and maintain such additional trafficcontrol
devices to regulate traffic under the
traffic ordinances of this Town or under State
law, or to guide or warn traffic.
Section 7.38 Specifications for traffic-control
devices.
All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices
shall conform to State regulations. All signs and
signals required hereunder for a particular purpose
shall so far as practicable be uniform as to
type and location. All traffic-control devices so
erected and not inconsistent with the provisions
of State law or this ordinance shall be official
traffic-control devices.
Section 7.39 Obedience to official traffic-control
devices.
All traffic shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic-control device applicable thereto
placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle in this ordinance.
Section 7 .40 When traffic devices required for
enforcement purposes.
No provision of this ordinance for which signs
are required shall be enforced against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position
and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section
shall be effective even though no signs are erected
or in place.
Section 7.41 Traffic-control signal legend.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control
signals exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or
"Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights
successively one at a time, or with arrows, the
following colors only shall be used and said terms
and light shall indicate and apply to drivers of
Section 7 .41
vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(a) Green alone or "Go."
Traffic
(I) Traffic facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless
a sign at such place prohibits either such
turn. But traffic, including vehicles turning
right or left, shall yield the right of way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent cross walk at the
time such signal is exhibited.
(2) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed
across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
cross walk unless faced with a "no walk"
sign.
(b) Yellow along or "Caution" when shown
following the green of "Go" signal.
(I) Traffic facing the signal is thereby warned
that the red of "Stop" signal will be exhibited
immediately thereafter and such traffic shall
not enter or be crossing the intersection when the
red or "Stop" signal is exhibited.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall
enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is
shown alone unless authorized by a pedestrian
"Walk" signal.
(c) Red alone or "Stop."
(I) Traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the cross walk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the
intersection and shall remain standing until
green or "Go" is shown alone,
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter
the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown
alone unless authorized by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
(d) Red with green arrow.
(I) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the
movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield
the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a
cross walk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter
the roadway until the green of "Go" is shown
alone unless authorized by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
(e) In the event an official traffic-control
signal is erected and maintained at a place other
than an intersection, the provisions of this section
shall be applicable except as to those provisions
which by their nature can have no application.
Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the
7.7
stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
such sign or marking the stop shall be made
at the signal.
Section 7.42 Pedestrian control signals.
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals
exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't
Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as
follows:
(a) Wall):. Pedestrians facing such signal may
proceed across the roadway in the direction of
the signal and shall be given the right of way by
the drivers of all vehicles.
(b) Wait or Don't Walk. No pedestrian shall
start to cross the roadway in the direction of such
signal, but any pedestrian who has partially.
completed his crossing on the walk signal shall
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the
wait signal is showing.
Section 7 .43 Flashing signals.
(a) Whenever an illuminated flashing red or
yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal
it shall require obedience by traffic as follows:
(I) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens
is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest cross walk at an intersection or at a limit
line when marked, or, if none, then before
entering the intersection, and the right to proceed
shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
(2) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a
yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, traffic may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(b) This section shall apply at railroad grade
crossings. Conduct of traffic approaching railroad
grade crossings shall be governed by the
rules as set forth in Section 7 .64.
Section 7.44 Display of unauthorized signs,
signals, or markings.
(a) No person shall place, maintain, or display
upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized
sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to
be or is in imitation of or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or
which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
Section 7 .44
or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic-control
device or any railroad sign or signal.
(b) No person shall place or maintain nor shall
any public authority permit upon any highway
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
( c) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit
the erection upon private property adjacent to
highways of s.igns giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be
mistaken for official signs.
( d) Every such prohibited sign, signal, or
marking is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction
over the highway is hereby empo,,.ered to
remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice.
Section 7 .45 Interference with official
traffic-control devices or
railroad signs or signals.
No person shall without lawful authority
attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock
down, or remove any official traffic control
device or any railroad sign or signal or any
inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof.
Section 7.46 Authority to establish play
Streets - Deleted
(This section was deleted from the ordinance by
Board of Commissioners on 1211512015.)
Section 7.47 Traffic lanes.
Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall
be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail
or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when
lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory
to making a lawful turning movement.
Traffic
ARTICLES
Speed Regulations
Section 7.48 General.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle
upon any streets of the Town at a greater speed
than is reasonable and proper, having regard to
the width, traffic and use of said street, or so as
to endanger the property or life or limb of any
person. Except as otherwise provided in this
Article, a rate of speed in excess of 3 5 miles per
hour in the said Town sh(lll be deemed a
violation of this Chapter.
(Ord. of 9-16-97)
Section 7.49 Exceptions.
'l
SPEED LIMIT
25 Cedar Valley Road (SR 1127) from a
point 0.47 miles west of Cedar Valley
Road (SR 1192) to a point 0.20 miles
east of US 321-A (Hudson Elem.
School zone, in effect from one hour
before to one hour after school begins
and ends on school days only).
U.S. and State Roads
25
The Town would recognize and enforce
all speed limits on U.S. and State Roads
inside the Town Limits the same as
those set by the State. The only
exception would be the School Zones
as set forth in this section.
Town streets are classified into two
groups: connecting streets and
residential streets.
Speed limits on these streets are:
Connecting streets (Those streets which
connect two state roads.)
Residential streets (Those streets which
connect only other residential streets or
flow only through residential areas.)
(Amended Ord. of 12/15/2015)
7-8
Section 7.50 Traffic 7-9
ARTICIE6
Turning Movements
Section 7_50 Required position and method of turning
at intersections.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an
intersection shall do so as follows:
(a) Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn
and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(b) Left turns on two-way roadways. At any
intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an
approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and
by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the
intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of
the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever
practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the
intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
(c) Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At
any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle
intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach
the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall
be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
Section 7.51 Turning markers.
When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications
are placed within an intersection indicating the course to b~
traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle
shall disobey the directions of such indications.
Section 7.52 Authority to place restricted turn signs.
The Board shall determine those intersections
at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right,
left, or U turn, and shall place proper signs at
ALP Supp. No. 15
Section 7.52 Traffic
such intersections. The making of such turns may
be prohibited between certain hours of any day
and permitted at other hours, in which event the
same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or
they may be removed when such turns are
permitted. Restrictions on turning movements
shall be as specified in Appendix II, Section 211
through 214, hereby incorporated herein.
(Note: See Appendix II, Section 213, Pg. A-9 for
list of intersections with "No right Turn on Red.")
Section 7 .53 Obedience to no-turn signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected
indicating that no right or left or U turn is
permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign.
Section 7 .54 Limitations on turning around.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such
vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any street in a business district and shall not
upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such
movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
ARTICLE7
One-Way Streets and Alleys
Section 7.55 Authority to sign one-way
streets and alleys.
Whenever any ordinance designates any oneway
street or alley there shall be signs giving
notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be
effective unless such signs are in place. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection
where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
Section 7 .56 One-way streets and alleys.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in
those alleys described in Appendix II, Section
210, hereby made a part hereof, vehicular traffic
shall move only in the indicated direction when
signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected
and maintained at every intersection where
movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
7-10
Section 7 .57 Traffic 7-11
ARTICLES
Special Stops Required
Section 7.57 (Reserved)
Section 7.58 Authority to erect stop signs.
Whenever any ordinance designates and
describes a through street, there shall be a stop
sign on each and every street intersecting such
through street or intersecting that portion thereof
described and designated as such by any
ordinance unless traffic at any such intersection is
controlled at all times by traffic-control signals;
provided, however, that at the intersection of two
such through streets or at the intersection of a
through street and a heavy traffic street not so
designated, stop signs shall be erected at the
approaches of either of said streets.
Section 7 .59  Intersections where stop required.
The Board may determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon
other than through streets and may determine
whether vehicles shall stop at one or more
entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall
erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop
is required.
Section 7 .60 Signs to bear the word "Stop."
Every sign erected pursuant to this Article shall
bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than eight
inches in height and such sign shall at nighttime
be rendered luminous by steady or flashing
internal illumination, or by a fixed floodlight
projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient
reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every
stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at
the nearest line of the cross walk on the near side
of the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line
of the roadway.
Section 7.61 Vehicles and streetcars to stop at
stop signs.
When stop signs are erected as herein authorized
at or near the entrace to any intersection,
all traffic shall stop before entering
the cross walk on the near side of the intersection
or in the event there is no cross walk
shall stop at a clearly marked stop line,' but
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection except
when directed to proceed by a police officer
or traffic-control signal.
Section 7.62 Emerging from alley, driveway, or
building.
Traffic shall stop immediately prior to driving
onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway or driveway,
yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right-ofway
to all traffic approaching on said roadway
..
Section 7 .63 Stop when traffic obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a
marked cross walk unless there is sufficient space
on the other side of the intersection or cross walk
to accommodate the vehicle he is operating
without obstructing the passage of other vehicles
or pedestrians, notwithstanding any trafficcontrol
signal indication to proceed.
Section 7 .64 Obedience to signal indicating
approach of railroad train.
(a) Whenever any person driving a vehicle
approaches a railroad grade crossing under any
of the circumstances stated in this Section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty feet
but not less than fifteen feet from the nearest rail
of such railroad, and shall not proceed until
he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements
shall apply when:
(1) A clearly visible electric or mechanical
signal device gives warning of the immediate
approach bf a railroad train;
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or when a
human flagman gives or continues to give a
signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train.
(3) A railroad train approaching within approximately
fifteen hundred feet of the highway crossing
emits a signal audible from such distance and
such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness
to such crossing, is an immediate hazard;
( 4) An approaching railroad train is plainly
visible and is in hazardous proximity to such
crossing.
(b) No person shall drive any vehicle through,
around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a
railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed.
Section 7 .65 Traffic 7-12
ARTICLE9
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
Section 7 .65 Following fire apparatus prohibited.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on
official business shall not follow any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm
closer than five hundred feet or drive into or
park such vehicle within the block where fire
apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
Section 7 .66 Crossing fire hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected
hose of a fire department when laid down on any
street or private driveway to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire
department official in command.
Section 7 .67 Driving through funeral or other
procession.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion
and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated
as required in this Chapter. This provision
shall not apply at intersections where traffic
is controlled by traffic-control signals or police
officers.
Section 7 .68 Drivers in a procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession
shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the
roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practical and safe.
Section 7 .69 Funeral processions to be
identified.
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles
shall be identified as such by the display upon the
outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
indentifying insignia or by such other method
as may be determined and designated by the
police department,_
Section 7 .70 When permits required for parades
and processions.
No funeral, pro-cession or -p;;ad~ ~ontaining,
two hundred or more persons or fifty or more 1
vehicles, excepting the forces of the United
States Army or Navy, the military forces of
this State, and forces of the police and fire de- ,
partments, shall occupy, march or proceed '
along any street except in accordance with a
permit issued by the Chief of Police and such
other regulations as are set forth herein which
may apply.
Section 7.71 Vehicles shall not be driven on a
sidewalk.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within
any sidewalk area except at a permanent or
temporary driveway.
Section 7.72 Limitations on backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same
unless such movement can be made with
reasonable safety and without interfering with
other traffic.
Section 7.73 Riding on motorcycles.
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only
upon the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto, and such operator shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a
motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to
carry more than one person, in which event a
passenger may ride upon the permanent and
regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon
another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of
the operator.
Section 7 .74 Clinging to vehicles.
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster,!
roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the
same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
Section 7.75 Controlled access.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from
any controlled-access roadway except at such
entrances and exits as are established by public
authority.
Section 7. 7 6 Boarding, or alighting from, public
conveyances or other vehicles.
No person shall board, or alight from, any
public conveyance, or other vehicle, while such
conveyance, or vehicle, is in motion.
Section 7. 77 Unlawful riding.
No person shall ride on any public conveyance,
or vehicle, or any portion thereof, not designed,
or intended, for the use of passengers. This
provision shall not apply to an employee engaged
in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons
riding within truck bodies in spaces intended for
merchandise.
Section 7 .78 Entering, jumping on, or 1iding
vehicles \vithout permission.
No person shall enter, jump on, or ride any
automobile, or other vehicle, without the consent
of the owner or driver.
Section 7 .79 Traffic
Section 7. 79 Persons riding must stay inside.
No person when riding shall allow any part of
his body to protrude beyond the limits of the
vehicle in which he is riding, except to give such
signals as are by law required, and no person shall
hang on to any vehicle whatsoever.
Section 7.80 Not more than three persons permitted
in front seat.
It shall be unlawful for the driver, or the
person in charge, of any motor vehicle to permit
more than three persons (including driver) to ride
in the front, or driver's seat of a motor vehicle.
Section 7 .81 Trains blocking crossing regulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to allow a railroad train, locomotive,
or any railroad vehicle to stand upon a public
crossing, or any part thereof, for more than five
minutes at any time.
Section 7 .82 Speed limit for trains.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to operate any locomotive engine .or
train or railroad car within the corporate limits of
the Town at any speed in excess of thirty-five
miles per _hcmr.
Section 7 .83 Mobile homes.
It shall be unlawful to park a trailer or mobile
home on streets or roadways inside the
Town of Hudson without a special permit
from the Town Clerk.
Section 7 .84 reserved.
ARTICLE 10
Pedestrians' Rights and Duties
7-13
Section 7.85 Pedestrians subject to trafficcon!
J:ol signals.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control
signals as heretofore declared in Sections 7.41
and 7.42 of this chapter, but at other places
pedestrians shall be granted those rights and
be subject to the restrictions stated in this Article.
Section 7 .86 Pedestrians' right-of-way in cross
walk.
(a) When traffic-control signals are not in place
or not in operation the driver of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the
roadway within a cross walk when the pedestrian
is upon the half of the roadway upon which the
vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of
the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian
shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle,
which is so close that it is impossible for the
driver to yield. A pedestrian's right-of-way in a
cross walk is modified under the condition and as
stated in Section 7.89(b).
(b) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a
marked cross walk or at any unmarked cross walk
at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall not overtake and
pass such stopped vehicle.
Section 7.87 Pedestrians to use right half of cross
walk.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable,
upon the right half of cross walks.
Section 7 .88 Crossing at right angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any
place other than by a route at right angles to the
curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb
except in a cross walk.
Section 7 .89 When pedestrian shall yield.
(a) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any
point other than within a marked cross walk or
within an unmarked cross walk at an intersection
shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon
the roadway.
(b) Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a
point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead
pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
( c) The foregoing rules in this section have no
Section 7 .89 Traffic 7-14
application under the conditions stated in Section
7.90 when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing
at certain designated places.
Section 7 .90 Prohibited crossing.
(a) Between adjacent intersections at which
traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians
shall not cross at any place except in a cross walk.
(b) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other
than in a cross walk in any business district.
Section 7 .91 Pedestrians walking along roadways.
(a) Where sidewalks are provided it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and
upon an adjacent roadway.
{b) Where sidewalks are not provided any
pedestrian walking along and upon a highway
shall when practicable walk only on the left side
of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic
which may approach from the opposite direction.
Section 7 .92 Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.
(a) No person shall stand in a roadway for the
purpose of soliciting a ride, employment, or
business from the occupant of any vehicle.
(b) No person shall stand on or in proximity
to a street or highway for the purpose of
soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle
while parked or about to be parked on a street or
highway."
Section 7 .93 Drivers to exercise due care.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of
this Article every driver of a vehicle shall exercise
due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon any roadway; shall give warning by sounding
the horn when necessary; and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or
any confused or incapacitated person upon a
roadway.
ARTICLE 11
Regulations for Bicycles
Section 7 .94 Effect of regulations.
(a) The parent of any child and the guardian
of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of
the provisions of this Article ...
(b) These regulations applicable to bicycles
shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon
any street or upon any public path set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those
exceptions stated herein.
Section 7 .95 Traffic laws apply to persons riding
bicycles.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by the laws of this State declaring
rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by this
Chapter applicable to the 톎river of a vehicle,
except as to special regulations in this Article and
except as to those provisions of law~ and ordinances
which by their nature can have no
application.
Section 7 .96 Obedience to traffic-control devices.
(a) Any person operating a bicycle shall obey
the instructions of official traffic-control signals,
signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer.
(b) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating
that no right or left or U-turn is permitted,
no persons operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such
person dismounts from the bicycle to make any
such tum, in which event such person shall then
obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
Section 7 .97 Riding on bicycles.
(a) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride
other than astride a permanent and regular seat
attached thereto.
(b) No bicycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it
is designed and equipped.
Section 7 .98 Riding on roadways and bicycle
paths.
(a) Every person operating a bicycle upon a
roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side
of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding
in the same direction.
Section 7.98
(b) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway
shall not ride more than two abreast except on
paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
( c) Whenever a usable path for bicycles has
been provided adjacent to a roadway bicycle
riders shall use such path and shall not use the
roadway.
Section 7.99 Speed.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under
the conditions then existing.
Section 7.100 Emerging from alley or
driveway.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an
alley, driveway or building, shall upon
approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway, yield the rightof-
way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering
the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Section 7.101 Clinging to vehicles.
No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach
the same or himself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
Section 7.102 Carrying articles.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article which prevents the
rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handle bars.
Section 7 .103 Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street
other than upon the roadway against the curb
or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in
such a manner as to afford the least obstruction
to pedestrian traffic.
Section 7 .104 Riding on sidewalks.
Any person riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
Traffic 7-15
and shall give audible signal before overtaking
and passing such pedestrian.
Section 7.105 Lamps and other equipment
on bicycles.
(a) Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall
be equipped with a lamp on the front which
shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least five hundred feet to the front and
with a red reflector on the rear of a type which
shall be visible from all distances from fifty
feet to three hundred feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of
headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp
emitting a red light visible from a distance of
five hundred feet to the rear may be used in
addition to the red reflector.
(b) No person shall operate a bicycle unless it
is equipped with a bell or other device capable
of giving a signal audible for a distance of at
least one hundred feet, except that a bicycle
shall not be equipped with nor shall any
persons use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
( c) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a
brake which will enable the operator to make
the braked wheel skip on dry, level, clean
pavement.
Section 7 .106 Traffic 7-16
ARTICLE 12
Method of Parking
Section 7.106 Standing or parking close to curb.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a
roadway other than parallel with the edge of the
roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic
moveinerit aiii:l-withthe rigli.tti.and wheels of the
vehicle within eighteen inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway except as otherwise provided
in this Article.
Section 7 .107 Signs or markings indicating angle
parking.
(a) The Board shall determine upon what
streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall
mark or sign such streets, which are specified in
Appendix II, Section 207, hereby made a part
hereof.
(b) Angle parking shall not be indicated or
permitted at any place where passing traffic
would thereby be caused or required to drive
upon the left side of the street.
Section 7 .108 Obedience to angle-parking signs
or markings.
Upon those streets which have been signed or
marked for angle parking, no person shall park or
stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb
or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or
markings.
Section 7.109 Lights on parked vehicles.
(a) Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at
rughttime upon any street within a business or
residence district no lights need be displayed
upon such parked vehicle.
(b) Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street
or highway outside of a business or residence
district during the hours between one-half hour
after sunset and one-half hour before sumise,
such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more
lamps which shall exhibit a light on the roadway
side visible form a distance of five hundred feet
to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible
from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear.
(c) Any lighted headlamps upon a parked
vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
ARTICLE 13
Stopping, Standing, or Parking
Prohibited in Specified Places
Section 7.110 Stopping, standing, or parking
prohibited. No signs required.
(a) No person shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with law or
the directions of a police officer or traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
(I) On a sidewalk;
(2) In front of a public or private driveway;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) Within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant;
(5) On a cross walk;
(6) Within twenty feet of a cross walk at an
intersection;
(7) Within thirty feet upon the approach to
any flashing beacon, stop sigh or traffic-control
signal located at the side of a roadway;
(8) Between a safety zone and the adjacent
curb or within thirty feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless signs or markings indicate a different
length;
(9) Within fifty feet of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing;
(I 0) Within twenty feet of the driveway entrance
to any fire station and on the side of a
street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy-five feet of said entrance (when
properly sign-posted);
(11) Alongside or opposite any street excavation
or obstruction when stopping, standing, or
parking would obstruct traffic;
(12) On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped
or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(13) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure
upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
(14) At any place where official signs prohibit
stopping.
(b) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully
under his control into any such prohibited area or
away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
Section 7.111 Parking not to obstruct traffic.
(a) No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle.
whether attended or unattended. upon the paved
or main traveled portion of any street or highway, except
in areas designated by the Board of Commissioners
and marked or posted as such.
(bl All persons in violation shall be subject to a
penalty of a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00)
or to be imprisoned for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days. or both. Violation shall authorize the towing
of any such vehicle when it impedes flow of traffic,
Section 7.112
cost for towing shall be paid by the owner of the
vehicle. (Ord. of 8/2/83)
Section 7.112 Parking in alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway for the
free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley, in such
position as to block the driveway entrance to any
abutting property.
Section 7.113 AU-night parking prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of
I :00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day, on the streets
specified in Appendix II, Section 202, hereby made a
part hereof.
Section 7.114 Parking for certain purposes
prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for
the principle purpose of:
(I) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(2) Washing, greasing, or repairing such
vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
Section 7.115 Parking adjacent to schools.
When official signs are erected indicating no
parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any
school property as authorized herein, no person shall
park a vehicle in any such designated place.
Section 7.116 Standing or parking on one-way
roadways.
Traffic
In the event a highway includes two or more
separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one
direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of
such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to
permit such standing or parking.
Section 7.117 No stopping, standing, or parking
near hazardous or congested places.
When official signs are erected at hazardous or
congested places no person shall stop, stand, or park
a vehicle in any such designated place.
7-17
ARTICLE 14
Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
Section 7.118 Standing in passenger curb loading
zone.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for
any purpose or period of time other than for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone
during hours when the regulations applicable to such
curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a
period not to exceed three minutes.
Section 7.119 Standing in freight curb loading
zone.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for
any purpose or length of time other than for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight
curb loading zone during hours when the provisions
applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case
shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials
exceed thirty minutes.
Section 7.120 Public carrier stops and stands.
Bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common-carrier motor vehicles,
designated by appropriate signs, shall be specified in
Appendix II, Section 206, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7.121 Stopping, standing, and parking of
bosses and taxicabs regulated.
(a) The operator of a bus shall not stand or park
such vehicle upon any street at any place other
than at a bus stand so designated provided
herein.
(b) The operator of a bus shall not stop such
vehicle upon any street at any place for the
purpose of loading or unloading passengers or
their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus
stand, or passenger loading zone so designed
as provided herein, except in case of an
emergency.
( c) The operator ofa bus shall entera bus stop, bus
stand, or passenger loading zone on a public
street in such a manner that the bus when
stopped to load or unload passengers or
baggage shall be in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not farther than
eighteen inches from the curb and the bus
approximately parallel to the curb, so as not to
unduly impede the movement of other
vehicular traffic.
( d) The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or
park such vehicle upon any street at any place
Section 7 .121
other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided
herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with
other stopping or parking regulations at any place for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Section 7.122 Restricted use of bus and taxicab
stands.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other
than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a
taxicab stand when any such stop has been officially
designated and appropriately signed, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop
therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when such stopping
does not interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to
enter or about to enter such zone.
Traffic
ARTICLE 15
Stopping, Standing, or
Parking Restricted or
Prohibited on Certain Streets
Section 7 .123 Application of Article.
7-18
The provisions of this Article prohibiting the standing
or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those
times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except
when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or official traffic-control device.
Section 7.124 Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this Article imposing a time limit on
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe
other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting
the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified
places or at specified times.
Section 7.125 Parking prohibited at all times on certain
streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets
described in Appendix II, Section 201, hereby made a part
hereof.
Section 7.126 Parking time limited on certain streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the
times specified within the district or. upon any of the streets
described in Appendix 11, Sections 203 through 205, hereby
made a part hereof.
Section 7.127 Parking signs required.
Whenever by this or any other ordinance any parking
time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated
streets there shall be appropriate signs giving notice thereof
and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are
erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
Section 7.128 No thru truck traffic.
All streets within the Town, except those listed below,
are designated as no thru streets. It shall be unlawful to
operate any truck, truck-trailer, or semi-trailer on any no
thru street within the Town except for trucks making
deliveries to residents who live on no thru streets; residents
ALP Supp. No. 14
Section 7 .128
who live on no thru streets who drive trucks to their
residence; trucks driven on no thru streets specifically
for the purpose of performing work at residents located
on no thru streets; emergency vehicles; and garbage
trucks. Through streets within the Town are as follows:
U.S. Highway 321 (Hickory Boulevard)
Main Street
Cedar Valley Road
Cajah Mountain Road
Pine Mountain Road
PI easant Hill Road
Mt. Herman Road
International Boulevard
Hardee Street
Central Street (between Huss Ave. and Cajah Mt. Road)
Central Street (between Cloverdale and International
Blvd.)
Fairway Avenue
Hayes Avenue (entrance to Shuford Mills only)
Olive Street
Davis Street
Horseshoe Bend Road
Mathewson Street
Cedar Avenue (Ord. of 12/ 6/83)
Artville Avenue (Ord. of 6-18-96)
Traffic 7-19
ALP Supp. No. 14
(
Section 8.1 Building Regulations 8-1
CHAPTERS
Building Regulations
ARTICLE!
Adoption of Regulatory Codes by Reference
Section 8.1 Scope of ordinance and codes.
Section 8.2 Building code adopted.
Section 8.3 Plumbing code adopted.
Section 8.4 Heating code adopted.
Section 8.5 Electrical code adopted.
Section 8.6 Residential building code.
Section 8. 7 Amendment.s to codes.
Section 8.8 Compliance with codes.
Section 8.9 Copies of codes filed with Clerk.
Section 8.10 through 8.12 reserved.
ARTICLE2
Inspection Department
Section 8.13 Reports and records.
Section 8.14 Inspection procedure.
Section 8.15 Oversight not. to legalize violation.
Section 8.16 Powers of inspection officials.
Section 8.17 through 8.20 reserved.
ARTICLE3
Enforcement
Section 8.21 Plans nnd specifications.
Section 8.22 Llmitntionson issuance of permits
Section 8.23 Issuance of permit.
Section 8.24 Permit fees.
Section 8.25 New developments regulated.
Section 8.26 through 8.28 reserved.
ARTICLE4
Condemnation, Repair, .11nd Demoli.tion
of Unsafe Buildings
Section 8.29 Inspection Oepartn1ent.
Section 8.30 Duties and responsibilities.
Sect.ion 8.31 JoinL inspection deparUnent; other nrrnngements.
Section 8.32 Financial support.
Section 8.33 Conflicts of jnterest..
Section 8.34 Failure to perform duties.
Section 8.35 Permits
Section 8.36 Time limitations on validity of permits.
Section 8.37 Changes in work.
Section8.38 St.oporders.
Section 8.39 Revocation of permits.
Section 8.40 Periodic inspections.
Section 8.41 Defects in buildings to be corrected.
Section 8.42 Unsafe buildings condemned.
Section 8.43 Removing notice from condemned building.
Section 8.44 Action in event.ol'failure t.o take corrective action.
Section 8.45 Order to take corrective action.
Section 8.46 Appeal; finality of order if not.appealed.
Section 8.47 Failure to comply with order.
Section 8.48 Ei:qu.itable enforcement.
Section 8.49 Appeals in general.
Section 8.50 Restrictions within primary fire limits.
Section 8.51 Restriction wit.bin secondary fire: limits.
Section 8.52 House numbering.
Section 8.53
Section 8.54
Section 8.55
Section 8.56
Section 8.57
SecLion 8.58
Section 8.59
Section 8.60
Section B.61
Section 8.62
Section 8.63
Section 8.64
Section 8.65
Section 8.66
Section 8.67
Section 8.68
Section 8.69
Sect.ion 8.70
Section 8.71
Section 8.72
Section 8.73
ARTICLES
Minimum Housing Standards.
Finding; purpose.
Definitions.
Minimum standards of fitness for dwellings and
dwelling units.
Minimum standards for structural condition.
Minimum standa.C'ds for basic plwnbing, heating.
and eleetC'ical equipment and facilities.
Minimum st.andards foe ventilation.
Miriltnum standards for space, use, and location.
Minimum standards for safe and sanitary
maintenance.
Minimum standards for control of insects, rodents,
and infestatiorui.
Minimum standards applicable to .roon1ing houses;
exceptions.
Responsibilities or owners and occupants.
Powers and duties ofhnu.slng inspect.or.
Inspection; duty of owners and occupants.
Pr(Jcedure tor unforecmenL.
Methods of service of eomplaints and orders.
ln rem action by inspector; placa:ding.
Costs, a lien on premises.
Alternative rentedies.
Board of adjustment to act.as housing appeals board.
Conflict with other provisions.
Violations; penalty.
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Regulatory Codes
by Reference
Section 8.1 Scope of ordinance and codes.
The provisions of this Chapter and of the
regulatory codes herein adopted shall apply to the
following:
(1) The location, design, materials, equipment,
construction. reconstruction, alteration, repair,
maintenance, moving, demolition, removal, use, and
occupancy of every building or sLructure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such building
or structure;
(2) The installation, erection, alteration, repair,
use and maintenance of plumbing systems consisting
of house sewers, building drains, waste and vent
systems, hot and cold water supply systems, and all
fixtures and appurtenances thereof;
(3) The installation, erection, alteration, repair,
use and maintenance of mechanical sysLems
consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning,
and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment,
and appurtenances thereof;
(4) The installation, erection, alteration, repair,
use and maintenance of electrical systems and
appurtenances thereof;
ALPSupp.No.8
(
Section8.1 Building Regulations
The adoption of this Chapter and the codes herein
adopted by reference shall constitute a resolution
with the meaning of G.S. 143-138.
Section8.2 Building code adopted.
The 1967 edition of the North Carolina State
Building Code, Volume 1, General Construction, as
adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council
and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as
fully as though set forth herein as the Building Code
of the Town to the extent such Code is applicable for
safe and stable design, methods of construction,
minimum standards, and use of materials in building
or structures hereafter erected, enlarged, altered,
repairedJ or otherwise constructed or reconstructed.
Section8.3 Plumbing code adopted.
The 1983 edition of the North Carolina Plumbing
텰ode (North Carolina State Building Code,
8-l.1
ALP Supp. No. 8
Section 83 Building Regulations 82
Volume II, Plumbing) as adopted and published
by the North Carolina Building Code Council and
as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as
fully as though set forth herein as the Plumbing
Code for the Town.
Section 8.4 Heating code adopted.
The I 971 edition of the North Carolina Heating
Code (North Carolina State Building Code,
Volume III, Heating) as adopted and published by
the North Carolina Building Code Council and as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully
as though set forth herein as the Heating Code for
the Town.
Section 8.5 Electrical code adopted.
The 1971 edition of the North Carolina Electrical
Code (North Carolina State Building Code,
Volume IV, Electrical), adopting by reference the
1965 edition of the National Electrical Code of
the National Fire Protection Association as
 adopted by the North Carolina Building Code
Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as fully as though set forth herein as the
Electrical Code for the Town.
Section 8.6 Residential building code.
The 1968 edition or later edition of the North
Carolina Unifonn Residential Building Code, as
adopted by the North Carolina Building Inspectors
Association, and as published by the North
Carolina Building Code Council is hereby adopted
by reference as fully as though set forth herein as
the Residential Building Code for one and two
family residential buildings in the Town.
Section 8:7 Amendments to codes.
Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted
by reference herein, which are from time to time
adopted and published by the agencies or organizations
referred to herein shall be effective in the
Town at the time such amendments are filed with
the Town Clerk or Building Inspector as provided
in Section 8.9.
Section 8.8 Compliance with codes.
(a) All buildings or structures which are hereafter
constructed, reconstructed, erected, altered,
extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished, or
moved shall confonn to the requirements, minimum
standards, and other provisions of either the
North Carolina State Building Code, General
Construction, Volume I or the North Carolina
Uniform Residential Building Code, whichever is
applicable, or both if both are applicable.
(b) Every building or structure intended for
human habitation, occupancy, or use shall have
plumbing, plumbing systems, or plumbing fixtures
installed, constructed, altered, extended,
repaired, or reconstructed in accordance with
the minimum standards, requirements, and other
provisions of the North Carolina Plumbing Code
(North Carolina State Building Code, Volume II,
Plumbing).
(c) All mechanical systems consisting of heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, and refrigeration
systems, fuel burning equipment, and appurtenances
shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired,
used and maintained in accordance with
the minimum standards, requirements, and other
provisions of the North Carolina Heating Code
(North Carolina State Building Code, Volume III,
Heating).
(d) All electrical wiring, installations and
appurtenances shall be erected altered, repaired,
used and maintained in accordance with the
minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions
of the North Carolina Electrical Code
(North Carolina State Building Code, Volume IV,
Electrical).
Section 8.9 Copies of codes filed with Clerk.
An official copy of each regulatory code
adopted herein, and official copies of all amendments
thereto, shall be kept on file in the office
of the Town Clerk or County Building Inspector.
Such copies shall be the official copies of the
codes and the amendments.
Section 8.10 through 8.12 reserved.
(
Section 8.13 Building Regulations 8-3
ARTICLE2
Inspection Department
Section 8.13 Reports and records.
The Inspection Department, and each Inspec- 
tor, shall keep complete, permanent, and accurate
records in convenient form of all applications
received, permits issued, inspections, and reinspections
made, and all other work and activities
of the Inspection Department. Periodic reports
shall be submitted to the Board, and to other
agencies, as required.
Section 8.14 Inspection procedure.
(a) Inspections. The Inspection Department
shall inspect all buildings and structures and work
therein for which a permit of any kind has been
issued as often as necessary in order to determine
whether the work complies with this Chapter
and the appropriate codes.
When deemed necessary by the appropriate
Inspector, materials and assemblies may be
inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication,
or inspections may be made by approved
and recognized inspection organizations; provided,
no apptoval shall be based upon reports of
such organizations unless the same are in writing
and certified by a responsible officer of such
organization.
All holders of permits, or their agents, shall
notify the Inspection Department and the appropriate
Inspector at each of the following stages of
construction so that approval may be given before
work is continued:
(1) Foundation Inspection. To be made after
trenches are excavated and the necessary reinforcement
and forms are in place, and before
concrete is placed. Drilled footings, piles, and
similar types of foundations shall be inspected as
installed.
(2) Framing Inspection. To be made after all
structural framing is in place and all roughing-in
of plumbing and electrical and heating has been
installed, after all fire blocking, chimneys, bracing
and vents are installed, but before any of the
structure is enclosed or covered. Poured in place
concrete structural elements shall be inspected
before each pour of any structural member.
(3) Fireproofing Inspection. To be made after
all areas required to be protected by fireproofing
are lathed, but before the plastering or other
fireproofmg is applied.
( 4) Final Inspection. To be made after building
or structure has all doors hung, fixtures set,
and ready for occupancy, but before the building
is occupied.
(b) Calls for Inspection. Request for inspections
may be made to the office of the Inspection
Department or to the appropriate Inspector. The
Inspection Department shall make inspections as
soon as practicable after request is made therefor,
provided such work is ready for inspection at the
time the request is made.
Reinspections may be made at the convenience
of the Inspector. No work shall be inspected until
it is in proper and completed condition ready for
inspection. All work which has been concealed
before the inspection and approval shall be
uncovered at the request of the Inspector and
placed in condition for proper inspection.
Approval or rejection of the work shall be
furnished by the appropriate Inspector in the
form of a notice posted on the building or given
to the permit holder or his agent. Failure to call
for inspections or proceeding without approval at
each stage of construction shall be deemed a
violation of thls Chapter.
(c) Street or Alley Lines. Where the applicant
for a permit proposes to erect any building or
structure on the line of any street, alley, or other
public place, he shall secure a survey of the line of
such street, alley, or other public place, adjacent
to the property upon which such building or
structure is to be erected before proceeding with
construction of such building or structure. It shall
be the duty of the Building Inspector to see that
the building does not encroach upon such street,
alley, or other public place.
(d) Certificate of Occupancy. No new building
or part thereof shall be occupied, and no addition
or enlargement of any existing building shall be
occupied, and no existing building after being
altered or moved shall be occupied, and no
change of occupancy shall be made in any
existing building or part thereof, until the Inspection
Department has issued a certificate of occupancy
therefor. A temporary certificate of occupancy
may be issued for a portion or portions of
a building which may safely be occupied prior to
final completion and occupancy of the entire
building. Application for a certificate of occupancy
may be made by the owner or his agent
after all final inspections have been made for new
buildings, or, in the case of existing buildings,
after supplying the information and data necessary
to determine compliance with this Chapter,
the appropriate regulatory codes and any zoning
ordinance for the occupancy intended. The
Inspection Department shall issue a certificate
of occupancy when, after examination and in- .
spection, it is found that the building in all
respects conforms to the provisions of this Chapter,
the regulatory codes, and any zoning ordi(
Section 8 .14 Building Regulations 8-4
nance for the occupancy intended. (See G. s_
160A-420, 160A-423, 160A-433.
Section 8-15 Oversight not to legalize violation_
No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part
of any Inspector or other official or employee of
the Inspection Department shall be deemed to
legalize the violation of any provision of this
Chapter or any provision of any regulatory
code herein adopted.
Section 8-16 Powers of inspection officials.
(a) Authority. Inspectors are hereby authorized,
empowered and directed to enforce all
the provisions of this Chapter and the regulatory
codes herein adopted.  
(b) Right-of-Entry. Inspectors with proper
identification shall have the right-of-entry on any
premises within the jurisdiction of the regulatory
codes herein adopted at reasonable hours for
the purpose qf inspection or enforcement of the
requirements of this Chapter and the regulatory
codes, upon presentation of proper credentials.
(c) Stop Orders. Whenever any building or
structure or part thereof is being demolished,
constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired
in a hazardous manner, or in violation of any
provision of this Chapter or any other Town
ordinance, or in violation of any provision of any
regulatory code herein adopted, or in violation of
the terms of the permit or permits issued therefor,
or in such manner as to endanger life or
property, the appropriate Inspector may order
such work to be immediately stopped. Such order
shall be in writing to the owner of the property or
to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and
shall state the reasons therefor and the conditions
under which the work may be resumed.
Section 8.17 through 8.20 reserved.
ARTICLE3
Enforcement
Section 8.21 Plans and specifications.
Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany
each application for permit when the estimated
total cost of the building or structure
is in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000),
and for any other building or structure where
plans and specifications are. deemed necessary
by the appropriate Inspector in order for him to
determine whether the proposed work complies
with the appropriate regulatory codes. Plans
shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to
indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed,
and the plans and specifications together
shall contain information sufficient to indicate
that the work proposed will conform to the
provisions of the Chapter and the appropriate
regulatory codes. Where plans and specifications
are required, a copy of the same shall be
kept at the work until all authorized operations
have been completed and approved by the appropriate
Inspector.
Section 8.22 Limitations on issuance of permits.
(a) Where any provision of the General Statutes
of North Carolina or of any ordinance
requires that work be done by a licensed specialty
contractor of any kind, no permit for
such work shall be issued unless it is to be performed
by such licensed specialty contractor.
(b) Where detailed plans and specifications
are required under this Chapter, no building
permit shall be issued unless such plans and
specifications have been provided.
Section 8.23 Issuance of permit.
When proper application for a permit has been
made, and the appropriate Inspector is satisfied
that the application and the proposed work
comply with the provisions of this Chapter and
the appropriate regulatory codes, he shall issue
such permit, upon payment of the proper fee or
fees as hereinafter provided in Section 8.24.
Section 8.24 Permit fees.
Fees for pennits shall be based upon the total
estimated cost of the proposed work, including all
sub-contracts if any, but in no case shall the total
estimated cost be less than the market value of
similar completed work in the Town as determined
by the appropriate Inspector or Inspectors.
Permit fees shall be as follows:
(a) Building Permit Fees (see schedule of fees
(
Section 8 .24 Building Regulations 8-5
in office of Building Inspector).
(b) Plumbing Permit Fees (see schedule of fees
in office of Plumbing Inspector).
(c) Heating-Air Conditioning Permit Fees (see
schedule of fees in office of Heating-Air Conditioning
Inspector).
(d) Electrical Permit Fees (see schedule of fees
in office of Electrical Inspector).
Section 8.25 New developments regulated.
No new developments will be annexed into
the Town limits until streets are graveled and
water and sewer lines are installed to the Town's
specifications. (Ord. of 5/1/62)
Section 8.26 through 8.28 reserved.
ARTICLE4
Condemnation, Repair, and Demolition
of Unsafe Buildings
Section 8.29 Inspection department.
The Town is authorized to create an inspection
department, and may appoint one or more
inspectors who may be given the titles of building
inspector, electrical inspector, plumbing inspector,
housing inspector, zoning inspector, heating
and air-conditioning inspector, fire prevention
inspector or deputy or assistant inspector, or
such other titles as may be generally descriptive
of the duties assigned. The department may be
headed by a superintendent or director of inspections.
(See G.S. 160A-411)
Section 8.30 Duties and responsibilities.
The duties and responsibilities of an inspection
department and of the inspectors therein shall be
to enforce within their territorial jurisdiction
State and local laws relating to:
(I) The construction of buildings and other
structures;
(2) The installation of such facilities as plumbing
systems, electrical systems, heating systems,
refrigeration systems, and air-conditioning systems;
(3) The maintenance of buildings and other
structures in a safe, sanitary, and healthful condition;
( 4) Other matters that may be specified by the
Board. These duties shall include the receipt of
applications for permits and the issuance or denial
of permits, the making of any necessary inspections,
the issuance or denial of certificates of
compliance, the issuance of orders to correct
violations, the bringing of judicial actions against
actual or threatened violations, the keeping of
adequate records, and any other actions that may
be required in order adequately to enforce those
laws. The Board shall have the authority to enact
reasonable and appropriate provisions governing
the enforcement of those laws. (See G.S.
!60A-412)
(S) No permit for alteration, repair or construction
of any building or structure shall
be issued unless the plans and specifications
show that the building or structure, and its
propose use, will be in compliance with applicable
provisions of the zoning ordinance.
Section 8.31 Joint inspection department; other
arrangements.
The Board may enter into and carry out
contracts with another municipality, county, or
combination thereof under wllich the parties
Section 831 Building Regulations 8-6
agree to create and support a joint inspection
department for the enforcement of State and
local laws specified in the agreement. The governing
boards of the contracting parties are authorized
to make any necessary appropriations for
this purpose.
In lieu of a joint inspection department, the
Board may design ate an inspector from any other
municipality or county to serve as a member of
its inspection department with the approval of
the governing body of the other county. The
inspector shall, while exercising the duties of the
position, be considered a municipal employee.
The Board may request the board of county
commissioners of the county in which the Town
is located to direct one or more county building
inspectors to exercise their powers within part or
all of the Town's jurisdiction, and they shall
thereupon be empowered to do so until the Board
officially withdraws its request in the manner
provided in G.S. I 60A-360(g). (See G.S.
160A-413)
Section 8.32 Financial support.
The Board may appropriate for the support of
the inspection department any funds that it
deems necessary. It may provide for paying
inspectors fixed salaries or it may reimburse them
for their services by paying over part or all of any
fees collected. It shall have power to fix reasonable
fees for issuance of permits, inspections, and
other services of the inspection department. (See
G.S. 160A-414)
Section 8.33 Conflicts of interest.
No member of an inspection department shall
be financially interested in the furnishing of
labor, material, or appliances for tile construction,
alteration, or maintenance of any building
withfo. the Town's jurisdiction or any part or
system thereof, unless he is the owner of the
building. No member of an inspection department
shall engage in any work that is inconsistent with
the interest of the Town.(See G.S. l 60A-4 l 5).
Section 8.34 Failure to perform duties.
No member of an inspection department shall
willfully fail to perform the duties required of
him by Jaw, or willfully shall improperly issue a
permit, nor shall give a certificate of compliance
without first making the inspections required by
law, or willfully shall improperly give a certificate
of compliance. (See G.S. l 60A-416)
Section 8.35 Permits.
No person shall commence or proceed with:
(I) The construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, removal or demolition of any
building or structure:
(2) The installation, extension or general repair
of any plumbing system:
(3) The installation, extension, alteration or
general repair of any heating or cooling equipment
system; or
(4) The installation, extension, alteration or
general repair of any electrical wiring, devices,
appliances, or equipment, without first securing
from the inspection department with jurisdiction
over the site of the work any and all permits
required by the State Building Code and any
other State or local laws applicable to the worl<.
A permit shall be in writing and shall contain a
provision that the work done shall comply with
the State Building Code and all other applicable
State and local laws. No permits shall be issued
unless the plans and specifications are identified
by the name and address of the author thereof,
and if the General Statutes of North Carolina
require that plans for certain types of work be
prepared only by a registered architect or registered
engineer, no permit shall be issued unless
the plans and specifications bear the North
Carolina seal of a registered architect or of a
registered engineer. When any provision of the
General Statutes of North Carolina or of any
ordinance requires that work be done by a
licensed specialty contractor of any kind, no
permit for the work shall be issued unless the
work is to be performed by such a duly licensed
contractor. (See G.S. l 60A-417)
Section 8.36 Time limitations on validity of
permits.
A permit issued pursuant to Section 8.35 shall
expire by limitation six months, or any lesser
time fixed by ordinance of the Board, after the
date of issuance if the work authorized by the
permit has not been commenced. If after commencement
the work is discontinued for a period
of twelve months, the permit therefor shall immediately
expire. No work authorized by any
permit that has expired shall thereafter be performed
until a new permit has been secured. (See
G. S. 160A-418)
Section 8.37 Changes in work.
After a permit has been issued, no changes or
deviations from the terms of the application,
plans and specifications, or the permit, except
where changes or deviations are clearly permissible
under the State Building Code, shall be made
until specific written approval of proposed
changes or deviations has been obtained from the
inspection department. (See G.S. I 60A-419)
(
Section 8 .38 Building Regulations 8-7
Section 8.38 Stop orders.
Whenever any building or structure or part
thereof is being demolished, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, or repaired in a hazardous
manner, or in substantial violation of any State or
local building law, or in a manner, that endangers
life or property, the appropriate inspector may
order the specific part of the work that is in
violation or presents such a hazard to be immediately
stopped. The stop order shall be in writing,
directed to the person doing the work, and shall
state the specific work to be stopped, the specific
reasons therefor, and the conditions under which
the work may be resumed. The owner or builder
may appeal from a stop order to the North
Carolina Commissioner of Insurance within a
period of five days after the order is issued.
Notice of appeal shall be given in writing to the
Commissioner of Insurance, with a copy to the
local inspector. The Commissioner of Insurance
shall promptly conduct a hearing at which the
appellant and the inspector shall be pennitted to
submit relevant evidence, and shall rule on the
appeal as expeditiously as possible. Pending the
ruling by the Commissioner of Insurance on an
appeal no further work shall take place in
violation of a stop order. Violation of a stop
order shall constitute a misdemeanor. (See G.S.
160A-421)
Section 8.39 Revocation of permits.
The appropriate inspector may revoke and
require the return of any permit by notifying the
permit holder in writing stating the reason for the
. revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any
substantial departure from the approved application,
plans, or specifications; for refusal or
failure to comply with the requirements of any
applicable State or local laws; or for false statements
or misrepresentations made in securing the
permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation
of any applicable State or local law may also be
revoked. (See G.S. l 60A-422)
Section 8.40 Periodic inspections.
The inspection department shall make periodic
inspections, subject to the Board's directions, for
unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise hazardous and
unlawful conditions in structures within its territorial
jurisdiction. In addition, it shall make
inspections when it has reason to believe that
such conditions may exist in a particular structure.
In exercising this power, members of the
department shall have a right to enter on any
premises within the jurisdiction of the department
at all reasonable hours for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action, upon
presentation of proper credentials. (See G.S.
160A-424)
Section 8.41 Defects in buildings to be corrected.
When a local inspector finds any defects in a
building, or finds that the building has not been
constructed in accordance with the applicable
State and local laws, or that a building because of
its condition is dangerous or contains fire hazardous
conditions, it shall be his duty to notify the
owner or occupant of the building of its defects,
hazardous conditions, or failure to comply with
law. The owner or occupant shall each immediately
remedy the defects, hazardous conditions,
or violations of law in the property he owns. (See
G.S. 160A-425)
Section 8.4 2 Unsafe buildings condemned.
Every building which shall appear to the
inspector to be especially dangerous to life
because of its liability to fire or because of bad
condition of walls, overloaded floors, defective
construction, decay, unsafe wiring or heating
system, inadequate means of egress, or other
causes, shall be held to be unsafe, and the
inspector shall affix a notice of the dangerous
character of the structure to a conspicuous place
on the exterior wall of said building. (See G.S.
J60A-426)
Section 8.43 Removing notice from condemned
building.
No person shall remove any notice that has
been affixed to any building or structure by a
local inspector of any municipality and that states
the dangerous character of the building or structure.
(See G.S. 160A-427)
Section 8.44 Action in event of failure to take
corrective action.
If the owner of a building or structure that has
been condemned as unsafe pursuant to Section
8.41 shall fail to take prompt corrective action,
the local inspector shall give him written notice,
by certified or registered mail to his last known
address or by personal service,
(1) That the building or structure is in a
condition that appears to constitute a fire or
safety hazard or to be dangerous to life, health, or
other property;
(2) That a hearing will be held before the
inspector at a designated place and time; not
later than ten days after the date of the notice,
at which time the owner shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel and to present
arguments and evidence pertaining to the mat(
Section 8 .44 Building Regulations 8-8
ter; and
(3) That following the hearing, the inspector
may issue such order to repair, close, vacate, or
demolish the building or structure as appears
appropriate.
If the name or whereabouts of the owner
cannot after due diligence be discovered, the
notice shall be considered properly and adequately
seived if a copy thereof is posted on the
outside of the building or structure in question at
least l 0 days prior to the hearing and a notice of
the hearing is published in a newspaper having
aeneral circulation in the Town at least once not
iater than one week prior to the hearing. (See
G.S. 160A428)
Section 8.45 Order to take corrective action.
If, upon a hearing held pursuan! to the notice
prescribed in Section 8.44, the mspector shall
find that the building or structure is in a
condition that constitutes a fire or safety hazard
or renders it dangerous to life, health, or other
property, he shall make an order in writing,
directly to the owner of such building or structure,
requiring the owner to remedy the d~fective
conditions by repairing, closing, vacating, or
demolishing the building or structure or taking
other necessary steps, within such period, not
less than sixty days, as the inspector may prescribed.
(See G. S. l 60A-429)
Section 8.46 Appeal; fmality of order if not
appealed. .
Any owner who has received an order under
Section 8 .44 may appeal from the order to the
Board. by giving notice of appeal in writing to
the inspector and to the Town Clerk within ten
days following issuance of the order. In the abscence
of an appeal, the order to the inspector
shall be final. The Board shall hear an appeal
within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify
and affirm or revoke the order. (See G. S.
160A-430)
Section 8.4 7 Failure to comply with order.
If the owner of a building or structure fails to
comply with an order issued pursuant to Section
8.44 from which no appeal has been taken, or
fails to comply with an order of the Board
following an appeal, he shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished in the discretion
of the court. (See G.S. !60A-43 I)
Section 8.48 Equitable enforcement.
Whenever any violation is denominated a misdemeanor,
the Town, either in addition to or in
lieu of other remedies, may initiate any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent, restrain,
correct, or abate the violation or to prevent the
occupancy of the building or structure involved.
(See G.S. 160A-432)
Section 8.49 Appeals in general.
Unless otherwise provided by Jaw, appeals from
. any order, decision, or determination by a member
of a local inspection department pertaining to
the State Building Code or other State building
laws shall be taken to the Commissioner of
Insurance or other officiai specified in G.S.
143-139, by filing a written notice with him and
with the inspection department within a period
of ten days after the order, decision or determination.
Further appeals may be taken to the State
Building Code Council or to the courts as
provided by law. (See G.S. 160A-434)
Section 8.50 Restrictions within primary fire
limits.
Within the primary fire limits, no frame or
wooden building or structure or addition thereto
shall be erected, altered, repaired, or moved
(either into the limits or from one place to
another within the limits), except upon the
permit of the local inspection department
approved by the Commissioner of Insurance. The
Board may make additional regulations for the
prevention, extinguishment, or mitigation of fires
within the primary fire limits. (See G.S.
160A-436)
Section 8.51 Restriction within secondary fire
limits.
Within any secondary fire limits, no frame or
wooden building or structure or addition thereto
shall be erected, altered, repaired, or moved
except in accordance with any mies and regulations
established by ordinance. (See G.S.
160A-437)
Section 8.52 House numbering.
All lots. buildings and structures in the city shall
be numbered in accordance with the following plan:
North and south numbers shall commence at I 00
Main Street.
East and west numbers shall commence at 100 Hall.
Avenue.
Odd numbers shall be on the east and north sides
of the streets: even numbers shall be on the south and
west sides of the streets.
There shall be one hundred numbers to each block:
one number to every fifty feet of frontage.
The City Clerk shall keep a chart showing the
proper street number of every Jot in the city which
ALP Supp. No. 0
Building Regulations 9
shall be open to inspection by anyone interested.
It shall be the duty of the owners and
occupants of every house, building and other
structure in the city to have placed thereon, in a
place visible from the street, figures at least two
and one-half inches high, showing the number of
the house. Any person, firm, or corporation
failing to so number any house, building or other
structure occupied by him, or if after receiving
notice to do so from the clerk shall continue in his
failure to so number such house, building or
structure shall be fined one dollar for each day
during or on which a failure to so number
continues. (Ord. of 5110/83)
ARTICLES
RESIDENTIAL MINIMUM HOUSING
State Law reference- Municipal housing
standards authorized, G.S.  l 60A-44 l et seq.
Section 8.53. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases,
when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit,"
"rooming house," "rooming unit" and "premises"
are used in this article, they shall be construed as
though followed by the words "or any part
thereof."
Accessory building or outhouse means a
building or structure the use of which is incidental
to that of the main building or structure and which
is located on the same lot or a contiguous lot.
Alter or alteration means any change or
modification in construction or occupancy.
Basement means a portion of a building
located completely underground or partly
underground, having direct access to light and air
from windows located above the level of the
adjoining ground.
Building means any structure built for the
support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels or property of any kind. The term
"building" shall be construed as if followed by the
words "or part thereof."
Cellar means a portion of a building located
partly or wholly underground having an
inadequate access to light and air from windows
located partly or wholly below the level of the
adjoining ground.
Code/Building official means the official or
other person charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article or duly authorized
representative.
Dwelling means any building, structure,
manufactured home or mobile home, or part
thereof, used and occupied for human habitation
or intended to be so used, and includes any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto
Building Regulations 10
or usually enjoyed therewith, except that it does
not include any temporary dwelling or any
manufactured home or mobile home, which is
used solely for a seasonal vacation purpose.
"Manufactured home" or "mobile home" means a
structure as defined in G.S.  143-145(7).
Dwelling unit means any room or group of
rooms located within a dwelling and forming a
single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating.
Exit means a clear and unobstructed way of
departure from the interior of a building or
structure to the exterior at street or grade level.
Extermination means the control and
elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by
eliminating their harborage places; by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve
as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest
elimination methods approved by the official.
Floor area means the total area of all
habitable space in a building or structure.
Garbage means the animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
Habitable room means a room or enclosed
floor space used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments and
laundries.
Infestatio11 means the presence, within or
around a dwelling of any insects, rodents or other
pests.
Multiple dwelling means any building or
portion thereof which is designed, built, rent,
leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which is
occupied as the home or residence of more than
two (2) families living independently of each
other and doing their own cooking in the building,
and shall include flats and apartments.
Occupant means any person living,
sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual
possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
Openable area means that part of a window,
porch or door which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
Operator means any person who has the
charge, care or control of a building or part
thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units
are let.
Owner means any person who, alone or
jointly, or severally with others:
(1) Has title to any dwelling or dwelling
unit, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof;
(2) Has the charge, care or control of any
dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or
agent of the owner, or as executor,
administrator, trustee or guardian of the
estate of the owner. Any such person
thus representing the actual owner shall
be bound to comply with the provisions
of this article, and of rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to
the same extent as if he is the owner.
Parties i11 interest means all individuals,
associations and corporations who have interest
of record in a dwelling, and any who are in
possession thereof.
Plumbing means and includes all of the
following supplied facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes,
mechanical garbage disposal units (mechanical
sink grinder), waste pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs,
shower baths, installed clothes washing
machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any
other similar supply fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
Premises means a lot, plat or parcel of land,
including the buildings or structures thereon.
Public authority means any housing
authority, or any official in charge of any
department or branch of the government of the
Town, the county or the state relating to health,
fire or building regulations, or to other activities
concerning housing in the Town.
Rooming/Boarding lzouse means any
dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing
one (1) or more rooming units, in which space is
Building Regulations 11
let by the owner or operator to two (2) or more
persons, who are not husband and wife, son or
daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of
the owner or operator.
Rooming unit means any room or group of
rooms forming a single habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but
not for cooking or eating.
Removal means the demolition and removal
of the entire building, leaving the premises free
and clear of any debris; any excavation properly
filled in and with no holes or pockets which retain
water.
Rubbish means combustible or
noncombustible waste materials except garbage,
including but not limited to, the residue from the
burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches,
yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass crockery and dust, and discarded
appliances.
Story means that part of a building between
one (I) floor and the floor or roof next above.
Structure means that which is built or
constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or
any piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some
definite manner. The term "structure" shall be
construed as if followed by the words "or part
thereof."
Substandard means any condition existing
in any housing or structure which does not meet
the standards of fitness of this article.
Supplied means paid for, furnished or
provided by, or under the contract of, the owner
or operator.
Temporary housing means any tent, trailer
or other structure used for human shelter which is
designed to be transportable (i.e. Motor home)
and which is not attached to the ground, to
another structure or to any utilities system on the
same premises legally for more than sixty ( 60)
consecutive days.
Unfit for human habitation means that
conditions exist in a dwelling which violate or do
not comply with one (I) or more of the minimum
standards of fitness established by this article.
Ventilation means the insufflation and the
exsufflation of air by natural means to and from
housing.
Ventilation, mechanical means ventilation
by power-driven devices.
Ventilation, natural means ventilation by
opening to outer air through windows, sky-lights,
doors, louvers or stacks with or without winddriven
devices.
Section 8.54. - Findings; purpose.
The Town Commission finds and declares
that there now exists in the Town and its one-mile
jurisdiction and may reasonably be expected to
exist in the future, housing which is unfit for
human habitation because of dilapidation; defects
increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other
calamities; lack of ventilation, adequate lighting
or sanitary facilities; or because of conditions
rendering such housing unsafe or unsanitary, or
dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or
morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the
residents of the Town and its area of jurisdiction;
and that a public necessity exists to exercise
police powers of the Town pursuant to G.S. 쬍h.
!60A, art. 19, and other applicable laws, as now
or hereafter amended, to cause the repair and
rehabilitation, closing or demolishing of such
housing in the manner provided in this article;
and pursuant to the exercise for the police power,
the Town Commission finds as fact and so
declares that the ensuing sections of this article
are necessary to the implementation of its
purposes hereinabove declared in this section and
that, specifically, but without limitation, the
minimum standards of fitness for dwellings and
dwelling units, as enacted in this article are
reasonable and necessary for this community and
are all reasonable and necessary criteria for
determining whether dwellings and dwelling
units in this Town are fit for human habitation.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 
l 60A-441.
Section 8.55 - Minimum standards of fitness
for dwellings and dwelling units.
Building Regulations 12
(a) Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as
a human habitation, or held out for use as
a human habitation, shall comply with all
of the minimum standards of fitness for
human habitation and all of the
requirements of Sections 8.55, 8.56,
8.57, 8.58, 8.59, and 8.60.
(b) No person shall occupy as owneroccupant,
or let to another for occupancy
or use as a human habitation, any
dwelling or dwelling unit which does not
comply with all of the minimum
standards of fitness for human habitation
and all of the requirements of Sections
8.55, 8.56, 8.57, 8.58, 8.59, and 8.60.
(Ord. of 5/5/87)
Section 8.56. - Conflicts.
The provisions of this article shall not be
construed to conflict with any other applicable
laws, codes or ordinances pertaining to housing,
but are supplemental thereto and where the
provisions of this article are similar to provisions
of other applicable codes or ordinances, the more
stringent provisions shall apply.
Section 8.57. - Scope.
(a) Every building used in whole or in part as a
dwelling unit or as two (2) or more dwelling
units, or as a rooming house or
boardinghouse, shall conform to the
requirements of this article irrespective of
the primary use of such building, and
irrespective of when such building may have
been constructed, altered or repaired.
(b) This article establishes minimum standards
for occupancy and does not replace or
modify standards otherwise established for
construction, replacement or repair of
buildings except such as are contrary to the
provisions of this article.
( c) In addition to the exercise of police power
authorized in this article with respect to
dwellings, the Town shall cause to be
repaired, closed or demolished any
abandoned structure which the Commission
finds to be a health or safety hazard as a
result of the attraction of insects or rodents,
conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous
condition constituting a threat to children or
frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in
the absence of sanitary facilities. The repair,
closing or demolition of such structures shall
be pursuant to the same provisions and
procedures as are prescribed in this article
for the repair, closing or demolition of
dwelling found to be unfit for human
habitation.
Section 8.58. - Alternative remedies.
Neither this article nor any of its provisions
shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the Town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their abatement by
summary action, or otherwise, or to enforce this
article by criminal process or otherwise, and the
enforcement of any remedy provided in this
article shall not prevent the enforcement of any
other remedy or remedies provided in this Code
or in other ordinances or laws.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 
160A-450.
Section 8.59. - Right of access.
(a) For the purpose of making inspections, the
official is hereby authorized to enter,
examine, and survey at all reasonable times
all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units
and premises. The owner or occupant of
every dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall
give the official free access to such dwelling,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit and its
premises at all reasonable times for the
purposes of such inspection, examination,
and survey.
(b) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling
unit shall give the owner thereof, or agent or
employee, access to any part of such
dwelling or dwelling unit, and its premises,
at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the
provisions of this article or with any lawful
order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
Building Regulations 13
State Law reference- Power to inspect, G .S.
160A-412, 160A-424, 160A-448.
Section 8.60. - Methods of service of
complaints and orders.
Complaints or orders issued by the official
shall be served upon persons either personally or
by registered or certified mail, but if the
whereabouts of such persons are unknown and
the same cannot be ascertained by the official, he
shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the
serving of such complaint or order upon such
person may be made by publishing the same once
each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper, printed and published in the Town.
Where service is made by publication, a notice of
the pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the
complaint or order.
Section 8.61. - Compliance.
Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a
human habitation or held out for use as a human
habitation shall comply with all of the
requirements of this article. No person shall
occupy as a human habitation any dwelling or
dwelling unit which does not comply with all of
the requirements of this article.
Section 8.62. - Space use.
The minimum standards for space use are as
follows:
( 1) A principal area shall have not less
than one hundred fifty ( 150) square
feet.
(2) A kitchen-dining room combination, if
any, shall have not less than one
hundred ( 100) square feet.
(3) A first bedroom, if any, shall have not
less than one hundred (100) square feet.
(4) A second bedroom, if any, shall have
not less than seventy (70) square feet.
(5) Each habitable room shall have at least
seventy (70) square feet.
( 6) At least one hundred fifty (150) square
feet of floor space in habitable rooms
shall be provided for the first occupant
in each dwelling unit; at least one
hundred ( 100) square feet of additional
floor space shall be provided for each
of the next three (3) occupants; and at
least seventy-five (75) square feet of
additional floor space shall be provided
for each additional occupant over the
number of four (4) (children one (1)
year of age and under shall not be
counted).
(7) At least seventy (70) square feet of
bedroom floor space shall be provided
for the first occupant; at least twenty
(20) square feet of additional bedroom
floor space shall be provided for the
second occupant; and at least thirty (30)
square feet of additional bedroom floor
space shall be provided for each
occupant over the number of two (2)
(children one (I) year of age and under
shall not be counted).
(8) Those habitable rooms which must be
included to meet the foregoing
minimum space standards shall be at
least seven (7) feet wide in any part
with at least one-half of the floor area
having a ceiling height of at least seven
(7) feet. That portion of any room
where the ceiling height is less than five
( 5) feet shall not be considered as part
of the floor area.
(9) No basement space shall be used as a
habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
(a) The floor and walls are
impervious to leakage of
underground and surface runoff
water and are insulated against
dampness.
(b) The total of window area in each
room is equal to at least the
window area sizes prescribed in
the following section for habitable
rooms.
( c) The total of openable window
area in each room is equal to at
least the room area prescribed in
the following section for habitable
rooms, except where there is
Building Regulations 14
supplied some other device
affording adequate ventilation
approved by the director of
inspections.
(10) Toilet and bathing facilities shall be
structurally enclosed and shall be
located so as not to require passage
through an openable area.
( 11) Bathroom walls, toilet room walls
and bedroom walls shall have no holes
or excessive cracks.
(12) Access shall be provided to all rooms
within a dwelling unit without passing
through a public space or another
dwelling unit.
(13) Doors shall be provided at all
doorways leading to bedrooms, toilet
rooms, bathrooms and at all rooms
adjoining a public space.
( 14) Each living unit shall have a specific
kitchen space, which contains a sink
with counter workspace and has hot and
cold running water and adequate space
for storing cooking utensils.
(15) Electric, water and sewer must be in
working order.
Sec. 8.63. - Light and ventilation.
The minimum standards for light and
ventilation are as follows:
(1) Every habitable room shall have at
least one (I) window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum
total window area measured between
stops for every habitable room shall be
eight (8) percent of the floor area of
such room. Whenever walls or other
portions of structures face a window of
any such room and such light
obstruction structures are located less
than five (5) feet from the window arid
extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, they shall not be
included as contributing to the required
minimum total window area. Whenever
the only window in a room is a
skylight-type window in the top of such
room, the total window area of such
skylight shall equal at least fifteen (15)
percent of the total floor area of such
room.
(2) Every room in a dwelling unit and
means of egress shall be sufficiently
illuminated so as to provide safe and
satisfactory uses.
(3) Year-round mechanically ventilating
systems may be substituted for
windows, as required herein, but must
be approved by the code official, in
rooms other than rooms used for
sleeping purposes.
( 4) All outside windows and doors used
for ventilation shall be screened.
(5) All windows and doors shall be made
weather tight.
( 6) Windows and doors shall have no
broken glass and shall have adequate
operable locks and hardware.
(7) Openable window area in each toilet
room shall be at least two (2) square
feet, unless served by mechanical
ventilation.
(8) Natural ventilation of spaces such as
attics and enclosed non-basement space
shall be provided by openings of
sufficient size to overcome dampness
and to minimize the effect of conditions
conducive to decay and deterioration of
the structure, and to prevent excessive
heat in attics.
(9) Utility spaces containing heatproducing,
air-conditioning and other
equipment shall be ventilated according
to manufacturer's requirements.
(I 0) Mechanical ventilation shall be of
sufficient size to eliminate dampness
and odors of the area it is serving.
Section 8.64. - Exits.
(a) Two (2) main exits, each at least thirty (30)
inches wide and six ( 6) feet eight (8) inches
high, easily accessible to the occupants of
each housing unit, shall be provided, unless
Building Regulations 15
a single exit is permitted as an exception by
provisions of the state building code, as from
time to time amended. All exit doors shall be
easily operable.
(b) Platforms, steps and/or handrails shall be
provided to serve exits and maintained in a
safe condition.
Section 8.65. - Plumbing.
The minimum plumbing standards are as
follows:
(1) The plumbing systems shall be
connected to the Town sanitary sewer
system, where available; otherwise, the
plumbing system shall be connected
onto an approved septic tank.
(2) All plumbing fixtures shall meet the
standards of the Town plumbing code
and shall be maintained in a state of
good repair and in good working order.
(3) There shall be provided a hot water
heater (minimum thirty-gallon
capacity) furnishing hot water to each
tub or shower, lavatory and kitchen
sink.
( 4) Installed water supply inside the
building shall be provided for each
housing unit.
(5) Installed water closet, tub or shower,
lavatory and sink shall be provided for
each dwelling unit.
( 6) Separate toilet facilities shall be
provided for each dwelling unit.
(7) Toilet and bathing facilities shall be
structurally protected from the weather.
(8) All water piping shall be protected
from freezing by proper installation in
protected space.
(9) At least one (1) main vent of a
minimum diameter of two (2) inches
shall be properly installed for each
building.
(10) Sewer and water lines shall be
properly supported with no broken or
leaking lines.
Section 8.66. - Heating.
The minimum heating standards are as
follows:
(I) Reserved.
(2) Every dwelling unit shall have heating
facilities which are properly installed,
are maintained in safe and good
working condition and are capable of
safely and adequately heating all
habitable rooms and bathrooms in
every dwelling unit located therein to a
temperature of at least sixty-eight ( 68)
degrees Fahrenheit at a distance three
(3) feet above floor level, under
ordinary minimum winter conditions.
(3) All gas-heating and oil-heating
equipment installed on the premises
shall be of a type approved by
Underwriters' Laboratories or by the
American Gas Association and shall be
installed in accordance with the
provisions of the state building code.
( 4) Liquid fuel stored on the premises
shall be stored in accordance with the
provisions of the National Fire
Prevention Association standards.
(5) Chimneys and fireplaces shall have no
loose bricks.
(6) Flues shall have no holes.
(7) There shall be no hanging masonry
chimneys.
(8) Thimbles shall be grouted in tight.
(9) Thimbles shall be installed high
enough for stovepipe to rise one-fourth
inch per foot minimum.
(10) Hearths shall be at least twenty (20)
inches deep and seven (7) inches
beyond each side of the fireplace
opening.
(11) No combustible materials shall be
within seven (7) inches beyond each
side of the fireplace opening.
(I 2) If the fireplace opening is closed
because of hazardous conditions, the
Building Regulations 16
closure shall be of masonry or other
approved material as determined by the
code official.
(13) Any stove shall be within six (6) feet
of the thimble serving it.
(14) Stovepipes and vents shall comply
with volume 3 of the state building
code.
(15) No unvented combustible space
heaters shall be used.
State Law reference- G.S.  136-443.l
Section 8.67. - Electricity.
The minimum electrical standards are as
follows:
(I) Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall
be wired for electric lights and
convenience receptacles, which shall
be connected in such manner as
determined by the National Electric
Code, as adopted by the Town.
(2) No receptacles, ceiling fixtures or
other fixtures shall be broken or
hanging loose.
(3) All toggle switches and fixtures shall
be safely operable.
(4) At least two (2) duplex convenience
outlets, as remote from each other as
practicable, shall be provided per
habitable room.
( 5) At least one ( 1) light outlet in each
bathroom, hall, kitchen and porch, and
over exterior steps to the second floor
shall be provided.
( 6) There shall be no bare wires, open
joints or spliced cables.
(7) Flexible cords shall not be used as a
substitute for the fixed wiring of a
structure, nor shall flexible cords be run
through holes in walls, ceilings or
floors, through doorways, windows, or
similar openings, or be attached to
building surfaces or concealed behind
building walls, ceilings or floors.
(8) No branch circuits shall be
overloaded.
(9) A minimum of three (3) branch
circuits, plus separate circuits for each
fixed appliance, shall be provided in
each dwelling unit.
(I 0) There shall be provided service
equipment and a lighting panel of
adequate capacity and size (minimum
of sixty-ampere capacity) to
accommodate the existing or the
required number of branch circuits, and
the equipment shall be properly
grounded.
( 11) Outlets in kitchens and bathrooms
shall be ground-fault interrupter device
protected.
(12) All residences shall have a smoke
detector on each livable floor. The
property owner shall be responsible for
installing a fresh battery with change in
tenants; the tenant shall be responsible
for maintaining the unit and shall not
commit any act that shall render the unit
inactive.
(13) All rental dwelling units having a
fossil fuel burning heater or appliance
or fireplace shall provide a minimum of
one operable carbon monoxide detector
per unit per level. A carbon monoxide
detector is also required for an attached
garage. The landlord shall install,
replace or repair the carbon monoxide
monitor(s) unless the landlord and
tenant have a written agreement to the
contrary.
Section 8.68. - Structural requirements.
The minimum structural standards shall be
as follows:
(I) Fo1111datio11:
a. A foundation shall support the
building at all points and shall be
free of holes and cracks which
admit rodents, water or dampness
to the interior of the building or
Building Regulations 17
which lessen the capability of the
foundation to support the building.
b. The foundation shall be on firm,
reasonably dry ground, and there
shall be no water standing or
running under the building.
c. Footings shall be sound and have
adequate bearing capacity.
d. Piers shall be sound.
e. No wood stiff knees or other
improper piers shall be allowed.
f. All structures shall be underpinned
or enclosed in an approved
manner, such as aluminum,
galvanized, asbestos or masonry.
(2) Floors:
a. No rotted or termite-damaged sills
shall be allowed.
b. No broken, overloaded or sagging
sills shall be allowed.
c. Sills shall be reasonably level.
d. Sills shall be properly and
sufficiently supported.
e. Sills shall clear the ground by at
least eighteen (18) inches.
f. No rotted or termite-damaged
joists shall be allowed.
g. No broken or sagging joists shall
be allowed.
h. Flooring shall be weather tight
without holes or cracks which
permit air to excessively penetrate
rooms.
1. Flooring shall be reasonably
smooth, not rotten or worn
through.
J. No loose flooring shall be allowed.
k. Floors shall be reasonably level.
(3) Walls, exterior:
a. Every exterior wall shall be
protected with paint or other
protective covering to prevent the
entrance or penetration of
moisture or the weather.
b. No studs which are rotted or
termite-damaged shall be allowed.
c. No broken or cracked structural
members shall be allowed.
d. No loose siding shall be allowed.
e. Walls used as partitions shall not
lean or buckle.
f. No deteriorated siding or covering
shall be allowed.
( 4) Walls, i11terior:
a. The interior finish shall be free of
holes and cracks, which permit air
to excessively penetrate rooms.
b. No loose plaster, loose boards or
other loose wall materials shall be
allowed.
c. There shall be no cardboard,
newspaper or other highly
combustible material allowed as a
wall finish.
d. No studs shall be rotted or termitedamaged.
e. No broken or cracked studs or
other broken or cracked structural
members shall be allowed.
(5) Ceili11gs:
a. No joists shall be rotted, broken or
sagging or have improperly
supported ends.
b. There shall be allowed no holes or
cracks, which permit air to
excessively penetrate rooms.
c. No loose plaster, loose boards,
loose shcetrock or other loose
ceiling finish shall be allowed.
d. There shall be allowed as ceiling
finishes no cardboard or other
highly combustible material.
(6) Roofs:
Building Regulations 18
a. Rafters shall not be rotted, broken
or sagging or have improperly
supported ends.
b. No rafters seriously fire-damaged
shall be allowed.
c. Attics shall be properly vented.
d. No rotted, loose or sagging
sheathing shall be allowed.
e. No loose roof covering shall be
allowed nor shall there be allowed
any holes or leaks, which could
cause damage to the structure or
rooms.
f. Walls and chimneys shall have
proper flashing.
(7) Stairs and steps:
a. Stairs and steps shall be free of
holes, grooves and cracks large
enough to constitute accident
hazards.
b. Stairwells and flights of stairs
more than four ( 4) risers or having
risers more than thirty (30) inches
high shall have rails not less than
two (2) feet six (6) inches
measured vertically from the nose
of the treads to the top of the rail.
c. Every rail shall be firmly fastened
and maintained in good condition.
d. No flight of stairs settled more
than one (I) inch out of its
intended position or pulled away
from supporting or adjacent
structures shall be allowed.
e. No rotting, sagging or deteriorated
supports shall be allowed.
(8) Porcltes and appurtenances:
a. Every outside and inside porch and
any appurtenance thereto shall be
safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal
use may cause to be kept in sound
condition and good repair.
b. Protective railings shall be
required on any unenclosed
structure over three (3) feet from
the ground level.
(9) Accessory structures: All accessory
buildings and structures, including
detached garages, shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair or
shall be raised to grade level and the
debris therefrom removed from the
premises.
(10) Supplied facilities: Every supplied
facility, piece of equipment or utility
which is required under this article shall
be so constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively and shall
be maintained in satisfactory working
condition.
Sec. 8.69. - Property maintenance.
The minimum property maintenance
standards are as follows:
(1) Buildings and structures:
a. Exterior wood surfaces not
inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be treated with
a protective coating of paint or
other suitable preservative, with
sufficient frequency to prevent
deterioration.
b. Floors, walls, ceilings and fixtures
shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(2) Public areas: Every owner of a
structure containing two (2) or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for
maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition the shared or public areas of
the structure and premises thereof.
(3) Rubbislt and garbage: Every person
who occupies and controls a dwelling
unit shall dispose of all rubbish and
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner
by placing it in proper storage facilities.
( 4) Premises:
Building Regulations 19
a. Fences and other minor structures
shall be maintained in safe and
substantial condition.
b. Yards and courts shall be kept
clean and free of physical hazards,
rubbish, trash and garbage.
c. No heavy undergrowth or
accumulations of plant growth
which are noxious or detrimental
to health shall be allowed.
d. Every premises shall be provided
with all-weather vehicular access
to and from the premises at all
times by an abutting public or
private street.
e. Walks and steps, constructed so as
to provide safety, reasonable
durability and economy of
maintenance, should be provided
for convenient all-weather access
to the structure.
f. Access to the rear yard from each
dwelling unit shall be required.
Such access is not, however,
acceptable where it is dependent
upon passage through another
dwelling unit. Each building shall
be provided with access to the rear
yard. This access for a detached
dwelling shall be directly from a
street.
g. Any nonresidential use of the
premises shall be subordinate to its
residential use and character.
(5) I11festatio11:
a. Premises, buildings and structures
shall, by generally accepted
methods of extermination, be
maintained free of vermination
and rodent harborage and
infestation.
b. Every basement or cellar window
used or intended to be used for
ventilation and every other
opening to a basement or cellar,
which might provide an entry for
rodents, shall be supplied with
screens installed or with such
other approved devices as will
effectively prevent entrance by
rodents.
c. Every head-of-household
occupant of a structure containing
a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination
of any insects, rodents or other
pests therein or on the premises;
and every head-of-household
occupant of a dwelling unit in a
structure containing more than one
(I) dwelling unit shall be
responsible for such extermination
whenever the dwelling unit is the
only one infested. Whenever
infestation is caused by failure of
the owner to maintain a structure
in a rodent proof or reasonably
insect proof condition,
extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
Whenever infestation exists in two
(2) or more of the dwelling units in
any structure or in the shared or
public parts of any structure
containing two (2) or more
dwelling units, extermination shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
(6) Clea11li11ess: Every occupant of a
dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in
a clean and sanitary condition that part
of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises thereof which he occupies and
controls.
(7) Supplied plumbi11g jrxtures: Every
occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep
all supplied plumbing fixtures therein
in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and
operation of same.
(8) Care of facilities, equipmellt a11d
structure: No occupant shall willfully
destroy, deface or impair any of the
facilities or equipment of any part of
Building Regulations 20
the structure of a dwelling or dwelling
unit.
Section 8. 70. - Rooming/Boarding houses.
All of the provisions of this article, and all of
the minimum standards and requirements of this
article shall be applicable to rooming houses, and
to every person who operates a rooming house, or
who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any
rooming unit in any rooming house, except as
provided in the following subsections:
(!) At least one (!) flush water closet,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and
sewer system and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each
four ( 4) rooms within a rooming house
whenever such facilities are shared. All
such facilities shall be located on the
floor they serve within the dwelling so
as to be reasonably accessible from a
common hall or passageway to all
persons sharing such facilities.
(2) Every lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied with hot water
at all times.
(3) Every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one (I) person shall
contain at least seventy (70) square feet
of floor space and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one
(I) person shall contain at least fifty
(50) sqnare feet of floor space for each
occupant thereof.
( 4) Every rooming unit shall have safe,
unobstructed means of egress leading
to safe and open space at ground level,
as required by the laws of the governed
area or of the state.
( 5) The operator of every rooming house
shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors and
ceilings, and for maintenance of a
sanitary condition in every part of the
rooming house. He shall be further
responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of the entire premises
when the entire structure or building is
leased or occupied by the operator.
( 6) No person shall operate a rooming
house unless he holds a valid rooming
house permit and keeps same posted on
the premises.
(7) The code official on a quarterly basis
shall inspect rooming houses.
Section 8.71. - Inspections; duty of owner and
occupants.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling
unit shall give the owner thereof, or agent or
employee, access to any part of such dwelling or
dwelling unit, and its premises, at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance
with the provisions of this article or with any
lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this article.
Section 8.72. - Refusal to permit entry for
inspection.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person
in possession of premises on which housing is
located in the Town to refuse, after being
presented with a warrant, as issued in accordance
with state law, to permit the code official or duly
appointed agents to enter upon the premises for
the purpose of making examinations as
authorized by this article. Violation of this section
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S.
15-27.2
Building Regulations 21
DIVISION2
ADMINISTRATION AND
ENFORCEMENT
Section 8.73. - Method of serving complaints,
orders.
Complaints or orders issued by the code
official or designee under this article shall be
served upon persons either personally or by
registered or certified mail. When service is made
by registered or certified mail, a copy of the
complaint or order may also be sent by regular
mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the
registered or certified mail is unclaimed or
refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the
post office within ten (I 0) days after the mailing.
If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected. If the identities of
any owners or the whereabouts of persons are
unknown and cannot be ascertained by the public
official in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or,
if the owners are known but have refused to
accept service by registered or certified mail, and
the public official makes an affidavit to that
effect, then the serving of the complaint or order
upon the owners or other persons may be made
by publication in a newspaper having general
circulation in the Town at least once no later than
the time at which personal service would be
required under the provisions of the part. When
service is made by publication, a notice of the
pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises thereby
affected.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 
160A-445.
Section 8.74. - Dwellings in violation;
preventive action or proceeding.
If any dwelling is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted, maintained or used
in violation of this article or any valid order or
decision of the official made pursuant to this
article, the official may institute any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration
or use, to restrain, correct or abate the violation,
to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about
the premises of the dwelling.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 
l 60A-446(g).
Section 8. 75. - Petition for temporary
injunction.
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by
the official may petition the superior court for an
injunction restraining the official from carrying
out the order or decision and the court may, upon
such petition, issue a temporary injunction
restraining the official pending a final disposition
of the case. The petition shall be filed within
thirty (30) days after issuance of the order or
rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be had
by the court on a petition with twenty (20) days,
and shall be given preference over other matters
on the court calendar. The court shall hear and
determine the issues raised and shall enter such
final order or decree as law and justice may
require. It shall not be necessary to file bond in
any amount before obtaining a temporary
injunction.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G .S. 
l 60A-446(t).
Section 8.76. - Enforcement by the Code
Official; assistance from Town agencies,
departments.
(a) The code official shall be responsible for
the enforcement of this article.
(b) The code official shall have authority to
request the advice and assistance of the
Town planning board, the housing authority,
the fire department, the health department,
and any other public authority may be
deemed appropriate, in determining those
areas of the Town in which substandard
housing may be prevalent, and designate and
schedule such areas for comprehensive
inspection under this article. This procedure
shall be in addition to regular, Town wide
inspections under this article.
Building Regulations 22
Section 8.77. -Powers of Code Official.
The code official is authorized to exercise
any powers necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this
article, including the following powers in
addition to others granted:
(I) To investigate the dwelling conditions
in the Town in order to determine
which dwellings therein are unfit for
human habitation;
(2) To administer oaths; affirmations,
examme witnesses and receive
evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises for the
purpose of making examinations in a
manner that will do the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in
possession;
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of
officials, agents and employees
necessary to carry out the purposes of
the ordinances;
(5) To delegate any of the functions and
powers under the ordinance to other
officials and other agents.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 
160A-448.
Section 8. 78. - Issue of complaint; hearing;
determination of unfit dwelling; abatement
procedure.
(a) Whenever a petition is filed with the code
official by a public authority or by at least
five (5) residents of the Town charging that
any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for
human habitation, or whenever it appears to
the official that any dwelling or dwelling
unit is unfit for human habitation, the code
official shall, ifthe preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner of and
parties in interest in such dwelling or
dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges
and containing a notice that a hearing will be
held before the official, at a place within the
county, not less than ten (10) nor more than
thirty (30) days after the serving of the
complaint. The owner or any party in interest
shall have the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place
and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of
such hearing shall also be given to at least
one (I) of the persons signing a petition
relating to such dwelling. Any person
desiring to do so may attend such hearing
and give evidence relevant to the matter
being heard. The rules of evidence
prevailing in courts oflaw or equity shall not
be controlling in hearings before the official.
(b) If after such notice and hearing the official
determines that the dwelling under
consideration is unfit for human habitation,
the code official shall state in writing the
findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owners an order as follows:
(1) If the repair, alteration or
improvement of the dwelling can be
made at a cost not to exceed fifty (50)
percent of the value of the dwelling, the
Order shall require the owner, within
the time specified, to repair, alter or
improve the dwelling in order to render
it fit for human habitation or to vacate
and close the dwelling as a human
habitation;
(2) If the repair, alteration or
improvement of the dwelling cannot be
made at a cost not to exceed (50)
percent of the value of the dwelling,
The Order shall require the owner,
within the time specified in the order, to
remove or demolish such dwelling.
(3) If a house has been closed and/or
boarded, for a period of one year or
longer, after being closed; following
proceedings under the substandard
housing regulations the Town
Commission determines that the owner
has abandoned the intent and purpose to
render it fit for human habitation that
continuation of the dwelling in its
vacated and closed status would be
inimical to the health, safety, morals
and welfare of the community, that the
Building Regulations 23
dwelling would continue to deteriorate
would create a fire and safety hazard,
would be a threat to children and
vagrants, would cause or contribute to
blight and deterioration of property
values m the area. Then m such
circumstances, the Town Commission
may, after the expiration of such one
year period, enact an ordinance and
serve such ordinance on the owner,
setting forth the following:
a. If it is determined that the repair of
the dwelling to render it fit for
human habitation can be made at a
cost not exceeding fifty (50)
percent of the then current value of
the dwelling, the ordinance shall
require that the owner either repair
or demolish and remove the
dwelling within ninety (90) days;
or,
b. If it is determined that the repair of
the dwelling to render it fit for
human habitation cannot be made
at a cost not exceeding fifty (50)
percent of the then current value of
the dwelling, the ordinance shall
require the owner to demolish and
remove the dwelling within ninety
(90) days.
( c) The official 1s authorized to fix the
reasonable value of any housing and to
estimate the cost of repairs, alterations or
improvements for the purposes of this
section.
(d) If the owner fails to comply with an order
to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and
close the dwelling, the official may cause
such to be repaired, altered or improved or
to be vacated and closed, and may cause to
be posted on the main entrance of any
dwelling so closed a placard with the
following words: "This building is unfit for
human habitation; the use or occupation of
this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a
building so posted shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
(e) If the owner fails to comply with an order
to remove or demolish the dwelling, the
official may cause such dwelling to be
removed or demolished; provided, however,
that the powers of the official set forth in
subsection ( d) and this subsection shall not
be exercised until the Town Commission
has, by ordinance, ordered the official to
proceed to effectuate the purpose of this
article with respect to the particular property
or properties, which the official has found to
be unfit for human habitation and which
shall be described in the ordinance. No such
ordinance shall be adopted to require
demolition of a dwelling until the owner has
first been given a reasonable opportunity to
bring it into conformity with the housing
code. Such ordinance shall be recorded in
the office of the register of deeds of the
county and shall be indexed in the name of
the property owner in the grantor index.
(f) The amount of the cost of such repairs,
alterations or improvements, or vacating and
closing, or removal or demolition by the
official, shall be a lien against the real
property upon which the cost was incurred,
which lien shall be filed, have the same
priority, and be collected as the lien for
special assessment provided in G.S.  Ch.
160A, art. 10. If the dwelling is removed or
demolished by the official, he shall sell the
materials of such dwelling, any personal
property, fixtures or appurtenances found in
or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit
the proceeds of such sale against the cost of
the removal or demolition and any balance
remaining shall be deposited in the superior
court by the official, shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by the court, and
shall be disbursed by the court to the persons
found to be entitled thereto by final order or
decree of the court.
(g) If any occupant fails to comply with an
order to vacate a dwelling, the public official
may file a civil action in the name of the
Town to remove such occupant. The action
to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature
of summary ejectment and shall be
commenced by filing a complaint naming as
parties-defendant any person occupymg
Building Regulations 24
such dwelling. The clerk of superior court
shall issue a summons requiring the
defendant to appear before a magistrate at a
certain time, date and place not to exceed ten
(I 0) days from the issuance of the summons
to answer the complaint. The summons and
complaint shall be served as provided in
G.S.  42-29. The summons shall be
returned according to its tenor, and if on its
return it appears to have been duly served,
and if at the hearing the public official
produces a certified copy of an ordinance
adopted by the governing body pursuant to
subdivision ( e ), authorizing the official to
proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the
magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that
the premises be vacated and that all persons
be removed. The judgment ordering that the
dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the
same manner as the judgment for summary
ejectment entered under G.S.  42-30. An
appeal from any judgment entered hereunder
by the magistrate may be taken as provided
in G.S.  7A-228, and the execution of such
judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S.
7 A-227. An action to remove an occupant of
a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may
not be in the nature of a summary ejectment
proceeding pursuant to this paragraph unless
such occupant was served with notice at
least thirty (30) days before the filing of the
summary ejectment proceeding that the
governing body has ordered the public
official to proceed to exercise duties under
paragraphs ( d) and ( e) of this section to
vacate and close or remove and demolish the
dwelling.
(h) Any violation of this section shall
additionally subject the offender to a civil
penalty to be recovered by the Town
pursuant to section I -7.
State Law reference- Abatement procedures,
G.S.  160A-443.
Section 8. 79. - Appeals from orders of Code
Official.
(a) An appeal from any decision or order of the
code official may be taken by any person
who is the subject of the decision or order.
Any appeal from the official shall be taken
within ten days from the rendering of the
decision or notice of the order, and shall be
taken by filing a notice of appeal with the
planning department which shall specify the
grounds upon which the appeal is based.
Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the
official shall forthwith transmit to the board
of adjustment all papers constituting the
record upon which the decision appealed
from was made. When an appeal is from a
decision of the code official refusing to
allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any
act, the decision shall remain in force until
modified or reversed. When any appeal is
from a decision of the code official requiring
the person aggrieved to do any act, the
appeal shall have the effect of suspending
the requirement until the hearing of the
board of adjustment, unless the official
certifies to the board of adjustment, after the
notice of appeal is filed with him, that by
reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a
copy of which shall be furnished the
appellant, a suspension of the requirement
would cause imminent peril to life or
property, in which case the requirement shall
not be suspended except by a restraining
order, which may be granted for due cause
shown upon not less than one day's written
notice to the code official, by the board of
adjustment, or by a court of record upon
petition made pursuant to G.S. l 60A-446(f)
and the provisions of this article.
(b) The board of adjustment shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing of all
appeals, shall give due notice to all the
parties, and render its decision within a
reasonable time. Any party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney. The board
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the decision or order appealed
from, and may make such decision and order
as in its opinion ought to be made in the
matter, and to that end it shall have all the
powers of the official, but the concurring
vote of four members of the board shall be
necessary to reverse or modify any decision
or order of the official. The board shall have
power also in passing upon appeals, in any
Building Regulations 25
case where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance,
to adapt the application of the ordinance to
the necessities of the case to the end that the
spirit of the ordinance shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 
160A-446(c), (d), (e).
Section 8.80. - Petition to superior court.
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by
the official or a decision rendered by the board
shall have the right, within 30 days after issuance
of the order or rendering of the decision, to
petition the superior court for a temporary
injunction restraining the official pending a final
disposition of the cause.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 
l 60A-446(t).
Section 8.81. - Unauthorized removal of
posted complaint, notice or order.
No person without the written consent of the
Town manager or appointed agent shall remove
or permit the removal of any complaint, notice or
order posted in accordance with the provisions of
this article. Any person violating or failing to
comply with the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 8.82. - Renting unfit dwelling after
notice.
When the official finds that a dwelling is
unfit for human habitation within the meaning of
this article and has notified the owner to such
effect and the time limit set by the official for the
repair, alteration, improvement, removal,
demolition or vacating and closing the same has
expired, no person shall receive rentals or offer
for rent or occupancy such dwelling or dwelling
unit as a human habitation until such time as the
order of the official is obeyed or reversed by a
court of competent jurisdiction in accordance
with the law. Each day such offense continues
shall be deemed separate offense. Any violation
of this section shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty.
Section 8.83. - Certificate of occupancy.
(a) The Town shall not provide, nor permit
another to provide, either public or private
utility services such as water, gas,
electricity, sewer, etc., to any dwelling unit
becoming vacant until such dwelling unit
has been inspected, brought into compliance
with this article and a valid certificate of
occupancy, as required, has been issued.
This requirement shall not preclude the
temporary use of such utility services for
alteration. The building official shall be
responsible for making the determination as
to when such temporary services may be
necessary.
(b) No certificate of occupancy may be issued
for any single-family or multi-family
residential building on which construction is
begun on orafter January 1, 1978, until it has
been certified as being in compliance by the
energy and insulation official with the
minimum insulation standards for
residential construction, as prescribed in the
state building code.
For structures built prior to 1978 and no
insulation exists, the attic shall be insulated
to an R-30 value. If insulation exists in a
structure built before 1978, it must have an
R-19 value.
(a) - It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy,
or allow another to occupy, or offer for rent, a
dwelling or dwelling unit until a valid certificate
of occupancy has been issued.
Section 8.84 Changes in work after permit
issued.
After a permit has been issued, no changes
or deviations from the terms of the application
and permit or changes or deviations from the
plans or specifications involving any work under
the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be made until
specific written approval of such changes or
deviations has been obtained from the appropriate
official.
Building Regulations 26
Section 8.85. - Violations; penalty.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect or refuse
to repair, alter or improve the same, or to vacate
and close and remove or demolish the same, upon
order of the official duly made and served as
provided in this article, within the time specified
in the order. Each day that any such failure,
neglect or refusal to comply with such order
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling or dwelling unit, with respect to which
an order has been issued pursuant to this division,
to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same
after the time prescribed in the order for its repair,
alteration or improvement, or its vacation and
closing, or removal or demolition. Each day that
such occupancy continues after the prescribed
time shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
Sections 8.86 - 8.90. - Reserved.
ARTICLE6
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS
Section 8.91. - Exercise of police powers;
authority.
The Town Commission hereby finds and
declares that there exists within the Town limits
and its environs unsafe structures which are a
health or safety hazard as a result of the attraction
of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire
hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat
to children or frequent use by vagrants as living
quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities In
order to alleviate these unsafe and dangerous
conditions for the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens and its environs, a public necessity
exists to exercise the police powers conferred
upon the Town for the repair, closing or
demolition of such structures.
Section 8.92. - Definition of abandoned and/or
unsafe structure.
An abandoned and/or unsafe structure is
defined as a nonresidential building or structure
which has not been occupied by authorized
persons for at least six ( 6) months and which
persistently or repeatedly becomes unprotected or
unsecured, or which has been occupied by
unauthorized persons, or which presents a danger
of structural collapse, fire, disease, or a threat to
children.
Section 8.93. - Procedure for enforcement.
(a) Duty of code official. It shall be the
duty of the code official to examine nonresidential
structures located in the Town
and its environs where conditions
described in section 4-101 exist for the
purpose of locating and taking action
with respect to such structures as appear
to be a health or safety hazard. In
exerc1smg this power, department
members shall have the right to enter on
any premises within the jurisdiction of
the department at all reasonable hours for
purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action, upon presentation of
proper credentials.
Building Regulations 27
(b) Notice of complai11t. If the inspection
discloses health or safety hazards as
described in this article, the official shall
affix a notice of unsafe character in a
conspicuous place on the exterior wall of
the structure giving notice of its unsafe or
dangerous conditions and cause to be
served upon the owner of and parties in
interest to the structure a complaint
stating the charges and containing a
notice. If the owner of a building or
structure that has been condemned as
unsafe pursuant to G.S. !60A-426 shall
fail to take prompt corrective measures,
the official shall give him written notice,
by certified or registered mail to the last
known address or by personal service,
that the building or structure is in a
condition that appears to meet one or
more of the following conditions:
(!) Constitutes a fire and safety hazard;
(2) ls dangerous to life, health, or other
property;
(3) ls likely to cause or contribute to
blight, disease, vagrancy or danger to
children; or
( 4) Has a tendency to attract person/s
intent on criminal activities or other
activities which would constitute a
public nuisance.
A hearing will be held before the official
at a designated place therein fixed, not
less than ten (I 0) nor more than thirty
(30) days after serving of said complaint.
If the name or whereabouts of the owner
cannot, after due diligence, be
discovered, the notice shall be considered
properly and adequately served if a copy
there of is posted on the outside of the
building or structure in question at least
ten days prior to the hearing and a notice
of the hearing is published in a
newspaper having general circulation in
the Town at least once, not later than one
week prior to the hearing.
No oversight or dereliction of duty on the
part of any official or employee of the
Town shall be deemed to legalize the
violation of any provision of this chapter
or any provision of any regulatory code
adopted in this chapter.
( c) Heari11g. The owner or any party in interest
shall have the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place
and time fixed in the complaint. Any person
desiring to do so may attend the hearing and
give evidence relevant to the matter being
heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in
courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the official.
( d) Procedure after hearing. After such
hearing, if the official finds that a structure
constitutes a health or safety hazard, the
code official shall state in writing the
findings of fact in support of such
determination. In such case, the official shall
issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof an order directing and requiring the
owner to repair, close, vacate or demolish
the structure as necessary to correct the
health or safety hazard within a specified
period of time.
Section 8.94. - Appeal; finality of order if not
appealed.
Any owner who has received an order
under G.S.  l 60A-429 may appeal from the
order to the Board of Adjustment by giving notice
of appeal in writing to the official and to the
Town clerk within ten days following issuance of
the order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the official shall be final. The Board of
Adjustment shall hear and render a decision in an
appeal within a reasonable time. The Board of
Adjustment may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
Section 8.95. - Securing, closing and
demolition by the Town.
If the owner fails to comply with an order of
the official to repair, secure and close, vacate or
demolish, the official shall take one (I) or more
of the following actions as necessary:
Building Regulations 28
(a) Secure the issuance of a warrant
charging such owner with violation of
this article;
(b) Secure and close said structure;
( c) Cause such structure to be repaired,
altered or improved; or
(d) Cause such structure to be demolished.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 
15-27.2
Section 8.96. - Actions by Town Commission.
(a) The powers of the official as set forth
in section 8.95 (c) and (d) shall not be
exercised until the Town Commission
has by ordinance ordered the official to
proceed to effectuate the purpose of
this article with respect to the particular
property or properties, which the
official has found to be a health or
safety hazard and which shall be
described in the ordinance. Such
ordinance shall be recorded in the
office of the register of deeds of the
county and shall be indexed in the
name of the property owner in the
grantor index.
(b) The amount of the cost of such repairs,
alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition by the official, shall be a
lien against the real property upon
which the cost was incurred, which lien
shall be filed, have the same priority,
and be collected as the lien for special
assessment provided in G .S.  Ch.
l 60A, Art. 10. If the structure is
removed or demolished by the official,
he shall sell the materials of such
structure, any personal property,
fixtures or appurtenances found in or
attached to the structure, and shall
credit the proceeds of such sale against
the cost of the removal or demolition
and any balance remaining shall be
deposited in the superior court by the
official, shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by the
court, and shall be disbursed by the
court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or decree of the
court.
Section 8.97. - Failure to comply with order.
If the owner of a building or structure
fails to comply with an order issued pursuant to
G.S.  l 60A-429 from which no appeal has been
taken, or fails to comply with an order of the
Town Commission following an appeal, he shall
be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, additionally
subject the offender to civil penalty to be recover
by the Town pursuant article G.S. 14-4.; Every
day such person shall willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any final order or direction of the
code official or Town Commission made by
virtue and in pursuance of this article shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Section 8.98. - Lien on property.
The amount of the cost of such repair,
alterations, improvements, vacating and closing,
or demolition ordered by the Town Commission
or by the official shall be a lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred; said
lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be
collected or foreclosed upon in the same manner
as is provided for assessments pursuant to G.S. 
Ch. 160A, Art. 10.
Section 8.99. - Other unlawful actions.
(a) No person shall remove or permit the
removal of any complaint, notice or
order posted in accordance with the
provisions of section 4-103 of this
article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
building upon whom a notice, complaint
or order has been served, to sell,
transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise
dispose of said building unless one of
the following actions have been taken:
(1) Compliance with the provisions of
the notice, complaint or order; or
(2) Furnish a copy of any notice,
complaint or order to the
transferee, lessee, or mortgagee,
Building Regulations 29
and give written notice to the
official of said action.
Section 8.100. - Alternative remedies.
Neither this article nor any of its provisions
shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the Town to define and declare
nuisance and to cause their abatement by
summary action or otherwise, or the enforcement
of any other remedy or remedies provided or in
other ordinances oflaws.
Section 8.101. - Conflicts with other
provisions.
In the event any provision, standard or
requirement of this article is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any other ordinance
or code of the Town, the provision which
establishes the higher standard or more stringent
requirement for the promotion and protection of
the health and safety of the residents of the Town
and environs shall prevail.
Section 8.102. - Unsafe buildings condemned.
An official may declare a nonresidential
building or structure within a community
development target area designated by the Town
Commission, or within a development zone
authorized by G.S.  105-129.3.A or G.S. 160A-
503(10) to be unsafe if it meets both of the
following conditions:
(1) It appears to the official to be vacant
or abandoned; and
(2) It appears to the official to be in such
dilapidated condition as to cause or
contribute to blight, disease, vagrancy,
fire or safety hazard, to be a danger to
children, or tend to attract persons
intent on criminal activities or other
activities which would constitute a
public nuisance.
Section 8.103. - Appeals in general.
Unless otherwise provided by law, appeals
from any order, decision or determination by a
member of a local inspection department
pertaining to the state building code or other state
building laws shall be taken to the commissioner
of insurance or appointed designee or other
official specified in G.S.  143-139, by filing a
written notice with him and with the inspection
department within a period of ten days after the
order, decision or determination. Further appeals
may be taken to the state building code council or
the courts as provided by law.
Section 8.104. - Changes in work after permit
issued.
After a permit has been issued, no changes
or deviations from the terms of the application
and permit or changes or deviations from the
plans or specifications involving any work under
the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be made until
specific written approval of such changes or
deviations has been obtained from the appropriate
official.
Sec. 8.105. - Report of owner's failure to
comply with Code Official's order.
If the owner does not appeal from the final
order or direction of the code official requiring
that the building or structure be demolished and
removed or the taking of such other steps as may
be required to abate the nuisance and remove the
hazards, and fails or refuses to comply with such
order and direction, it shall be the duty of the
official to file a written report thereof with the
Town manager, who shall cause such report to be
placed on the agenda for action by the Town
Commission at its next ensuing regular meeting
or at some subsequent meeting to which the Town
Commission may continue the same. The code
official shall mail a copy of such report by
certified or registered mail to the owners last
known address or have a copy of such repmt
delivered to such owner. Such report shall specify
the date of the meeting of the Town Commission
for which the matter will be docketed for action.
Sections 8.106. - 8.110 - Reserved
\
Section 9.1 Health and Sanitation 9-1
CHAPTER9
Health and Sanitation
ARTICLE I
General Health Regulations
Section 9.1 Unlawful to violate county health
regulations.
Section 9.2 Unlawful to interfere with health officer.
Section 93 Right of entry.
Section 9.4 Human and animal waste, dead animals.
Section 9.5 Septic tanks and privies regulated.
Section 9.6 Planting and protection of trees.
Section 9.7 Milk.
Section 9.8 Butchering restricted.
Section 9.9 Removal of stagnant waters.
Section 9.10 Sale of food.
Section9.!1 Town watertank.
Section 9.12 Keeping of hogs, etc.
Section 9.13 Definitions.
Section 9.14 tbrough9.!6 reserved.
ARTICLEZ
Growth of Weeds and Accumulation of Refuse Regulated
Section 9.17
Section 9.18
Section 9.19
Section 9.20
Section 9.21
Section 9.22
Section 9.23
Section 9.24
Uncontrolled growth of weeds and
accumulation of refuse declared public
nuisance.
Complaint and investigation.
Notice to abate nuisance.
Failure of owner to abate nuisance.
Cost incurred by owner.
Charges become a lien.
Procedure is alternative to other autboriud
procedures.
Debris from new construction.
ARTICLE3
Garbaget Refuse Collection and Disposal
Section 9.25
Section 9.26
Seclion 9.27
Section 9.28
Section 9.29
PuipOse and definitions.
Responsibility for administration.
Fuoction and power of1he responsible
department.
Standards and regulations for collection.
Standards and regulations for storage prior
to collection.
Section 9.30 Standards and regulations for disposal.
Section 9.31 Prohibited activities.
Section 932 through 9.40 reserved.
Section 9.41
Section 9.42
Section 9.43
Section 9 .44
Section 9.45
Section 9.46
ARTICLE4
Cemeteries
Cemetery use.
Conduct
Vehicles.
Cleanliness.
Burial regulated.
Damaging gravestones, etc.,
prohibited.
ARTICLES
Smoking in Municipal Buildings and Vehicles
Section 9.51
Section 9.52
Section 9.53
Section 9.54
Section 9.55
Definitions.
Smoking prohloited in municipal buildings.
Smoking prohibited in municipal vehicles.
Exemptions.
Penalty.
ARTICLEl
General Health Regulations
Section 9.1 Unlawful to violate county health
regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation
to violate any lawfully adopted rule or regulation of the
County Board of Health. The enforcement of this Section
shall be under the supervision of the County Health
officer.
Section 9.2 Unlawful to interfere with health officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or
delay the Health Officer or any of his assistants in the
lawful discharge of their duties.
Section 9.3 Right of entry.
The Health Officer or any of his assistants shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any premises for the
purpose of making the inspections or investigations as
required by this Chapter.
Section 9.4 Human and animal waste; dead animals.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or
deposit any hmnan waste on any street lot or premises
except in approved sanitary :fucility. No butcher,
fishmonger, huckster, or vendor of merchandise of any
kind shall leave any refuse on the streets, or uncovered
by earth, on the lots of the Town. All putrid or decayed
animals or vegetable matter must be removed from all
cellars and out buildings at least once in every forty eight
hours during the months of May, June, July, August and
September, and at least once a week during the other
months of the year. No animal that died by disease or
accident and no meat therefrom nor any animal or meat
therefrom killed whtle feverish, bruised, disabled, injured
with broken bones, or otherwise heavy with young, jaded
or :futigued from long driving or shipping, or killed or kept
in some building or in so close proximity with fumes of
gas, or disease or spoiled meat as to become contaminated
therefrom or rendered unwholesome or unhealthy thereby,
or manipulated with tools used on diseased or other dead
carcasses as aforesaid, shall be brought into Town, held or
offered for sale as food therein.
(b) Owners of animals dying in the Town shall,
upon notice of their death, immediately remove same.
Section 9.4 Health and Sanitation 9-2
( d) Any animal killed by a railroad train or rail car
within the corporate limits of the Town shall be
removed by said railroad. For failure to observe this
Section, after having been notified by the Chief of
Police or Mayor, a fine shall be imposed on said
company as provided in Section 1.5 hereof.
Section 9.5 Septic tanks and privies regulated.
(a) No privy of any kind shall be permitted in the
Town of Hudson where a town sewer is reasonably
accessible. When privies are permitted they shall be
constructed in accordance with the regulations of the
North Carolina State Board of Health. Privies altered
or reconstructed shall also conform to these
regulations.
(b) Septic tanks may be installed where sewer is
not reasonably accessible provided such tank is
constructed in accordance with the specifications of the
North Carolina State Board of Health, and a permit
therefor is issued by the Town Clerk.
Section 9.6 Planting and protection of trees.
(a) No person shall cut or damage any tree of the
Town without the permission of the Town or shall dig
or injure any tree or shall tack or post any advertisement
upon said trees in the Town.
(b) Planting of shrubs and/or trees may not be of a
type or in a location which would be hazardous to
public health and/or safety. Existing growth must be
removed or trimmed to meet this requirement.
Section 9. 7 Milk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for
sale within the Town any impure, adulterated or
unwholesome milk, or sell, or offer to sell as pure milk,
any milk to which water has been added or any other
substance which in its effect, injures its quality or
lessens its value, or to sell or offer to sell, the milk from
any cow that may be sick, diseased or suffering from
any bodily condition, or disorder liable to render her
milk unfit, or unsafe to use or food, or milk obtained
from a cow kept in a filthy or unventilated stable or
building, or in an offensive, filthy lot or pen or shed, or
that may be fed upon food or allowed to drink any
liquid with risk of sickness or disease therefrom.
Section 9.8 Bntchering restricted.
No person shall butcher any cattle, hogs or
sheep within the corporate limits of the Town:
Provided this shall not apply to persons that may
butcher cattle or hogs or sheep for home purposes.
Section 9.9 Removal of stagnant waters.
No person or occupant of any property shall allow
stagnant water to accumulate or remain in cellars or
anywhere on their property.
Section 10 Sale of Food
Eating establishments, all persons, firms or
corporations selling food of any kind or serving
prepared meals shall comply with all requirements
pertaining thereto of the North Carolina State Board
of Health.
Section 9.11 Town water tank.
It shall be unlawful for any person (other than
persons employed by the Town) to climb up the water
tank in the Town.
Section 9.12. Keeping of hogs, etc.
(a) No hog sty or pig pen, stall, stable, shed, barn,
chicken roost, chicken lot or like building of
any person shall be located within one hundred
feet of any dwelling other than his own, or
within fifty feet of any well, spring or any other
source of water used for drinking or culinary
purposes, or any natural drain or gutter within
the Town, or within fifty feet of property lying
in the Town possessed or owned by another
person. Fenced pasture must contain not less
than one-half acre for each head of livestock.
(Ord. of 1211/70).
(b) The offal from such pens, sites, etc., shall be
heaped in a pile and carried off the premises at
least twice a week; no water shall be allowed
to collect and stand around such pen or sty; and
the owner of any such building shall keep such
pen, stall or shed in an absolute sanitary
condition in every respect, so as not to offend
any persons within the Town.
(c) If a complaint is filed in writing at the Town
hall or to an officerofthe Town by an adjoining
property owner or tenant thereof, setting forth
the basis for his complaint, and if the basis
thereof is in violation of the restrictions herein
set forth, and if the person offending shall fail
to comply with the restrictions herein set forth
within two days on being notified to do so by
the sanitary inspector, or any officer of the
Town, he shall be subject to a penalty of a fine
not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) or to be im(
(
Section 9-12 Health and Sanitation
prisoned for a period not to exceed thirty days,
one or both, within the discretion of the court.
(d) Any sty, stall or pen within the Town that
shall be declared a menace to health upon the
certificate of a practicing physician in good
standing in the county medical association shall
be removed outside of the Town by the owner
thereof, after forty-eight hours' notice shall have
been given him by the sanitary inspector. All
persons failing to remove such nuisance after
such notice shall be subject to a penalty of a fine
not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) or to be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed thirty days,
or both, within the discretion of the court. (Ord.
of8/4/70)
Section 9.13 Definitions (Ord. 5/15/12)
(1) Livestock is defined as: All equine
species, including horses, ponies,
donkeys, and mules; all bovine species
including cows and cattle; all ruminates,
including goats and sheep.
(2) Poultry - shall be defined as any
species, including chickens, ducks, and
turkeys kept for productive or useful
purposes other than as pets. This
definition excludes domestic fowl that
are kept for non-productive purposes
including but not limited to guineas,
peacocks and like species.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or
keeper of any chicken, turkey, duck
or domestic fowl of whatever
description to run at large in the
Town.
(2) No person shall keep or maintain
poultry in the Town unless the fowl
will be on a tract of land and/or
maintained as follows:
a) The tract shall consist of at
least twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet under single
ownership or control.
b) Such poultry must be contained
in a secure fence enclosure at
all times.
c) The enclosure shall have a
minimum of ten square feet
(10) for each fowl.
9.3
d) No enclosure shall be erected
or maintained within the front
or side yard (as defined by the
Zoning Ordinance) within fifty
(50) feet of any property line or
within one hundred (100) feet
of another residence.
e) The enclosure shall be kept
clean, sanitary and free from
accunmlations of excrement
and objectionable odor.
t) There shall be no more than
four ( 4) fowl kept on any
property at any time. No
roosters will be pennitted.
Sections 9.14 through 9.16 reserved.
Health and Sanitation 4
ARTICLE2.
ABANDONED MANUFACTURED HOMES
Section 9.17. Intent
(a) The intent of this article is to protect the
public health and environment through
the deconstruction of abandoned
manufactured homes to reduce blight and
unattractive nuisances.
(b) It is a policy of the town to promote the
removal of reusable or recyclable
materials to reduce the impact of such
solid wastes and production of said
materials on the environment.
Section 9.18. Abandoned, Nuisance and
Junked Mobile Homes Unlawful
(a) It shall be unlawful for the registered
owner or person entitled to possession
of a manufactured home or for the
owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the manufactured
home is located to leave, allow, or suffer
the manufactured home to remain on the
property after it has been declared an
abandoned manufactured home or a
public nuisance.
(b) A manufactured home shall be deemed
to be an abandoned manufactured home
for the purposes of this article in the
following circumstances: any
manufactured home that is either vacant
or in need of extensive repair; and a
danger to public health, safety, welfare
or the environment.
( c) A manufactured home shall be
considered abandoned when it has not
been occupied for at least 120 days and
meets any of the following criteria:
( 1) Provides a location for loitering,
vagrancy, unauthorized entry or other
criminal activity;
(2) Has been boarded up for at least 30
days;
(3) Has taxes in arrears for a period of
time exceeding 365 days;
( 4) Has all utilities disconnected and not
in use.
Section 9.19. Notice Requirements for
Abandoned Manufactured Homes
The Town shall give notice to the
responsible party and the land owner for each
identified abandoned manufactured home.
The notice may be served upon the owner,
occupant or person in possession of the
premises by at least one (I) of the following
methods:
(a) By delivering a copy of the notice to
the person or by leaving copies of the
notice at the person's residence with
some person of suitable age and
discretion then residing on the
premises;
(b) By mailing a copy of the notice by
registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to the
person to be served and delivered to the
addressee;
( c) By delivering a copy of the notice to
any official, employee or agent of a
corporation, partnership or business; or
( d) If, after a due and diligent effort, the
person cannot be located, by posting a
copy of the written notice in a
prominent place upon the real property.
Section 9.20. Removal of Abandoned
Manufactured Homes
(a) The owner or responsible party shall be
given 60 days from receipt of the written
notice to dispose of the abandoned
manufactured home in a legal manner.
Health and Sanitation 5
(b) If the owner or responsible party fails to
comply with this order, the town shall
take any action it deems reasonably
necessary to dispose of the abandoned
manufactured home, including entering
the property where the abandoned
manufactured home is located and
arranging to have the home
deconstructed and disposed of in a
manner consistent with the Town's
garbage collection and disposal
provisions.
( c) If the property owner does not remove
said abandoned manufactured home, a
lien will be placed against the real
property. If not paid within 30 days, the
lien shall be collected as unpaid taxes.
Section 9.21. Protection Against Criminal or
Civil Liability
No person shall be held to answer in any
civil or criminal action to any owner or other
person legally entitled to the possession of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked manufactured
home, for disposing of such manufactured home
as provided in this article.
Section 9.22. Appeals
(a) Within the 60-day period mentioned in
Sec. 9 .20, the owner of the property
where the nuisance exists may appeal
the findings of the enforcement official
to the Board of Adjustment by giving
written notice of appeal to the
enforcement official. The appeal is to
stay the abatement of the nuisances by
(b) the enforcement official until a final
determination by the Board of
Adjustment. In the event no appeal is
taken, the enforcement official may
proceed to abate the nuisance.
(c) The Board of Adjustment, in the event
an appeal is taken as provided in
division (a) above, may, after hearing all
interested persons and reviewing the
findings of the enforcement official,
reverse the finding made pursuant to
Sec. 9 .20, but if the Board of
Adjustment determines that the findings
of the enforcement official pursuant to
Sec. 9 .18 are correct and proper, it shall
declare the condition existing on the
property to be a danger and hazard to the
health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the Town
and public nuisance, and direct the
enforcement official to cause the
conditions to be abated.
Reserved Sec. 9.23. - Sec. 9.24.
Health and Sanitation 6
ARTICLE3
Garbage, Refuse Collection and Disposal.
Section 9.25 Purpose and definitions.
a) The purpose of this article is for the protection
of the public health, welfare, safety, and interest
through the facilitation and enforcement of
proper solid waste management.
b) For the purpose of this article, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
1. Commercial and residential establishment. A
commercial establishment is any office in or from
which is conducted a service; retail or wholesale
stores; bottling plants; printing establishments;
apartment complexes; religious, charitable, or
governmental offices; schools; nonprofit
organizations; private clubs; hospitals; and
restaurants. A residential establishment is any
establishment designed or used wholly or in part
for private purposes.
2. Container. A waterproof, odor-proof receptacle
approved by the Town for use in commercial,
business, industrial, residential and other
approved areas.
3. Disposal site. The site used for discharging,
depositing, injecting, dumping, spilling, leaking, or
placing of any solid waste into or on any land so
that the solid waste or any constituent thereof may
enter the environment or emit into the air, or
discharge into any waters, including ground
waters.
4. Dump. The consolidation or collection of solid
waste from one or more sources at a disposal site
which has unsanitary conditions. Includes any
disposal area which has not been approved hy
applicable health regulations.
5. Garbage. The organic waste matter, both
animal and vegetable, from houses, kitchens,
restaurants, hotels, hospitals, and the like.
Comprises chiefly waste food, and does not include
liquid that may be drained into the sewer, or ashes,
cinders, and the like from fireplaces, stoves,
heaters, and the like.
6. Hazardous waste. A solid waste or combination
of solid wastes, which because of their quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
characteristics may: cause or significantly
contribute to an increase in mortality, or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating
reversible illness; or pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed.
7. Industrial establishment. An industry engaged in
manufacturing products from raw materials.
8. Nonprofit organization. An organization not
conducted or maintained for the purposes of making a
profit.
9. Refuse. Solid waste accumulations consisting of
garbage, household trash, yard trash, and business
trash.
1 O. Sanitary landfill. A method of disposing of solid
waste on land in a sanitary manner without creating
nuisances or hazards to public health or safety, by
utilizing the principles of engineering to confine the
solid waste to the smallest practical area, to reduced it
to the smallest practical volume, and to cover it with a
layer of compacted earth at the conclusion of each
day's operation or at more frequent intervals as may
be necessary.
11. Solid waste. Garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash, and
other discarded solid materials, including solid waste
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, and
agricultural operations, and from community
activities, but not including solids or dissolved
materials in domestic sewage or other significant
pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or
suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents,
dissolved materials in irrigation return flows, or other
common water pollutants. (Ord. of 6/4/85)
Section 9.26 Responsibility for
administration.
The administration of the provisions of this
article shall be the responsibility of the Town
Code Enforcement Officer. It shall be their duty
to enforce all of the provisions of this article. (Or
Section 9.27 Function and power of the
responsible department.
The Town Code Enforcement Officer shall:
a) Aid and assist the county and state in the
application and enforcement of rules and
regulations pertaining to solid waste
management.
b) Enforce local rules and regulations
pertaining to solid waste management.
c) Issue warning notices and initiate
proceedings against violators of local
regulations. (Ord. of 6/4/85)
Health and Sanitation 7
Section 9.28 Standards and regulations for
collection.
The level of garbage service provided by the
Town shall not exceed three 32-gallon cans per
residential or commercial establishment picked up
one time per week. Any establishment that exceeds
this level of service shall use commercial garbage
collection provided by private collectors as
franchised by the Town. Industrial garbage or trash
will not be collected by the Town; private collectors
must be used as franchised by the Town. When
private collection is required, it shall be at I 00%
cost to the generator of the waste. (Ord. of 6/4/85)
Section 9.29 Standards and regulations for
storage prior to collection.
Every owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee shall
provide adequate, approved containers for
receiving and holding refuse. The following rules
and regulations for storage shall be observed:
a) Containers shall be kept in a sanitary
condition at all times.
b) Pick-up schedules for each area of the
Town are available at the Municipal Building.
Containers must be placed at curbside on the day of
pickup by 7:00 a.m. Plastic bags may be used, but
must be kept in containers except for the day of the
pickup.
c) Garbage (food waste) and rubbish shall
be stored in a container which shall have a tightfitting
cover, have suitable handles, be watertight
and fly-proof, and be able to be carried easily by the
collector.
d) Garbage (food waste) shall be drained of
Liquids.
e) Containers shall be kept tightly covered
at all times.
f) Containers shall be ofnot less than 20
gallons nor more than 32 gallons in capacity for
households.
g) Containers shall be stored on the
owner's property and not left on a public right-ofway
after pickup. (Ord. of 6/4/85)
Section 9.30 Standards and regulations for
disposal.
a) All non-hazardous solid waste shall be
disposed of in the Caldwell County sanitary landfill.
b) No burning of solid waste is permitted
except in approved incinerators or by permit.
c) All hazardous waste shall be collected and
disposed of in accordance with state laws. (Ord. of
6/4/85)
Section 9.31 Prohibited Activities.
a) It shall be unlawful for any person to
scavenge any materials delivered and deposited
for disposal.
b) It shall be unlawful for any person to
salvage to reclaim any solid wastes except at a
properly permitted facility in which salvage is an
integral plan of operation.
c) It shall be unlawful to make refuse
available for animal consumption unless the
refuse has been heat-treated to kill any disease
agent therein.
d) It shall be unlawful for any person to
use, maintain, or operate an open dump.
e) It shall be unlawful for any person to
burn any solid waste except in an approved
incinerator, or by permit.
f) It shall be unlawful for any person to
throw, place, or deposit, or cause to be thrown,
placed, or deposited, any solid waste, trash, tree
limbs, or leaves in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, body of water, public or private
property, except as provided in this article.
(Ord. of 6/4/85)
Section 9.32 through 9.40 reserved.
Health and Sanitation 8
ARTICLE4
Cemeteries
Section 9.41 Cemetery nse.
No person shall be interred or disinterred therein
without lawful authority and permission obtained.
Section 9.42 Conduct.
No person shall disturb the quiet, repose and good
order of the cemetery, nor shall any person deface,
remove, disturb, injure or destroy any tree, plant, or
shrub therein except in the manner herein provided;
trespassing within said cemetery is hereby
prohibited, and no person shall commit any immoral
act therein under penalty of the law herein
prescribed.
Section 9.43 Vehicles.
No vehicle shall enter said cemetery except for the
purpose of attending funerals, visiting graves or
other lawful mission.
Section 9.44 Cleanliness.
No person shall deposit any rubbish, filth, waste,
or other unclean or unsightly substance in said
cemetery, and all materials carried within said
cemetery and not used in the erection of
monuments, markers or other lawful structures
authorized herein, shall be promptly removed
therefrom by the owner of the lot upon which such
monument, marker or structure shall be located.
Section 9.45 Burial regulated.
a) It shall be unlawful for any person to bury
any human being on any lot or premises within the
corporate limits except within an approved
cemetery and in accordance with all applicable laws
and regulations.
b) No person shall dig any grave, put up any
gravestone or board or make any erections, or dig
up any sod on any private burial lot, except under
the direction or by the consent of the owner thereof.
Section 9.46 Damaging gravestones, etc.
prohibited.
No person shall remove the stakes from a burial
lot or any board, gravestone, or other monument
which may have been erected at any grave, nor
deface, injure or destroy any such board,
gravestone, or monument in any manner.
Sections 9.47 through 9.50 reserved.
Health and Sanitation
ARTICLES
Smoking in Municipal Buildings
and Vehicles
Section 9.51 Definitions.
Smoking. The inhaling, exhaling,
burning or carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar,
cigarette or other combustible tobacco
product. The use of any electric oral device,
such as one composed of a heating element,
battery, and/or electronic circuit, which
provides a vapor of nicotine or any other
substances, and the use or inhalation of which
simulates smoking. The term shall include
any such device, whether manufactured,
distributed, marketed, or sold as an ecigarette,
e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other
product name or descriptor.
(Ord. o/9114193-Amended 1012112014)
Section 9.52 Smoking Prohibited in
Municipal Buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
smoke in any building or facility or portion of
a building or facility now or hereafter owned,
leased, operated, occupied, managed or
controlled by the Town.
(Ord. o/9114193)
Section 9.53 Smoking Prohibited in
Municipal Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
smoke in any vehicle now or hereafter owned
or leased by the Town.
(Ord. o/9114193)
Section 9.54 Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to
individual dwelling units in public housing
complexes.
(Ord. o/9114193)
Section 9.55 Penalty.
Violation of this article shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable in
accordance with N.C.G.S. 14-4.
(Ord. o/9114/93)
9
Health and Sanitation 10
ARTICLE6.
NUISANCES
DIVISION 1. - General
Section 9.56. - Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section unless the context clearly indicates that a
different meaning is intended:
Agent means the person who manages or has
custody of a business building or the person to
whom rent thereon, if any, is paid.
Apartment or apartment ltouse or tenement
ltouse means every house, building, or portion
thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to
be occupied or is occupied as the house, home or
residence of more than two families, living
independently of each other and doing their
cooking on the premises, or by more than one
family upon a floor, so living and cooking, but
having no common right in the halls, stairways,
yards, water closets or privies.
Asltes means the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke or other combustible material.
"Ashes" shall not include cremated human
remains.
Attaclted business unit means a structure of
two or more business offices constructed as one
unit, such as a dental office, medical office,
insurance office or any other business in which
the major activity is providing a service or is
clerical in nature and does not in itself produce a
product.
Brusltwood means large, heavy yard
trimmings resulting from heavy pruning or shrub
removal with maximum six-inch diameter at
large end;
Building material means lumber, brick,
stone, dirt, carpet, plumbing materials, plaster,
concrete, floor coverings, roofing material,
gutters and other materials or substances
accumulated as a result of new construction,
repairs, remodeling, or additions to existing
structures or accessory structures or demolition of
such.
Bulk container means a commercially made
metal container designed to store and hold
rubbish and solid waste until the same can be
collected for disposal, generally having a
capacity of not less than four cubic yards nor
more than eight cubic yards and capable of being
serviced and emptied by automated machinery.
Bulk service means a customer that stores
and disposes of rubbish and solid waste in a bulk
container.
Business building means any structure,
whether public or private, in the Town that is
adapted for occupancy for transaction of
business, for rendering of professional service,
for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of
goods, wares or merchandise or for the
performance of work or labor, including, but not
being limited to, hotels, office buildings, public
buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants,
grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses,
workshops, factories in business areas and all
outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures on
premises used for business purposes.
Collection means the act of removing solid
waste from a point of generation to an approved
disposal site.
Collection 011 private property means the act
of removing solid waste from private
developments for an additional fee from a point
of generation to an approved disposal site.
Collection shall be made at a mutually
established location approved by the property
manager and the Town manager or appointed
designee for automated collection.
Commercial establisltment means any
structure or location, whether public or private,
that is adapted for occupancy for the transaction
of business, for the rendering of professional
services, for amusement, for the display, sale or
storage of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the
performance of work or labor, including hotel
rooms, rooming houses, office buildings, public
buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants,
grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses,
workshops, factories and all other houses, sheds,
barns and other structures on premises used for
business purposes. "Commercial establishment"
shall also include churches, houses of worship or
Health and Sanitation 11
other religious or eleemosynary institutions,
regardless of size.
Co11structio11 aud demolitio11 waste means
solid waste incident to maintenance, remodeling
or new construction, including, but not limited to,
mineral matter, wood, sheetrock, shingles and
metal, but specifically excluding any substance
which is contaminated by asbestos, lead based
paint, or any other substance the disposal of
which is regulated as a toxic or hazardous
material.
Co11do111i11ium means real estate, portions of
which are designated for separate ownership and
the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions.
Real estate is not a condominium unless the
undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners.
Disabled person means any person who by
reason of infirmity, or other physical or mental
impairment is incapable of complying with the
provisions of this chapter as it relates to the
placement of refuse containers curbside. Included
in the definition are children 12 years of age and
under;
Family living unit means, but is not limited
to, single-family residences, single mobile
homes, single-family living units in duplexes,
apartments, and other multifamily dwellings, but
shall not include hotels or motels;
Fee means that charge by the Town
associated with a good or service provided to or
for the benefit of a customer.
Garbage means all putrescible wastes
except sewage and body wastes, including all
meat, vegetables and fruit refuse commonly
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food, from or on any
premises within the Town limits.
Graffiti shall mean writings, drawings,
inscriptions, figures, or marks of paint, ink, chalk,
dye, or other similar substances on public or
private buildings, sidewalks, streets, structures,
or places which such marking are not authorized
or permitted by the property owner or possessor.
For the purpose of this chapter, graffiti shall
include drawings, writings, markings, or
inscriptions regardless of the content or the nature
of the materials used in the act.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prevent temporary, easily removable chalk or
other water soluble markings on public or private
sidewalks, streets or other paved surfaces which
are used in connection with typical children's
activities, such as drawings, or bases for stick
ball, kickball, handball, hopscotch or other
similar activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prohibit temporary, easily
removable chalk or other water soluble markings
used in connections with any lawful business or
public purpose or activity.
Hazardous household waste means any of
the following materials, existing in a home
because of their use in that home: pesticides;
herbicides; petroleum products (epoxy resins,
coal tar, polishes, thinners, mineral spirits,
varnish, grease, caulking materials); solvents;
acids (muriatic, hydrochloric, sulfuric,
phosphoric); poisons (arsenic, lead, chrome and
warfarin compounds); alkaline material (photo
developers, sodium hydroxide, bleaches); oil
based paints and stains, but not latex paints;
batteries of all kinds, for cars, flashlights, smoke
detectors, hearing aids, toys, watches and similar
batteries; antifreeze; and used motor oil.
Hazardous material or hazardous waste.
The following is an explanation of hazardous
waste as published in the North Carolina
Hazardous Waste Management Law adopted for
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA). For the purposes of this chapter, the
definition "hazardous waste" has been
condensed. The terms defined are not inclusive of
all items specified by the EPA regulations.
Hazardous waste is defined as potentially
dangerous byproducts of our highly
industrialized society which cannot be handled,
treated or disposed of without special
precautions. It includes ignitable, corrosive,
reactive and toxic waste such as acetone, gasoline
and industrial alcohol, alkaline cleaners, acids,
cyanide and chlorine, arsenic, pesticide wastes,
paint, caustics, infected material, offal, fecal
matter (human and animal), and explosives.
Health official means the chief health
official of the County Health Department or any
Health and Sanitation 12
health department including County or any
person whom he has authorized to perform any of
the powers or duties conferred upon him by this
article.
Hotels and motels means places of business
whose primary business and the one in which
they are normally and customarily engaged in
supplying temporary living quarters with limited
family living facilities for short periods of time.
Household sharp medical waste means any
type of product capable of puncturing or
lacerating the skin that is designed or used to
treat, diagnose, or prevent a disease or medical
condition, including, but not limited to, scalpels
and hypodermic needles.
Industrial and commercial waste means
those wastes, including solids, semisolids, sludge
and liquids generated by an industry, commercial
establishment or other manufacturing enterprise
that is not classified as a hazardous waste or
requires special handling such as oils, acids, etc.
Infectious waste means a solid waste
capable of producing an infectious disease.
Examples of waste designated as infectious are:
micro-biological waste, pathological waste,
blood products, improperly packaged sharps and
all other waste as defined in the medical waste
management regulation under I SA NCAC
13B.1200 in North Carolina Solid Waste
Management rules.
Liquid waste means any waste material that
is determined to contain free liquid as defined in
Method 9095, Paint Filter Liquid Test, as
described in Test Methods for Evaluating Solid
Waste, Physical/Chemical Method, as published
in the Environmental Protection Agency
Publication No. SW-846 or any successor or
equivalent publication.
Litter means any discarded man-made
materials including, but not limited to, solid
waste materials, industrial materials, household
trash, business trash, building materials, scrap
materials and hazardous waste as such terms are
defined in this chapter and not properly
containerized or prepared for collection and
disposal.
Multifamily residential unit means two or
more single-family dwellings constructed as one
unit, such as apartment houses, motels, mobile
home parks, townhouses, patio houses, or
condominiums. Duplexes/triplexes built on
public streets are not considered multifamily
residential units.
Nuisance means any condition or use of
property, or any act or omission affecting the
condition or use of property, which directly
threatens the safety of citizens; adversely affects
the general health, happiness, security and
welfare of others; or is detrimental to the rights of
others to the full use of their own property and
their own comfort, and happiness because of
decreased property values and the
unattractiveness and livability of neighborhoods.
Further, the Town Commission finds and
declares that the following specific conditions are
prejudicial to the general health, safety and
welfare of the Town and its citizens; lessen the
attractiveness and livability of the Town; and,
when located on any lot or parcel of land within
the Town limits, are a nuisance.
Occupant means the individual, firm,
partnership or corporation that has the use of,
controls or occupies any business building,
apartment house or tenement house, or any
portion thereof, whether owner or tenant In the
case of vacant business buildings, apartment
houses or tenement houses, or any vacant portion
of a business building, apartment house or
tenement house, the owner, agent or other person
having custody of the building shall have the
responsibilities of an occupant of a building.
Occupant means the person who has the use
of or occupies any business building or any part
thereof, or who has the use or possession, actual
or constructive, of the premises, whether the
actual owner or tenant In the case of vacant
business buildings or any vacant portion of a
business building, or in case of occupancy in
whole or in part by the owner and agent of the
building, such owner or agent shall be deemed to
be and shall have the responsibility of an
occupant of such building.
Opening means any opening in foundation,
sides or walls, ground or first floor or basement,
including chimneys, eaves, grills, windows,
Health and Sanitation 13
ventilators, walk grates, elevators and any pipes,
wires or other installations through which a rat
may enter.
Opell place shall constitute any portion or
area of a property not enclosed by walls, this
shall include, but not be limited to, carports,
patios, porches, decks, terraces, lean-tos,
outbuildings, and the like, which are exposed to
the exterior and/or public view, including, but
not limited to, front, side, and/or rear yards.
Tarps, plastic sheeting, canvas sheeting,
unfinished building materials or the like shall
not constitute walls.
Owller means the person owning the
business building or premises, or agent of the
building or premises, or the person to whom rent
is paid; whether an individual, firm, partnership
or corporation. In the case of business buildings
leased or rented with a covenant in the lease or
other agreement under which the lessee is
responsible for maintenance and repairs, the
lessee shall also be considered in such cases as
the owner for the purpose of this chapter.
Physical disability means a medical
condition, verified by a registered physician, that
makes an individual physically unable to bring
the automated refuse/automated recycling
container to the curbside for collection and where
there is no one else residing in the household
capable of taking the containers to the curbside.
Premises means business houses,
boardinghouses, rooming houses, offices,
theaters, hotels, tourist camps, apartments,
restaurants, cafes, bars, eating houses, hospitals,
schools, private residences, mobile home parks,
vacant lots and other places where garbage, trash
or rubbish accumulates.
Private street means a street not open to
public use, on private property, and not
maintained by any governmental agency.
Private property means all of that property
as described and set out in an owner's deed
including, but not limited to, yards, grounds,
driveways, entrances or passageways, parking
areas, storage areas, vacant land, bodies of water
and including sidewalks, grass strips, one-half of
alleys, curbs or rights-of-way up to the edge of
the pavement of any public street.
Public street means the entire width
between property lines, whatever nature, when
any part thereof is dedicated or open to the use of
the public as a matter of right for the purpose of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Public property means all that property
except private property as herein defined,
including but not limited to highways, streets,
parks, recreation areas, sidewalks, grass strips,
medians, curbs or rights-of-way up to the edge of
the pavement of any public street or body of
water.
Qualifying customer means a single-family
detached home, duplex, or condominium
regardless of the size of complex, or an
apartment, tenement house or townhome which,
when combined with all other units located on the
premises, is comprised of not more than six
family living units.
Rat eradicatiofl means the removal, killing,
destruction and extermination of rats by
systematic use of traps or by poisons and by other
methods.
Rat harborage means any condition which
provides shelter or protection for rats, thus
favoring their multiplication and continued
existence in, under or outside of a structure of any
kind, including, but not limited to, conditions on
vacant lots, creeks, branches, ditches, rubbish
heaps, junkyards and any other places inside or
outside of structures which afford shelter or
provide a place or situation favoring the breeding,
multiplication or continued existence of rats.
Rat stoppage or rat-proojiflg means a form
of construction to prevent ingress of rats into
business buildings from the exterior or from one
building to another; it consists essentially of the
closing, with material impervious to rat
gnawing, of all openings in the exterior walls,
ground or first floors, basements, roofs and
foundations, that may be reached by rats from
the ground, by climbing or by burrowing.
Refuse means all solid wastes, including
garbage, rubbish and trash.
Rollout cofttaifter means a plastic or
fiberglass container, having wheels for ease of
movement and a lid which securely covers the bin
Health and Sanitation 14
designed to keep flies and other vermin from
refuse, which is approximately 95 gallons in size
and designed for the automatic collection of
refuse by Town machinery.
Rubbisft or trasft means matter that 1s
worthless or useless or of no substantial, practical
value or matter that is of value only when it has
decayed or has been recycled. Rubbish is solid
waste, exclusive of garbage or ashes, including,
but not limited to, leaves, pine needles, twigs,
limbs and other such parts of trees not useful as
timber and shall include the trunks and limbs of
trees, even though useful for timber, when the
same have been blown down or felled, either
partially or totally, and which have become dried
and flammable; tin or aluminum cans, bottles,
papers, paper boxes or cartons, small light wood
or crafting materials, rags, excelsior, rubber,
leather, metals, wire or wire scraps, glass and
crockery, but shall not include salvage
automobiles, buses, or other items which in the
judgment of the Town is likely to cause damage
to equipment of the Town or injury to employees
of the Town, or is likely because of the nature,
size or weight of the material, to handicap or
overburden the automated equipment.
Sltarps container means
specifically manufactured for the
sharp medical waste.
a container
disposal of
Single business unit means any single
nonresidential unit that generates no more
garbage per week than can be placed or stored in
a maximum of one rollout container with a total
capacity of no more than 95 gallons when
accumulated between collections, such as a
dental office, medical office, insurance office or
another business in which the major activity is
providing a service or is clerical in nature and
does not in itself produce a product.
Single-family residential unit means any
dwelling place occupied by one family and not
defined as a multifamily residential unit.
Solid waste means useless, unwanted or
discarded solid material with insufficient liquid
content to be free flowing, including by way of
example and not by limitation, rubbish, garbage,
commercial and industrial waste, scrap materials,
junk, refuse, demolition and construction debris
and landscape refuse, but shall not include sludge
from air or water pollution control facilities,
septic tank sludge or agricultural or unacceptable
waste.
Solid waste disposal facility means any land
or structure or combination of land area and
structures, including dumps, landfills and transfer
stations used for storing, transferring, collecting,
separating, processing, recycling, recovering,
treating, salvaging, reducing, incinerating or
disposing of solid wastes.
Stationary bulk compactor means any
Town approved container made of watertight
construction that contains a packing mechanism
and an internal or external power unit, and
constructed so that the container can be emptied
mechanically by means of automated equipment
for the purpose of collection of solid waste.
Town /tome or town ftouse means an
apartment or other family living unit which is
capable of ownership separate and apart from
other portions of the structure to which it is
conjoined or of which it may be a part, but of
which there is no ownership interest in the
common areas of the facility in the owner of the
individual dwelling unit.
Unacceptable waste means items which are
not appropriate for disposal through this means
and includes, but is not limited to, sewage and its
derivatives, special nuclear or by-product
materials within the meaning of the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and hazardous
waste.
Unit means one single-family residence or
an individual apartment, motel room or suite,
mobile home, townhouse, patio house,
condominium, cluster home in a multifamily
residence, unless otherwise specified by the
Town.
Waste means all useless, unwanted, or
discarded materials resulting from industrial,
commercial, agricultural and residential
activities.
Wftite goods means large household
appliances, regardless of actual color, including,
but not limited to, refrigerators, stoves, washers,
dryers, etc.
Health and Sanitation
Yard waste means vegetative matter and
other materials generated while providing normal
maintenance to the yard areas adjacent to a
single-family residential unit without earth, soil
or other mineral matter attached thereto,
including, but not limited to, leaves, grass, twigs,
limbs, hedge trimmings, plant trimmings, and
shrubs. This shall not include plastic or synthetic
fibers, lumber, rocks, gravel, dirt or tree or
shrubbery remains except as specifically
authorized herein, or soil contaminated with
hazardous waste.
Section 9.57. - Nnisance
Any condition specifically declared to be a
danger to the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare of inhabitants of the Town and a
public nuisance by the Town Commission or is
in violation of any Town, county or state health
regulation is considered to be a nuisance, as
follows, but not limited to:
(1) Unfit Habitat
(a) Whatever renders the air, food or
water unwholesome.
(b) Whatever building, erection,
structure or part of cellar thereof is
overcrowded or not provided with
adequate means of ingress and
egress or is not sufficiently
supported, ventilated, drained,
cleaned or lighted.
( c) An occupied or used improvement
thereon without utility services
resulting in conditions which are
detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of citizens and the peace
and dignity of the Town.
(2) Unsanitary, stagnant, or inhibited
water
(a) Any stagnant water, to include all
cellars and foundations of houses
whose bottoms contain stagnant or
putrid water.
(b) Disease vectors. An open place of
collection of water where insects
tend to breed; permitting of any
stagnant water, filth or any other
15
matter harmful to health or comfort
to remain on the premises of the
owner or premises under control by
the owner or person in control
within the corporate limits after
twenty-four (24) hours' notice of
such condition;
( c) All business organizations, such as
public motor vehicle garages,
service stations, dry cleaning
establishments, and any other
businesses or industrial
organizations which shall discharge
any petroleum products, chemicals
or other such substances which
would or could pollute any creek or
stream within the zoning
jurisdiction of the Town.
( d) It shall be unlawful for any person
to obstruct the flow of water in any
stream or drainage way within the
Town by throwing or placing
stumps, brush, rubbish, litter or
other material within or along the
banks of any such stream or natural
drainage way.
( e) Any improper or inadequate
drainage on private property which
causes flooding, interferes with the
use of, or endangers in any way the
streets, sidewalks, parks or other
Town-owned property of any kind;
provided, that the notices required
and powers conferred by this
chapter by and on the public
official in abating the nuisances
defined by this paragraph shall be
given and exercised by the Town
manager or the director of public
works;
(3) Rats, snakes, carcass and feral
animals:
(a) Any building or premises which is
constructed or maintained in such a
manner so as to provide food,
shelter or protection for rats.
Health and Sanitation
(b) Firewood, if stored outdoors, shall
be stacked orderly to prevent
wildlife habitat.
( c) Hides, dried or green, provided the
same may be kept for sale in the
Town when thoroughly cured and
odorless;
(4) Junk:
(a) Any furniture originally
intended for indoor or interior
use, outdoor furniture in disuse
or disrepair,
(b) Seating removed from motor
vehicles,
( c) Storage containers,
(d) Automotive parts and/or
supplies,
(e) Inoperable appliances, exercise
equipment.
(f) Other metal products of any
kind or nature kept within an
open place which have jagged
edges of metal or glass, or areas
of confinement.
(g) Junked motor vehicles on public
grounds and private property
(Reference Section 2:
Abandoned, Junk and Nuisance
Motor Vehicles).
( 5) Plant Overgrowth
(a) Weeds, grasses and/or other
vegetation on one's residential,
business, or vacant lot which is
over 8 inches in height on the
average or to permit such lot to
serve as a breeding place for
mosquitoes, as a refuge for rats
and snakes, as a collecting place
for trash and litter or as a fire
hazard.. It will be the
responsibility of the owner to cut
and remove all weeds and other
overgrown vegetation as often as
necessary so as to comply with
the provisions of this section.
16
This provision shall not apply to
lots greater than one acre, but
shall be maintained m
accordance with this provision to
a depth of 20 feet from its
property lines if and only if the
adjacent property is occupied by
a dwelling or other structure
located within 50 feet of such
property. This provision will not
apply to wooded vacant lots that
are more than 75 percent covered
with mature trees, or property
that consist of ravines, creek
banks, or severe slopes which
may cause the maintenance
dangerous or unsafe.
Furthermore this provision will
not apply to vacant lots that are
larger than three acres in size
(i.e. Golf courses, farmland,
vineyards, etc ... ). Natural means
of plant removal is permitted on
parcels of land greater than 200
acres;
(b) A place of vines, shrubs or other
vegetation over eight inches in
height when such vines, shrubs
or vegetation are a focal point for
any other nuisance enumerated
in this Code; provided, the
nuisance herein defined by this
subsection shall be cleared and
cut only when it is necessary to
abate any other nuisance
described in this section;
( c) A place of growth of noxious
vegetation, including poison
sumac (Rhus vernix), poison ivy
(Rhus radicans) or poison oak
(Rhus Toxicodendron), in a
location likely to be accessible to
the general public;
( d) Any hedge, shrubbery, tree or
plant along any street, alley or
sidewalk planted closer than 18
inches or extending closer than
12 inches or lower than 14.5 feet
to such street, alley or sidewalk,
Health and Sanitation 17
or any of the above-mentioned
vegetation that obscures clear
vision as located within the
protected sight distance triangle.
( 6) Trash and waste.
The storage of garbage and trash in
containers as prescribed by this chapter and
the regular collection thereof by the Town
upon payment of fees and charges as
provided in this chapter are hereby declared
to be essential to the efficient operation of the
Town and to the prevention of disease and
protection to the public health. Any
accumulation of rubbish or trash causing or
threatening to cause the inhabitation therein
of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind.
(I) Scattering of garbage or trash,
storage of garbage or trash except in
containers as provided by this
chapter, or the accumulation of
trash by reason of nonpayment of
fees or charges for its removal is
hereby declared to be a nuisance
and a violation of this chapter.
(2) Under no circumstances shall trash
or garbage be allowed to
accumulate or be stored for a period
longer than 30 days.
(3) Under no circumstances shall trash
or garbage be dumped or stored on
any right of way or in any alley or
on any lot without being placed in
proper containers as prescribed
herein.
(4) No industrial wastes, manure,
debris from construction or repair
work, leaves, trees or tree
trimmings may be dumped or stored
on any within any right of way or in
any alley.
(5) No owner or occupant of any
premises shall prohibit or prevent
weekly solid waste collection
services at the premises.
(6) An open place of collection of
garbage, food waste, animal waste
or any other rotten or putrescible
matter of any kind.
(7) Public streets maintenance
(a) Failure to clean or clear a public street,
property, and adjoining sidewalks of any
earth, sand or mud and debris related to
a construction, timbering, or other
similar land use project within 12 hours
after notification by the Town for major
and minor thoroughfares or within 24
hours after such notification for
collector and local streets; however, if it
is found by the Town that the situation
is causing a clear and present danger or
hazard to traffic or the general public,
such cleaning or clearing may be
required to take place as soon after
notification as practicable. This
provision does not preempt any
applicable federal, state, or county
regulations applicable to said events.
(b) Property owners are required to maintain
any area of their property which is
located between a public sidewalk and
the curb of a paved street in accordance
with the guidelines set forth in this
section.
(8) Odor
(a) Unsightly litter, foul or offensive odors
which remain upon or emanate from a
property.
(b) Maintaining animals in an unsanitary
environment which results in unsightly
or offensive animal waste, litter, or odor
which would disturb a reasonable
person.
(9) Constrnction materials: Lumber and
building supplies, earth, sand and/or gravel
on construction sites where the work is
discontinued for a period of 60 days
(10) Graffiti, It shall be unlawful for any person
owning property, acting as manager or
agent for the owner of property, or in
possession or control of property to fail to
remove or effectively obscure any graffiti.
Health and Sanitation 18
(11) Animals sanitation:
(a) Any person owning, harboring,
walking, in possession of or in charge of
a dog, which defecates on public
property, public park property, public
right-of-way property or any private
property without the permission of the
private property owners, shall remove
all feces immediately after it is
deposited by the dog. All feces removed
in accordance with this section shall be
placed in a suitable bag or other
container that closes and disposed of in
a lawful manner.
(b) Any person, while harboring, walking,
in possession of or in charge of a dog on
public property, public park property,
public right-of-way or any private
property without the permission of the
private property owner, shall have in
possession a bag or other container that
closes, which is suitable for removing
feces deposited by the dog.
( c) The provisions of this Section shall not
apply to visually impaired persons using
dogs as guides.
(12) Abandoned Manufactured Homes,
reference Article 2.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 
160A-193
Section 9.58. - Exceptions
Exceptions. The provisions contained in
subsection 1.02. 4: Junk and 6: Trash
and debris, shall not apply to
commercial property owners,
including, but not limited to, junk yard
dealers, salvage companies, yard waste
recycling operations, cement, quarry or
other mining type businesses, whose
operations include the accumulation,
storage, sale, repair, or maintenance of
such materials or objects and who have
obtained all applicable zoning and
operating permits and are following all
applicable ordinances contained within
the Code of Ordinances and the Zoning
Ordinance. In addition, the provision
contained in subsection 1.02.7.a. shall
not apply to stockpiled rock, stone,
gravel, sand, earth, or other similar
materials on sites utilized and
maintained by the North Carolina
Department of Transportation or the
municipality.
Section 9.59. - Notice.
(a) Whenever the code official or appointed
designee have determined that the
conditions on a particular lot or parcel of
land are a nuisance and should be abated or
otherwise corrected, the code official or
appointed designee shall give notice to the
owner, lessee or other person in possession
of the premises in writing setting forth the
findings and describing the appropriate
corrective action. The code official or
appointed designee may establish a
deadline, not to exceed sixty ( 60) days, for
the abatement of the nuisance.
(b) The notice may be served upon the owner,
occupant or person in possession of the
premises by at least one (1) of the following
methods:
(1) By delivering a copy of the notice to
the person or by leaving copies of the
notice at the person's residence with
some person of suitable age and
discretion then residing on the
premises;
(2) By mailing a copy of the notice by
registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to the
person to be served and delivered to the
addressee;
(3) By delivering a copy of the notice to
any official, employee or agent of a
corporation, partnership or business; or
( 4) If, after a due and diligent effort, the
person cannot be located, by posting a
copy of the written notice in a
prominent place upon the real property.
Section 9.60. - Removal or abatement of
nuisances.
Health and Sanitation 19
Upon investigation and discovery of any of
the conditions deemed a nuisance, the code
official or appointed designee shall make a
written report of his findings and may order that
appropriate corrective action be taken, including
the removal or abatement of such conditions by
the person creating the nuisance or by the owner,
occupant or other person in possession of the
premises on which the nuisance is located.
Prompt abatement is required within I 0 days
from the receipt of such written notice.
Section 9.61. - Chronic Violator
The Town may notify a chronic violator of the
Town's public nuisance ordinance that, ifthe
violator's property is found to be in violation of
the ordinance, the Town shall, without further
notice in the calendar year in which notice is
given, take action to remedy the violation, and
the expense of the action shall become a lien
upon the property and shall be collected as
unpaid taxes. The notice shall be sent by
certified mail. A chronic violator is a person
who owns property whereupon, in the previous
calendar year, the Town gave notice of violation
at least three times under any provision of the
public nuisance ordinance.
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 
160A-200.l
Section 9.62. - Removal or abatement of other
conditions.
Prior to ordering the removal of conditions
which do not threaten the public safety or pose a
general threat to the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town, the code
official or appointed designee shall first
determine that such conditions are visible from
adjacent property or from a nearby street or
highway and that the benefits of removing or
correcting the conditions outweigh the burdens
imposed upon the private property owner. Such
findings shall be based upon a balancing of the
monetary loss of the owner against the
corresponding gain to the public by promoting or
enhancing the community, neighborhood or area
appearance, including protection of property
values, indirect protection of public health and
safety, preservation of the character and integrity
of the community and the promotion of comfort
and quality oflife of area residents.
Section 9.63. - Appeal.
Within the time period stated in the notice to
abate, the owner or occupant of the property
where the nuisance exists may appeal the findings
of the code official to the Board of Adjustment
(BOA) by appearing before the BOA at the
appeal hearing date and time given on said notice.
The abatement of the nuisance will be postpone
by the code official until the final determination
for the appeal is made by the BOA. The BOA will
need to make a 4/5 finding to overturn the code
official's ruling. In the event no appeal is taken
within the time period stated to abate, the code
official may proceed to abate the nuisance.
Section 9.64. - Removal by Town.
If any person, having been ordered to abate
a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter, fails,
neglects or refuses to abate or remove the
condition constituting the nuisance within 15
days from receipt of such order, the designee may
cause such condition to be removed or otherwise
remedied by having employees of the Town or
contracted work/workers go upon such premises
and remove or otherwise abate such nuisance
under the supervision of an official or employee
designated by the code official. Any person who
has been ordered to abate a public nuisance may,
within the time allowed by this chapter, request
the Town, in writing, to remove such condition,
the cost of which shall be paid by the person
making such request. The Town may require such
requestor to deposit some or all of the estimated
cost of such removal prior to doing the work or
may require the requestor to execute an
agreement giving security for the payment of
such costs.
Section 9.64. - Removal by Town.
If any person, having been ordered to abate
a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter, fails,
neglects or refuses to abate or remove the
condition constituting the nuisance within 15
days from receipt of such order, the designee may
cause such condition to be removed or otherwise
remedied by having employees of the Town or
contracted work/workers go upon such premises
and remove or otherwise abate such nuisance
Health and Sanitation 20
under the supervision of an official or employee
designated by the code official. Any person who
has been ordered to abate a public nuisance may,
within the time allowed by this chapter, request
the Town, in writing, to remove such condition,
the cost of which shall be paid by the person
making such request. The Town may require such
requestor to deposit some or all of the estimated
cost of such removal prior to doing the work or
may require the requestor to execute an
agreement giving security for the payment of
such costs.
Section 9.65. - Emergency action.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section
1.09, the code official or appointed designee shall
have authority to summarily remove, abate or
remedy or cause to be removed, abated or
remedied, any condition that is dangerous or
prejudicial to the public health or public safety.
Section 9.66. - Penalties.
(a) Any violation of the articles of this
chapter shall subject the offender to a
civil penalty in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50.00). Violators shall be
issued a written citation which must be
paid within seventy-two (72) hours of
receipt. Such citation shall be served by
either first class mail, personal service
or posted at the front door. Any of these
methods of service shall be
conclusively presumed to be valid, and
no owner or occupant shall refuse
service of the citation.
(b) Each day's continuing violation shall
be considered a separate and distinct
offense.
(c) Notwithstanding subsection (a) above,
provisions of this chapter may be
enforced through equitable remedies
issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
( d) In addition to or in lieu of remedies
authorized in subsections (a) and (c),
violations of any articles of this chapter
may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor
or otherwise in accordance with G.S.
쬵60A-175.
Section 9.67. - Right of entry.
The code official or appointed designee is
hereby given full power and authority to enter
upon the premises upon which a nuisance is
found to exist under the provisions of this chapter
for the purpose of abating the nuisance as
provided in this chapter.
Section 9.68. - Cost of abatement declared
lien.
(a) The actual cost incurred by the Town
in removing or otherwise remedying a
public nuisance shall be charged to the
owner of such lot or parcel of land, and
it shall be the duty of the finance
department or public services
department to mail a statement of such
charges to the owner or other person in
possession of such premises, with
instructions that such charges are due
and payable within 30 days from the
receipt thereof.
(b) If charges for the removal or abatement
of a public nuisance are not paid within
30 days after the receipt of a statement
of charges, such charges shall become
a lien upon the land or premises where
the public nuisance existed and shall be
collected as unpaid taxes
( c) The procedure set forth in this chapter
shall be in addition to any other
remedies that may exist under law for
the abatement of public nuisances, and
this chapter shall not prevent the Town
from proceeding in a criminal action
against any person violating the
provisions of this chapter.
( d) All ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict with this ordinance are hereby
repealed. If any part of this ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid, such
adjudication shall apply only to such
part so adjudged and the remainder of
the ordinance shall be deemed valid
and effective.
State Law reference- Authority for abatement
of public nuisances, G.S.  160A-193.
Section 10.1 Bnsinesses and Trades 10-1
CHAPTER IO
Bnsinesses and Trades
ARTICLE!
Privilege Licenses
Section 10.1 through 10.9 reserved.
Section 10.10
Section 10.11
Section 10.12
Section 10.13
Section 10.14
Section 10.15
Section 10.16
Section 10.17
Section 10.18
Section 10.19
Section 10.20
Section 10.21
Section 10.22
ARTICLE2
Taxicabs
Definitions.
Application required.
Unlawful to operate without certificate.
Board issues certificates.
Duration of certificate.
Determination of convenience and
necessity.
Hearing, notices.
Burden of proof
Failure to begin operations.
Transfer.
Revocation of certificate.
Substitution of vehicles.
No person to hold more than one
certificate.
ARTICLE3
Sunday Regulations
Section 10.23 and 10.24 reserved.
ARTICLE4
Pool Room and Bowling Alleys
Section 10.25
Section 10.26
Section 10.27
Section 10.28
Section 10.29
Section 10.30
Section 10.31
Section 10.32
Section 10.32.1
Pennit required.
Application for permit.
When pennit refused.
Fann and content ofpennit.
Certain prohibitions to be observed by
permit holder and employees.
Rules for operation of pool rooms.
Permit holder responsible.
Revocation of permit
Arcades
ARTICLES
Peddling and Soliciting at Private Residences
Section 10.33
Section 10.34
Section 10.35
Section 10.36
Section 10.37
Section 10.38
Section 10.39
Section 10.40
Pennit required.
Application for permit
Issuance of permit, possession and
exhibition.
Appeal from the refusal to issue permit.
Duration and rene\val.
Transferability.
Revocation of permit.
Exceptions.
ARTICLE6
Beer and Wine Sales
Section 10.41 Sell of Beer, Wine and Mixed
Beverages.
Section 10.42 through 10.50 reserved.
ARTICLE7
Shows, Exhibits or Publications - Indecent or Illicit
Section 10.51
Section 10.61
Section 10.62
Section 10. 70
Unlawful to show, exhibit, sell or
distribute indecent or illicit material.
ARTICLES
Festivals and Events
The Hudson Butterfly Saturday Festival
Arts & Crafts Festival; activities
prohibited.
Other specially designated town or
HCDA sponsored events; activities
prohibited.
ARTICLE9
Gross Receipts Tax
An Ordinance Levying a tax on Gross
Receipts derived from Retail ShortTerm
Lease or Rental Vehicles.
Section I - Definitions.
Section 2 - Levy of Tax.
Section 3 -Collection of the Tax.
Section 4 - Report and Payment of Tax.
Section 5 - Taxpayer to Keep Records.
Section 6-Tax Collector to Provide Forms.
Section 7 - Situs.
Section 8 - Penalties and Remedies.
Section 9 - Administration.
Section 10- Severability.
Section 11- Authority.
Section 12 - Effective Date.
Section IO. I 0 Businesses and Trades 10-1. I
ARTICLE 2
Taxicabs
Section 10.10 Definitions.
(a) Persons. When used in this Article shall mean
and include both singular and plural, and shall also
mean and include persons, individuals, firms,
corporations, partnerships and associations.
(b) Taxicab. When used in this Article shall be
defined as any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer
passengers, operated upon any street or highway
on call or on demand, accepting or soliciting passengers
indiscriminately for hire between such
points along streets or highways as may be directed
by the passenger or passengers so being transported,
and shall not include motor vehicles or
motor vehicle carriers as defined in Sub-Section (k)
of Section 62-103 of the General Statutes of North
Carolina.
Section 10.11 Application required.
Every person desiring to operate a taxicab business
within the Town shall file on forms supplied
by the Town Clerk an application for the Certificate
of Convenience and Necessity.
Section 10.12 Unlawful to operate without certificate.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
taxicab business within the Town without first
having applied for and secured from the Board a
certificate of convenience and necessity.
Section 10.13 Board issues certificates.
The Town Board shall have power and it will be
its duty to order certain certificates issued or refuse
to issue certain certificates or to issue certificates
for partial exercise of the rights granted, only on
such terms and conditions as in its judgement the
public convenience and necessity may require.
Section 10.14 Duration of certificate.
A certificate shall constitute a franchise from
the Town for the operation of taxicabs within the
Town subject to the provisions of this Article for
one year, unless a shorter period of time is specified
in the certificate. Applications for renewal
shall be filed annually and hearing conducted as
herein provided.
Section 10.15 Determination of convenience and
necessity.
In determining whether the public convenience
and necessity require the franchising of such
Supp. No. 4, 2-79
Section 10.15 Businesses and Trades l 0-2
taxicab or taxicabs, the Town Board shall, among
other things, take into consideration the following
factors:
(a) Whether or not the public convenience and
necessity require such proposed or additional
taxicab service within the Town of Hudson.
(b) The financial responsibility of the applicant
and the likelihood of the proposed service
being permanent. responsible, and satisfactory.
(c) The number and condition of equipment.
(d} The schedule of proposed rates.
(e) The number of taxicabs now operated and
the demand for increased service, if any, and
whether or not the safe use of the streets by the
public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be
preserved, and whether or not adequate provision
has been made for off street parking of said
taxicabs.
(f) The experience of applicant in the taxicab
business.
(g) Such other relative facts as may be deemed
necessary and advisable.
Before making any decision with respect to the
issuance of a certificate of convenience and
necessity, the Town Board, or a committee
thereof, shall make a full and complete investigation
of all facts, if it so desires, subpoena
witnesses and utilize the services of the Chief of
Police or any other officer or employee of the
Town.
Section 10.16 Hearing, notices.
Each application for Certificate of Convenience
and Necessity shall be scheduled for a hearing not
later than thirty days after the same is filed, and
the applicant shall be notified by the Town Clerk
by mail to the business address set forth in the
application of the date and time of such hearing,
such notification to be sent at least ten days
before the date set for the hearing. The Town
Clerk shall also, within the same time, notify all
persons who at the time hold certificates of
convenience and necessity for the operation of
taxicabs within the municipality, of the date and
time for such hearing and the name of the
applicant. In addition, the Town Board shall have
the power to have published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation at least ten
days before the hearing, a notice setting forth the
name of the applicant and the date and time of
hearing. The cost of such publication to be paid
by the applicant.
Section 10.17 Burden of proof.
The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant
to establish the existence of public convenience
and necessity for the operation of the
taxicab or taxicabs specified in his application,
and all other facts required for the granting of a
certificate.
Section 10.18 Failure to begin operations.
If a certificate is granted to an applicant, and
said applicant shall fail, in accordance with the
provisions of the certificate, to begin operations
within sixty days after the date of said certificate,
then said certificate shall become null and void,
and no refund of any amount paid by the
applicant will be made by said Town.
Section 10.19 Transfer.
A certificate is not transferable without the
consent and approval of the Town Board. Applications
for a permit to transfer shall be filed in
the same manner as an application for a certificate
of convenience and necessity. The proceedings
upon such application for transfer shall be
the same as those prescribed for the issuance of a
certificate, except that the question of public
convenience and necessity need not be proved.
No certificate will be issued to any applicant
unless such applicant be the holder in due course
and for value of the title to such taxicab, and
only the holder of such certificate shall be permitted
to operate such taxicab business.
Section 10.20 Revocation of certificate.
The Town Board may at any time after a
public hearing revoke any certificate issued by
authority of this Article for any one, or more, of
the following causes:
(a} Failure to operate the taxicab specified in
the certificate in such manner as to serve the
public adequately and efficiently.
(b} Failure to maintain motor equipment in
good repair.
(c} Failure to carry liability insurance or bond
as required by law.
(d) Failure to pay to the Town taxes or license
fees imposed upon such taxicabs.
(e) Violation by the taxicab drivers of traffic
and safety ordinances, or state laws relating to
alcholic beverages, other drugs, firearms, gam bling
or prostitution.
(f) Failure to report accidents.
(g} Willful failure to comply with any provision
of this Article or ordinances or State Jaws
relating to the operation of taxicabs, whether
such ordinances and laws be now in force or hereafter
enacted into ordinance and into laws.
No certificate shall be revoked until the owner
has had at least five days' notice by personal
Section 10.20 Businesses and Trades
service or registered mail of the charges against
him, and of the time and place of the hearing. If,
after the hearing, it is found that the owner is
guilty of one or more of the offenses listed
herein, the Board shall have the power to revoke
the certificate, or to condition a revocation upon
compliance of its order within any time fixed by
it.
Section 10.21 Substitution of vehicles.
The person to whom a certificate has been
issued may, by proper endorsement thereon by
the Town Clerk, substitute another vehicle, or
other vehicles, for the vehicle or vehicles for
which certificate was granted. In such instance,
the liability insurance or bonds shall also be
transferred to such substitute vehicle or vehicles.
Section 10.22 No person to hold more than one
certificate.
The Town Board reserves the right to issue
only one such certificate to any one person, and
the person holding such certificate shall be required
to operate his taxicab himself and shall
have no power or authority by virtue of his certificate
to delegate the operation of such business
to any person.
ARTICLE3
Sunday Regulations
Section 10.23 and 10.24 reserved.
10-3
Section 10.25 Businesses and Trades 10-4
ARTICLE4
Pool Rooms and Bowling Alleys
Section I 0.25 Permit required.
No person shall maintain or operate any pool
or billiard table, bowling alley, or other table or
alley for any game or play for which a charge
is made, either directly or indirectly, unless he
shall first have secured a permit from the Board
to do so. Such permit shall expire on June 30
each year, and shall not be transferable.
Section 10.26 Application for permit.
Applications for such permit shall be made
upon forms provided by the Town Clerk, and
shall contain all information necessary for the
Board to act intelligently upon such applications.
Section 10.27 When permit refused.
The Board shall not issue such permit to any
person:
(a) Who has been convicted of unlawfully
selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; or
(b) Who is not a citizen and resident of North
Carolina; or
(c) Who is of immoral character; or
(d) Who is a habitual user of intoxicating
liquor or narcotic drugs.
Section 10.28 Form and content of permit.
Every permit issued pursuant to this Article
shall specify the premises for which it is issued,
the number of tables or alleys to be operated
thereunder, the name of the owner or operator,
and the dates upon which the permit begins and
shall expire. Such permit shall be posted in a
prominent place on the premises at all times.
Section 10.29 Certain prohibitions to be observed
by permit holder and
employees.
Permit holders under this Article shall not,
and neither shall their employees:
(a) Permit any gambling on the premises at
any time; nor the sale or use of any racing, football
or other parlay cards or gambling boards.
(b) Permit the premises to become disorderly;
or pennit any profane, obscene or indecent
language thereon.
(c) Permit any intoxicating liquors or narcotic
drugs to be sold or kept or consumed on
the premises.
(d) Permit any person under the age of sixteen
years to enter or remain upon the premises, unless
such person be accompanied by his parent or
guardian.
(e) Employ in carrying on the business any
person who has been convicted of unlawfully
selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs.
(f) Permit any kee!ey board, keno board. or
any other such board or device to be attached
to or placed upon any pool or billiard tables.
(g) Permit any illegal or immoral act or acts.
Section 10.30 Rules for operation of pool
rooms.
The following rules shall be observed by all
operators of pool rooms within the Town.
(a) All pool rooms shall close by I o'clock
A. M. each morning, Monday through Friday and
12 o'clock midnight on Saturdays and no person
other than the owner, operator or employees shall
be permitted on the premises from that hour until
7 o'clock a.m. the following morning.
(b) No play on any table shall be allowed during
the times when pool rooms are required by
this Article to remain closed.
(c) Pool rooms shall remain closed on Sundays.
(d) All pool rooms shall be operated only on
the ground floor of a building, and clear glass
windows shall be in those parts of the building
facing any street, so that a clear view inside may
be had from the street.
(e) No screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or
other obstructions shall be placed between the
entrance to the room where pool is played and
the rear wall of such room. A clear view of the
interior from the entrance to the rear of the room
must be maintained at all times.
(f) No partitions forming rooms, stalls or
other enclosures where the public congregate shall
be permitted. Provided, this shall not be construed
so as to prohibit the maintenance of
closets used exclusively for storage purposes, or
of toilets.
(g) There shall not be permitted or maintained
any open or secret connections through doors,
windows, trap doors, hidden doors, panels, stairways,
or other devices with any place where
gambling is conducted or where persons meet or
congregate for immoral purposes.
Section 10. 31 Permit holder responsible.
The acts and conduct of the agents and employees
of the permit holder in the conduct of
the business shall be deemed to be the acts
and conduct of the permit holder.
.Business and Trades
Section 10.32 Revocation of permit.
A second conviction of a permit holder or his
agent or employee, for any violation of any
provision of this Article shall by operation oflaw
constitute an automatic revocation of the permit of
such permit holder. In addition, the Board may at
any time, for cause, and after a hearing, of which
such permit holder shall be given such reasonable
notice as the Board may direct, revoke any permit
issues pursuant to this Article.
Section 10.32. l Arcades (Adopted 212000)
Definition - An arcade shall be defined as an area
that allows no more than two (2) pool tables and is
operated and intended for occupancy by children
and other youth. Permitted items in an Arcade may
include mechanical and electrical games, air
hockey, table tennis, foosball, and other similar
devices intended for persons under twenty-one (21)
years of age.
Permit holders under this Article shall not, and
neither shall their employees:
A) Permit any gambling on the premises
at any time; nor the sale or use of any
racing, football or other parlay cards
or gambling boards.
B) Permitthe premises to become
disorderly; or permit any profane,
obscene or indecent language thereon.
C) Permit any intoxication liquors or
narcotic drugs to be sold or kept or
consumed on the premises. Further,
no intoxicating liquors or illegal
narcotic drugs are to be possessed or
consumed at the location by
customers of the establishment.
The following conditions will apply to the arcade
owner:
A) No person shall be permitted to carry
on the business of an Arcade who has
been convicted of unlawfully selling
intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs.
B) There shall be no keeley boards, keno
boards, or any other such board or
device to be attached to or placed
upon any pool or billiard tables.
10.4-1
C) There shall be no illegal acts.
D) The applicant is required to apply for
a permit with the Chief of Police in
the same process as issued by the
Town Clerk in Section 10.26, stating
that they are acquainted with and
have knowledge of the restrictions
and conditions herein set forth, and
will, in the operation of the arcade,
fully and completely abide by and
obey the restrictions and conditions in
their entirety.
E) All property owners within one
hundred (100) feet of the proposed
location shall be notified following
application by the Town Manager or
by the Town Manager's designee.
F) Separate restroom facilities shall be
provided for men and women.
G) Plate Glass windows shall be
installed to those parts of newly
constructed buildings facing any
street, so that a clear view of the
interior may be had from the street.
H) Shall not violate the County or Town
noise ordinance.
I) A manager of at least the age of
twenty-one (21) be on the premises at
all times.
J) That a yearly permit be granted
through a Conditional Use by the
Board of Commissioners for
reinstatement upon review and a
report from Town Manager and Chief
of Police.
K) That the operator of the Arcade shall
be closed at all times between the
hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
all days of the week, and not be open
before 12:00 p.m. on Sundays.
L) That the Hudson Police Department
be permitted to enter the
establishment for administrative
inspection purposes to ensure the
compliance with these regulations.
Businesses and Trades 10.5
ARTICLES
Peddling and Soliciting at Private Residences
Section 10.33 Permit reqnired.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation, without fir.;t obtaining a permit as
hereinafter provided, to go in or upon or permit
its representatives to go in or upon any private
residence or premises in the Town as solicitor,
peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transit
vendor of merchandise, not having been requested
or invited so to do by the occupants of said
private residence or having secured their permission
so to do for the purpose of soliciting
orders for the sale of goods, wares, periodicals or
merchandise, or for the purpose of distributing,
disposing of, peddling or hawking the same ..
Section 10.34 Application for permit.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to
engage in the business or practices referred to in 
Section 10.33 hereof shall f'tle with the Town
Clerk an application for a permit to do so. The
application shall be in writing, and shall show
the applicant's name, age, current address and
his place of residence and nature of employment
during the preceding year, the address and nature
of business of his employer or principal,
if any, and shall specify in detail the goods,
wares, periodicals or other merchandise to be
offered for sale. The applicant shall also furnish,
at the time of filing his application, a photograph
made within one year of the date of the
application. The applicant shall also give to the
Town Clerk, at the time of filing of the application
such other information requested as may
be of assistance in passing upon the qualifications
of the applicant. If the application is filed
by an employer there shall also be filed a separate
application for each solicitor giving the information
set forth above as to the qualifications
of the solicitor and the same shall be signed
and sworn to by each solicitor and a separate 
permit shall be issued for each applicant.
Section 10.35 Issuance of permit, p06Se8Sion and
exhibition.
If, upon investigation reasonably made, the
Town Clerk ascertains and determines that the
applicant for a permit, as herein required, is a
person of good moral character and proposes to
engage in a lawful commercial or professional
enterprise during hours that will not unduly
disturb the occupants of residences, the Town
Clerk shall issue to him a permit to engage in
such business which p톏rmit shall contain substantially
the information set forth, in his application
and to which shall be attached the applicant's
photograph. Such permit shall be carried at all
times by the applicant to whom issued when
soliciting or canvassing in the Town and shall
be exhibited by such applicant whenever requested
to do so by any police officer or any
person solicited. A record of such permit shall
be kept on file in the Town hall. If the Town
Clerk shall, upon investigation, determine that
the applicant is not a person of good moral
character and that he does not propose to engage
in a lawful commercial or professional enterprise
during hours reasonably convernent for the
occupants of residences, he shall refuse to issue
the said permit.
Section 10.36 Appeal from the refusal to issue
pennit.
Upon the refusal of the Town Clerk to grant
a .Permit as hereinbefore required, the applicant
thereafter may appeal to the Board and if the
Board shall be satisfied that the applicant and his
proposed business and hours of work meet the
requirements herein set forth it shall direct the
Town Clerk to issue the said permit, otherwise, .
the same shall be refused.
Section 10.37 Duration and renewal.
The Town Clerk shall determine from the
application and from such facts as may be
developed in connection with such application
the period for which such permit shall be approved
and granted, provided, however, that such
period shall in no case exceed twelve calendar
months. Upon the expiration .of the permit the
Town Clerk may, upon application filed in the
form and giving the information required in the
original application, renew and extend such
permit for additional periods not to exceed
twelve calendar months for any period.
Section 10.38 Transferability.
No permit approved and issued as herein
provided shall be transferable.
Section 10.39 Revocation of pennit.
If it should thereafter appear that the facts set
forth in the applicant's application are untrue or
if the applicant is thereafter convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude, or if he engages in
business other than as set forth in his permit or
fails to utilize the same in good faith and for the
purpose issued, the said permit shall be revoked
by the Town Clerk and from said revocation
Businesses and Trades
the applicant may, if he desires, appeal to the
Board.
Section 10 .40 Exceptions.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply t-0
the sale or solicitation of farm or dairy products
by the producer or to organizations or representatives
of organizations organized and operated
exclusively for educational, benevo!en t, religious,
fraternal, charitable or civic purposes and not
operating for profit and where such solicitation or
sales are made without remuneration to the
solicitor.
10.6
Section 10.41 Bnsinesses and Trades
ARTICLE6
Beer and Wine Sales
Section 10.41 Sell of Beer, Wine and
Mixed Beverages
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
establishment or corporation to sell alcohol
within the corporate limits of the Town, without
a valid Alcohol Beverage Control Commission
(ABC) permit issued by the Alcohol Law
Enforcement (ALE) Branch of the Department
of Public Safety.
(Amended Ord. of 12/15/2015)
Section 10.42 through 10.50 reserved.
ARTICLE7
Shows, Exhibits or Publications -
Indecent or Illicit
Section 10.51 Unlawful to show, exhibit,
sell or distribute indecent
or illicit material.
(a) No show or exhibit which offends public
decency or morals shall be shown or exhibited
in the Town, nor shall any publication depicting
illicit sexual conduct or which otherwise
offends the public decency or morality be
shown, exhibited, sold, or distributed in the
Town.
(b) Any person violating this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine
of not more than $500 or imprisoned for a
period not to exceed 30 days or both. (Ord. of
216179)
10-7
Festivals and Events
Article 8
Businf'Jlses and Trades 10.8
FESTIVALS AND EVENTS
(Adopted 8-17-2010)
Sec. 10-61. The Hudson Butterfly Saturday
Festival Arts & Crafts Festival; activities
prohibited.
(a) Purpose. The Hudson Butterfly
Saturday Festival Arts & Crafts Festival (hereafter
referred to as "The Butterfly Saturday Festival") is
an event of the Town of Hudson that attracts a large
number of people and which often continues for a
longer time period than most organized events. Due
to the congestion and the length of Butterfly
Festival, the town enacts this article to promote the
public health, safety and welfare, and to provide
orderly recreation at Butterfly Festival.
Additionally, the town desires to permit and
regulate the vendors appearing at the events to
protect the public safety. The Butterfly Saturday
Festiva.l frequently features organized activities live . ' entertamment, food concessions and many
authorized exhibitors who display and offer for sale
artwork, crafts, food and related items. The Hudson
Community Development Association (hereafter
referred to as "HCDA") issues permits to persons
desiring to place or maintain booths or concession
stands at The Butterfly Saturday Festival. The
exhibition or offering for sale of merchandise or
food and beverages by unauthorized vendors poses a
threat to the public safety and welfare, interferes
with planned traffic flow and the maintenance of
order, frequently violates the town zoning ordinance
and detracts from the authorized exhibits and
concessions.
(b) Applicability. This section shall
apply from 6:00 a.m. on the first day of The
Butterfly Saturday Festival through 12:00 midnight
on the last day of The Butterfly Saturday Festival, or
the rain dates, if necessary, to cover all of the period
of time encompassed by the event.
The area and boundaries of The Butterfly
Saturday Festival to which these provisions shall be
made to apply shall be determined by the HCDA
with the approval of the town manager or his or her
designee, and shall include any public street,
sidewalk or other publicly owned area that is within
or constitutes the boundary of that event.
( c) Unlawful to operate bicycle or other
wheeled vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a bicycle, tricycle, unicycle, moped,
skateboard or any other wheeled vehicle, roller
skates or roller blades (all hereafter referred to as
"wheeled vehicle") on or within the boundaries of
The.Butterfly Saturday Festival. For purposes of this
sectlon, "operate" shall mean the use, putting into
action, or causing to function of a wheeled vehicle
by a person mounted thereon. This section shall not
appl_Y to wheelchairs, baby strollers, or baby
carnages.
( d) Unlawful to throw balls, shoot
projectiles, etc. except as otherwise permitted herein
as part of a permitted or approved activity. It shall
be unlawful for any person to shoot projectiles, toss
or throw a ball, Frisbee, model airplane or similar
object on or within the boundaries of The Butterfly
Saturday Festival.
( e) Unlawful to use fireworks. It shall
be unlawful for any person to purchase, sell, deal in,
transport, possess, receive, use or cause to be used or
discharged, any fireworks on or within the
boundaries of The Butterfly Saturday Festival. For
the purpose of this section, "fireworks" shall include
all devices that are legal or illegal in the State of
North Carolina., including items that explode and
non-exploding items that produce heat, smoke,
noise, light or movement. This section shall not
apply to fireworks displays conducted by a licensed
professional pyrotechnician contracted by the town
or the HCDA as part of The Butterfly Saturday
Festival.
(f) Unlawful to conduct outside sales. It
shall be unlawful for any person or business other
than Town ofHndson existing merchants to sell any
merchandise or other item, any service, food or
beverage from any outside location (hereafter
referred to as "outside sales") on public property in
or within five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries
of The Butterfly Saturday Festival, without the
issuance of a permit or permission by the Town of
Hudson or the HCDA.
(g) Failure to cease activities. It shall
be unlawful for a person on or within the boundaries
of The Butterfly Saturday Festival to fail to obey the
Festivals and Events
command of a law enforcement officer to:
(1) Cease the operation of a wheeled
vehicle;
(2) Cease the shooting or throwing of a
ball, Frisbee, model plane, or other
projectile; or
(3) Cease exhibiting, displaying,
offering for sale or selling any
merchandise, service, food or
beverage, on public property in or
within five hundred ( 5 00) feet of the
boundaries of The Butterfly
Saturday Festival without a valid
permit or written permission from
the Town of Hudson ortheHCDA.
(h) Exception. This section shall not
apply to the operation of a wheelchair for the benefit
of the handicapped or to the operation of any
wheeled vehicle or the throwing or tossing of any
ball, Frisbee or other object ifthe otherwise
prohibited activity is part of an authorized exhibit,
activity or display. The director of the Hudson
Community Development Association or his or her
designee or the town manager or his or her designee
as it relates to The Butterfly Saturday Festival shall
have the authority to specify the conditions under
which wheeled vehicles may be operated and balls,
Frisbees, or objects may be thrown or tossed for the
protection of the public.
(i) Animals. Pursuant to section 3-4 of
the Town Code, which requires animal owners to
keep their dog or cat under restraint, animals, except
leashed dogs, or cats or dogs carried by their owners,
are prohibited at The Butterfly Saturday Festival.
This section shall not apply to animals in a petting
zoo or animal rides if the otherwise prohibited
animals are part of an authorized exhibit, activity or
display. Dogs or cats designated under section 11.18
of the Town Code as "fierce, dangerous, or vicious"
are not permitted within the boundaries -0fthe
festival unless they are securely muzzled.
(j) Enforcement. A violation of this
article is a misdemeanor.
10.8
Sec. 10-62. Other specially designated town or
HCDA sponsored events; activities prohibited.
(a) Purpose. Specially designated Town
of Hudson or HCDA sponsored parades, concerts
and festivals and events of the Town of Hudson
(hereafter jointly referenced as "town events") are
events that attract a large number of people and
which continue for variable time periods. Due to the
congestion and the duration of such events, the town
enacts this article to promote the public health,
safety and welfare, and to provide orderly recreation
at town events to which these provisions are made t-0
apply.
Additionally, the town desires to permit and
regulate the vendors appearing at the events to
protect the public safety. Town events frequently
feature organized activities, live entertainment, food
concessions and many authorized exhibitors who
display and offer for sale artwork, crafts, food and
related items. The HCDA or the appropriate town
department, depending on the event, issues permits
to persons desiring to place or maintain booths or
concession stands and the Town of Hudson issues
itinerant business licenses to peddlers or roving-type
vendors. The exhibition or offering for sale of
merchandise or food and beverages by unauthorized
vendors poses a threat to the public safety and
welfare, interferes with planned traffic flow and the
maintenance of order, frequently violates the town
zoning code and detracts from the authorized
exhibits and concessions.
(b) Applicability. This section shall
apply to town events other than The Butterfly
Saturday Festival.
This section shall apply during the times
listed on an approved Town of Hudson application
permit for parades, picket lines and group
demonstrations, or on the rain dates, if necessary, to
cover all of the period -0f time encompassed by the
event, provided that no event shall extend beyond
12:00 midnight without the approval of the town
council.
The area and boundaries of any town event
to which these provisions shall be made to apply
shall be determined by the appropriate town
Festivals and Events
department or the downtown business association as
designated by the town manager or his or her
designee, depending on the event, and shall include
any public street, sidewalk or other publicly owned
area that is within or constitutes the boundary of that
event.
( c) Unlawfal to operate bicycle or other
wheeled vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a bicycle, tricycle, unicycle, moped,
skateboard or any other wheeled vehicle, roller
skates or roller blades (all hereafter referred to as
"wheeled vehicle") on or within the boundaries of
any town event to which these provisions have been
made to apply. For purposes of this section,
"operate" shall mean the use, putting into action, or
causing to function of a wheeled vehicle by a person
mounted thereon. This section shall not apply to
wheelchairs, baby strollers, or baby carriages.
( d) Unlawfal to throw balls, shoot
projectiles, etc. except as otherwise permitted herein
as part of a permitted or approved activity. It shall
be unlawful for any person to shoot projectiles, toss
or throw a ball, Frisbee, model airplane or similar
object on or within the boundaries of any town event
to which these provisions have been made to apply.
( e) Unlawfal to use fireworks. It shall
be unlawful for any person to purchase, sell, deal in,
transport, possess, receive, use or cause to be used or
discharged, any frreworks on or within the
boundaries of any town event. For the purpose of
this section, "fireworks" shall include all devices that
are legal or illegal in the State of North Carolina,
including items that explode and non-exploding
items that produce heat, smoke, noise, light or
movement. This section shall not apply to fireworks
displays conducted by a licensed professional
pyrotechnician contracted by the town or the HCDA
as part of a town event.
(f) Unlawfal to conduct outside sales. It
shall be unlawful for any person or business other
than Town of Hudson existing merchants to exhibit,
display, offer for sale or to sell any merchandise or
other item, any service, food or beverage from any
outside location (hereafter referred to as "outside
sales") on public property in or within five hundred
(500) feet of the boundaries of a town event, without
the issuance of a permit or permission by the
10.8
Hudson Community Development Association. Any
person issued a permit to conduct outside sales shall
display the permit issued by the Town of Hudson in
a conspicuous place at the location of the outside
sales.
(g) Town exhibit permits. Upon the
request of a law enforcement officer, a town
employee or a member of the Hudson Community
Development Association, any person shall produce
or exhibit any permit from the HCDA or the Town
of Hudson for outside sales or permitted activities at
a town event so that the town may ensure
compliance with this section. The permit may
include limits on hours of display issued by the
HCDA and the Town of Hudson.
(h) Failure to cease activities. It shall
be unlawful for a person on or within the boundaries
of a town event to which these provisions have been
made to apply, to fail to obey the command of a law
enforcement officer to:
(1) Cease the operation of a wheeled
vehicle;
(2) Cease the shooting or throwing of a
ball, Frisbee, model plane, or other
projectile; or
(3) Cease exhibiting, displaying,
offering for sale or selling any
merchandise, service, food or
beverage, on public property in or
within five hundred (500) feet of the
boundaries of the town event
without a valid permit or written
permission from the HCDA or the
Town of Hudson.
(i) Exception. This section shall not
apply to the operation of a wheelchair for the benefit
of the handicapped or to the operation of any
wheeled vehicle or the throwing or tossing of any
ball, Frisbee or other object if the otherwise
prohibited activity is part of an authorized exhibit,
activity or display. The director of the HCDA or his
or her designee or the town manager or his or her
designee as it relates to the town event shall have the
authority to specify the conditions under which
wheeled vehicles may be operated and balls,
Festivals and Events
Frisbees, or objects may be thrown or tossed for the
protection of the public.
(j) Animals at town events. Pursuant to
section 3-4 of the Town Code, which requires
animal owners to keep their dog or cat under
restraint, animals, except leashed dogs, or cats or
dogs carried by their owners, are prohibited at town
events. This section shall not apply to animals in a
petting zoo or animal rides if the otherwise
prohibited animals are part of an authorized exhibit,
activity or display. Dogs or cats designated under
section 11.18 of the Town Code as "fierce,
dangerous, or vicious" are not permitted within the
boundaries of the festival unless 1hey are securely
muzzled.
(k) Enforcement. A violation of this
article is a misdemeanor.
10.8
Gross Receipts Tax
Businesses and Tllldes
Article9
10.70 AN ORDINANCE
LEVYING A TAX ON GROSS
RECEIPITS DERIVED FROM
RETAIL SHORT-TERM LEASE OR
RENTAL OF VEIDCLES
(Adopted 711812000)
WHEREAS, the North Carolina
General Assembly has ratified Senate
Bill 1076, which has been designated as
Session Law 2000-2 [the "Act"] and
made effective for taxable years
beginning on or after July 1, 2000; and,
WHEREAS, the Act repealed the
property tax on certain vehicles leased or
rented under retail short-term leases or
rentals and authorized municipalities to
replace the lost tax revenue through
enactment of a local tax on gross
receipts derived from retail short-term
leases or rentals.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT
ORDAINED by the Board of
Commissioners of the Town of Hudson,
North Carolina that:
Section 1. Definitions. In
addition to the common meanings of
words, the following definitions shall be
applicable herein:
(a) "Customer" shall mean
any person that leases or rents a vehicle
on a short-term lease or rental basis.
(b) "General Statutes" shall
refer to the North Carolina General
Statutes and any reference to a particular
section thereof shall include the same as
may be from time to time amended,
modified, supplemented, revised or
superseded.
( c) "Gross receipts" shall
mean the amount that is or would be
reported as gross receipts on a business's
state income tax return, or on the federal
income tax return filed with the state
income tax return if the state return does
not separately state gross receipts for the
most recently completed tax year. Taxes
collected hereunder are not subject to the
tax herein imposed and are not included
in gross receipts.
( d) "Lease or rental" shall
mean a transfer, for consideration, of the
use but not the ownership of property to
another for a period of time. [G.S. 105-
164.3(7a)]
(e) "Long-term lease or
rental" shall mean a lease or rental made
under a written agreement to lease or
rent property to the same person for a
period of at least three hundred sixtyfive
(365) continuous days. [G.S. 105-
187.1(3)]
(f) "Person" shall mean any
individual, trustee, executor, other
fiduciary, corporation, unincorporated
association, partnership, sole
proprietorship, company, firm, or other
legal entity.
(g) "Short-Term lease or
rental" shall mean any lease or rental of
a vehicle that is not a long-term lease or
rental. [G.S. 160A-215.l(e)(2) and G.S.
105-187.1(4)]
(h) "Tax Collector" shall
refer to that individual appointed by the
governing body pursuant to (G.S. 105-
349)(the provisions of the municipal
charter), to collect taxes on behalf of the
Town of Hudson and any other person
1D.9
Gross Receipts Tax
authorized to carry out the duties and
functions of such individual.
(i) "Taxpayer" means any
person liable for the taxes
imposed by this
Ordinance.
G) "Vehicle" shall mean any
of the following:
(i) a motor vehicle of
the private passenger
type, including a
passenger van, DllIUVan,
or sport utility vehicle.
(ii) a motor vehicle of
the cargo type, including
a cargo van, pickup truck,
or truck with a gross
vehicle weight of 26,000
pounds or less used
predominantly in the
transportation of property
for other than commercial
freight, and that does not
require the operator to
possess a commercial
drivers license.
(iii) a trailer or
semitrailer with a gross
vehicle weight of 6,000
pounds or less. [G.S.
160A-215.l(e)(l)]
Section 2. Levv of Tax. A tax
is hereby imposed and levied in an
amount equal to one and one-half
percent (1.5%) of the gross receipts
derived from the short-term lease or
rental of vehicles at retail to the general
public. This tax on gross receipts is in
addition to the privilege taxes authorized
by G.S. 160A-21 l.
Section 3. Collection of the Tax.
Every person engaged in the business of
the short-term lease or rental of vehicles
at retail to the general public shall
collect at the time of the lease or rental
the tax herein levied, place the tax so
collected in a segregated account, and
thereafter remit such tax to the Tax
Collector in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance. The
taxpayer shall include a provision in
each retail short-term lease or rental
agreement stating that the percentage
amount enacted by this Ordinance of the
total lease or rental price, excluding
sales tax, is being charged as a tax on
gross receipts. The amount of the tax
shall be stated separately from the lease
or rental and shown separately on the
taxpayer's records. The tax shall be paid
by the customer to the taxpayer as
trustee for and on account of the Town
of Hudson. The taxpayer shall be liable
for the collection thereof and for its
payment to the Tax Collector and the
taxpayer's failure to charge or to collect
said tax from the customer shall not
affect such liability.
Section 4. Report and Payment
of Tax. Taxes levied under this
Ordinance are due and payable when a
return is required to be filed. Every
taxpayer shall, within the time specified,
submit a return to the Tax Collector on
the form prescribed by the Tax
Collector. A return must be signed by
the taxpayer or the taxpayer's agent.
Returns of taxpayers are due to the Tax
Collector each month on or before the
fifteenth (15th) day of the month
following the month in which the tax
accrues. As provided in G.S. 160A-
208.l, a return shall not be considered a
public record and information contained
fU
Gross Receipts Tax
in a return may be disclosed only in
accordance therewith.
Section 5. Taxpayer to Keep
Records. The taxpayer shall keep and
preserve suitable records of the gross
receipts received by such taxpayer in the
conduct of business and such other
books or accounts as may be necessary
to determine the amount of the tax for
which such taxpayer is liable under the
provisions ofthis Ordinance. It shall be
the duty of the taxpayer to keep and
preserve for a period of three years all
such records of gross receipts and other
books and accounts described. All
records, books and accounts herein
described shall be open for examination
at all reasonable hours during the day by
the Tax Collector or his duly authorized
agent.
Section 6. Tax Collector to
Provide Forms. The Tax Collector shall
design, prepare, print and make available
to all taxpayers operating within the
municipal boundaries of the Town of
Hudson forms and instructions for filing
returns to insure a full collection of and
an accounting for taxes due. The failure
of any taxpayer to obtain or receive
forms shall not relieve such taxpayer
from the payment of the tax at the time
and in the manner provided.
Section 7. Situs. The transaction
giving rise to the tax herein levied shall
be deemed to have occurred at the
location of the entity from which the
customer takes delivery of the vehicle.
[G.S. 160A-215.l(b)]
Section 8. Penalties and
Remedies. The provisions with respect
to remedies and penalties applicable to
Subchapter VIII (Local Government
Sales and Use Tax) of Chapter 105 of
the General Statutes, as contained in
Article 5 and Article 9, Subchapter 1,
Chapter I 05 thereof, shall be applicable
in like manner to the tax authorized to be
levied and collected under this
Ordinance, to the extent that the same
are not inconsistent with the provisions
hereof. The governing body of the
Town of Hudson may exercise any
power the Secretary of Revenue may
exercise in collecting sales and use
taxes. [G.S. 160A-215.l(f)]
Section 9. Administration. In
addition to the provisions herein, the
levy and collection of the taxes herein
imposed shall be otherwise administered
in the same manner as the Sales and Use
Tax as provided in Article 5, Subchapter
1, Chapter 105 of the General Statutes.
[G.S. 160A-215.l(d)]
Section I 0. Severabilitv. If any
section, clause, or provision of this
Ordinance shall be found to be invalid,
the validity of the remaining sections,
clauses or provisions shall not be
affected thereby.
Section 11. Authoritv. This
Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the
provisions of
G.S. 160A-215.1.
Section 12. Effective Date. This
Ordinance and the taxes thereby levied
and imposed shall become effective July
1, 2000.
Adopted this the 18th day of July,
2000.
1U
Gross Receipts Tax
Ordinance Notes:
Note: The General Assembly enacted
Session Law 2000-2 entitled "An Act to
Repeal the Property Tax on Certain
Vehicles Leased or Rented Under Retail
Short-Term Leases or Rentals and to
Replace the Tax Revenue with a Local
Tax on Gross Receipts Derived from
Retail Short-Term Leases or Rentals"
(the "Act"). The Act designates certain
vehicles offered at retail for short-term
lease or rental as property classified and
excluded from the tax base. It also
amends G.S. Chapter 160A by adding a
new section, 160A-215.l, which
authorizes municipalities to levy a gross
receipts tax on short-term lease or rentals
of vehicles.
The Act provides that the gross receipts
tax levied by a municipality may not
exceed one and one-half percent (1.5%).
1U
Adopted 7 /18/2000
Section 11.1 Disorderly Conduct and Public Nuisances 11-1
Chapter 11
Disorderly Conduct and Public Nuisances
Section 11.1
Section 11.2
Section 11.3
Section 11.4
Section 11.5
Section 11.6
Section 11. 7
Section 11.8
Section 11.9
Section l I.JO
Section 11.11
Sectionll.11-1
Section 11.12
Section 11.13
Section 11.14
Section 11.15
Section 11.16
Section 11.16-1
Section 11.16-2
Section 11.17
Section 11.18
Section 11.20
Section 11.21
Section 11.22
Section 11.23
Section 11.24
Section 11.25
Section 11.26
Section 11.27
Section 11.28
Section 11.29
Section 1 J.30
ARTICLEl
Disorderly Conduct
General.
Vagrants.
House of ill fame.
Profimity and boisterous conduct.
Public drunkenness.
Drinking in public.
Dance balls.
Street lights.
ARTICLE2
General Nuisances
Unnecessary noises prohibited.
Noises expressly probtoited.
Firearms regulated.
Carrying concealed handguns
prohibited on Town property.
Posting bills- other advertising.
Fire bombs prohibited.
Same; enforcement.
ARTICLE3
Animals
Animals at large.
Nuisance.
Running on owner's premises.
Control and penalty.
Bird sanctuary.
Caldwell Co. Animal Control Ord.
ARTICLE4
Abandoned Vehicles
Removal of vehicles; Sbandoned motor
vebicle defined.
Same; junked motor vehicle defined.
Same; duty of owner to remove.
Same; removal by Town.
Same; costs of removal; notice to
owner.
Same, sale of abandoned motor
vehicles.
Same; disposition of proceeds of sale.
Same; disposition ofjnnked motor
vehicles.
Same; disposition of unidentified
vehicles.
Same; disposition of proceeds of sale.
Same; immunity.
ARTICLEl
Disorderly Conduct
Section 11.1 General.
No occupant of any house whether residence or
business shall permit same to be kept in an indecent
and offensive or disorderly manner or permit loafers
or idle persons to congregate therein or in front of
same to the annoyance of persons passing by or living
in the vicinity.
Section 11.2 Vagrants.
Any and all tramps, vagrants, persons under
suspicion, who shall be found with no visible means
of snpport, either male or female, shall not be allowed
on the streets or other public places.
Section 11.3 House of ill fame.
No person shall keep a house or other place of ill
fame in the Town and no person shall knowingly rent
any house to be used as a house of ill fume. All adult
persons living in such house shall be considered as
keepers thereof and be snbject to the penalties of this
Code.
Section 11.4 Profanity and boisterous conduct
It shall be unlawful for any person to use loud and
boisterous language so as to become a nuisance or use
any form of profanity or indecent language on the
street or in a gathering or audience or assembly, or in
any public place whatsoever, or to indecently expose
themselves w:ithin the corporate limits.
Section 11.S Public drunkenness.
It shall be unlawful for any intoxicated person to be
on or upon any public street or other public place.
Section 11.6 Consumption or possession of alcohol
on the public streets and sidewalks of the Town or
in public buildings or Town maintained and
operated parks and recreation facilities.
a) It shall be unlawful for a person to consume
a malt beverage or unfortified wine on the
public streets or sidewalks, owned, occupied
or controlled by the Town.
b) It shall be unlawful for a person to possess an
open container of malt beverage or
unfortified wine on the public streets or
sidewalks owned, occupied or controlled by
the Town.
c) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess
or consume malt beverages or unfortified
wine on public streets, sidewalks, alleys or
parking lots which are closed to regular
traffic for special events.
d) For the purpose of this section, the term
"open container'' means a container w:ith a _
seal that has been broken or a container other
than the manufucturer's unopened original
Section 11.1 Disorderly Conduct and Public Nuisances 11-2
container. The terms "malt beverages" and
"unfortified wine" are defined in G. S. l 8B-
10 l.
e) For the purpose of this section, alcohol
consumption is allowed at the Hudson
Uptown Building (HUB) so Jong as proper
ABC permits are obtained.
f) The Board of Commissioners may adopt a
resolution maldng other provisions for the
possession and consnmption of malt
beverages and/or unfortified wine at special
events of the Town or at special community
festivals. Any resolutions that may be
adopted sball provide fur the specific times,
dates and geographical limitations of the
special event or festival.
g) Violations of subsections (a), (b) and (c) of
this section shall be misdemeanors,
punishable upon conviction in accordance
with Section 1.5. (Amended 7/1812017)
Section 11.7 Dance halls.
Any person, or persons, operating a hall for the
purpose of holding public dances and charging
admission for personal gain, or profit, in the Town
sball secure a permit from the Town Clerk at a cost of
seventy-five dollars ($75.00), which shall expire after
twenty-four hours from time of purchase. When such
person or persons are known to allow or condone the
use of alcoholic beverages, littering of the streets or
premises adjacent to the hall, boisterous or disorderly
conduct on the premises or otherwise disturbing the
peace and well-being of the citizens of Hudson, shall
be refused renewal of such permit at the discretion of
the Town Clerk. Any person or persons conducting
dances and charging admission for the benefit of clubs,
civic organizations, schools or other groups interested
in the public welfare, will not be required to pay the
seventy-five ($75.00) fee as set out above, but will be
subject to all restrictions as outlined. (Ord. of
11/16/67)
Section 11.8 Street Lights
It shall be unlawful for any person to break or
damage street lights. Any person violating this
Section sball be fined notto exceed twenty-five dollars
($25.00) or imprisoned for not exceeding thirty days.
It sball be unlawful for any person to iajure or
damage any public proper!J in the Town. Any person
violating this section will be fined not to exceed fifty
($50.00) or imprisoned for not to exceed thirty day.
(Ord. of 11/5/57)
ARTICLEZ
General Nuisances
Seetion 11.9 Unnecessary noises prohibited.
It shall be wtlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to create or assist in creating, permit,
continue, or permit the continuance of any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise
in the Town. Noise of such character, intensity and
duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any
individual is proh:t"bited.
Sectiou 11.10 Noises expressly prohibited.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation
of this Section, but said euumeration shall not be
deemed to be exclusive, namely;
a) The sounding of any horn or signal device on
any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle while not in motion, except as a
danger signal if another vehicle is
approaching appareutly out of control, or if in
motiou only as a danger signal after or as
brakes are being applied and deceleration of
the vehicle is intended; the creation by means
of any such signal device of any
unreasonably loud or barsh sound; and the
sounding of such device for an unnecessary
and unreasonable period of time.
b) The use of any gong or sireu upon any
vehicle, other than police, fire or other
emergency vehicle.
c) The use or operation of any piano, manual or
automatic, phonograph, radio, loud speaker,
or any other instrument, or sound amplifying
devices so loudly as to disturb persons in the
vicinity thereof; or in such a manner as
renders the same a public nuisance provided,
however, that upon application to the Town
Clerk permits may be granted to responsible
organizations to produce programs in music,
speeches or geueral entertainment
d) The keeping of any animal or bird which by
causing frequent or Jong continued noise
shall disturb the comfort and repose of any
person in the vicinity.
e) The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in
such manner as to create loud or unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
f) The blowing of any steam whistle attached to
any stationary boiler except to give notice of
the time to begin or stop work or as a warning
of danger.
Section 11.10 Disorderly Conduct and Public Nuisances 11-3
(g) The discharge into the open air of the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor vehicle except through
a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(h) The use of any mechanical device
operated by compressed air unless the noise
created thereby is effectively muffled and
reduced.
(i) The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration or repair of any building in
a residential or business district other than
between the hours of 7 a.m. and 6 p.m. on
weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity
in the interest of public safety and then only with
a permit from the Town Clerk, which permit may
be renewed for a period of three days or less while
the emergency continues.
G) TI1e creation of any excessive noise
ou any street adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, or court while the same are in session,
or within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of any
hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the
working of such institution, provided,
conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets
indicating that the same is a school, court or
hospital street.
(k) The creation of any excessive noise
on Sundays on any street adjacent to any church,
provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such
streets adjacent to churches indicating that the
same is a church street.
(I) The creation of loud and excessive
noise in coIDlection with loading or unloading
any vehicle, of the opening and destruction of
bales, boxes, crates and containers.
(m) The sounding of any bell or gong
attached to any building or premises which
disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the
vicinity thereof.
(n) The shouting and crying of peddlers,
barkers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the
quiet and peace of the neighborhood.
( o) The use of any drum, loud speaker or
other instrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale or display of
merchandise.
(p) The use of any mechanical loud
speakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving
vehicles for advertising purposes or other
purposes except where specific license is
received from the Town Clerk.
( q) The conducting, operating or
maintaining of any garage or filling station in any
residential district so as to cause loud or offensive
noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours
of II p.m. and 7 a.m.
(r) The firing or discharging of squibs,
crackers, gunpowder or other combustible
substance in the streets or elsewhere for the
purpose of making noise or disturbance, except
by permit from the Board.
Section 11.11 Firearms regulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge any firearm of any type within the
corporate limits except a peace officer in the
performance of his duty.
Section 11.11-1 Carrying concealed handguns
prohibited on Town property.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b)
below, all persons are prohibited from carrying
concealed handguns as defined in G. S. 14-269 in
Town owned buildings, their appurtenant
premises and parks.
(b) This prohibition shall not apply to
the following persons:
(I) Officers and enlisted personnel of
the forces of the United States when in discharge
of their official duties as such and acting under
orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons;
(2) Civil officers of the United States
while in the discharge of their official duties;
(3) Officers and soldiers of the militia
and the national guard when called into actual
setvice;
(4) Sworn law enforcement officers;
(5) Aniuial Control officers;
( c) A conspicuous notice shall be
posted at each entrance to any property forth in
(a) above stating: "Possession of weapons or
carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited."
(d) Any person in violation of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be fined $500 or imprisoned for
six months or both.
( e) Weapons possessed in violation of
this ordinance are hereby declared to be
contraband. The Chief of Police or his designee
shall hold such weapon for disposal pursuant to
court order. In the absence of any court order, the
weapon shall be destroyed.
(Ord. of 9112195)
Section 11.12 Posting bills-other advertising.
No person shall stick, paint, brand, stamp, write or
put upon any house, fence, wall, pavement, post or
upon any properly, owned by any person, firm or
(
(
11.12 Disorderly Conduct and Public Nuisance ll.4
corporation, or owned by the Town of Hudson, any
printed, written, painted or other advertisement, bill,
notice, sign or poster, without first having obtained
the written pennission of the owner of such property
and having received a permit from the Town Clerk.
Section 11.13 Fire bombs prohibited.
(a) For the purposes of this Section, the
following tenns shall have the meanings herein
ascribed:
(1) "Molotov Cocktail" is defined as any
breakable container or any container which is
designed in such a manner that upon being propelled
it will at impact empty its contents which is filled
with any inflammable fluid or substance, and which
is fitted with a fuse or wick.
(2) "Firebomb" is defined as any type of
object designed or constructed so that upon being
propelled it will explode or ignite its area of impact.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to manufacture, possess, transport or use any
Molotov Cocktail or other firebomb.
( c) It shall be unlawful for any person or
group of persons to possess all the items or materials
needed to manufacture Molotov Cocktails or other
firebombs, other than on his or their premises. The
provisions ofthis Section shall be cumulative and in
addition to any other ordinance or General Statutes
ofNorth Carolina on this subject.
Section 11.14 Same; enforcement.
The Chief of Police of the Town is hereby
authorized to enforce the preceding section for such
periods of time as he shall deem necessary.
ARTICLE3
Animals
Section 11.15 Animals at large.
No horse, goat, cattle or other animals,
except a domestic house cat with a current rabies
inoculation tag, shall be permitted to run at large
within the Town Limits. Running at large means to
be off the premises of the owner and not under the
reasonable control of the owner or an authorized
person, either by leash or otherwise, but an animal
within the automobile or other vehicle of its owner
shall be deemed to be upon the owner's premises.
All animals caught running at large shall be reported
to the Caldwell County Animal Control Department
by the Hudson Police Department. (Amended by
Ord. of 8/4/81 and Ord. of3/17/97)
(Adopted 9/2008)
Section 11.15-1
Any person owning, harboring, walking, in
possession of or in charge of a dog which defecates
on public property, public park property, public
right-of-way or any private property without the
pennission of the private property owners, shall
remove all feces immediately after- it is deposited by
the dog. All feces removed in accordance with this
section shall be placed in a suitable bag or other
container that closes, and shall be disposed of in a
lawful manner. Violation of this provision of this
Article may be punishable by a civil citation of
$50.00 per occurrence.
Section 11.16 Nuisance
It shall be unlawful for any animal owner or
keeper to harbor, maintain, or permit on any lot,
parcel ofland, or premises under his control, any dog
or other animal which by any sound or cry shall
disturb the peace and comfort of the inhabitants of
the neighborhood or interfere with any person in the
reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or
property. (Ord. of8/4/81)
Section 11.16-1 Running on owner's premises.
The provisions of this Article do not prohibit
animals from running at large on the premises of the
owner or person having charge of the animal. (Ord.
of8/4/81)
(
11.12 Disorderly Conduct and Public Nuisance
Section 11.16-2 Control and penalty.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person
owing or having charge of any animal to permit the
animal to run at large, unless the animal is under
reasonable control as set forth in Section ll .15 of
this Article.
For the purpose of this Article, an animal
shall be deemed not under control when:
(I} The animal inflicts damage or injury
(by biting, jumping upon, pollution of vegetation, or
by any other means whatsoever) to the person or
property of anyone other than the owner, except in
the defense of the owner, his family, or property.
(2) In the case of any unspayed female
animal, when the animal is not securely confined in
the owner's yard, pen or other enclosure.
(b) Any animal found running at large in
the Town of Hudson shall be impounded. It shall be
the duty of the Hudson Police Department, in
cooperation with the Caldwell County Animal
Control Department, to capture and impound said
animal(s) in the Caldwell County Animal Shelter.
Any person owning, keeping, or having
charge or control of any animal and allowing the
animal to run at large in violation of the provisions
of this Article shall pay a civil penalty in accordance
with the Town of Hudson Schedule of Fees. Any
subsequent violations may be punished as a
misdemeanor in accordance with Section 14-4 of the
General Statutes (Ord. of 8/4//81; amended by Ord.
of3/17/97)
Section 11.17 Bird sanctuary.
The entire area embraced within the
corporate limits of the Town of Hudson is hereby
designated as a bird sanctuary.
It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or
attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or
wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests.
Provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are
found to be congregating in such numbers in a
particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or
menace to health or property in the opinion of the
proper health authorities of the Town of Hudson,
then in such event said health authorities shall meet
with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird
Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many
of said clubs as are found to exist in the Town of
Hudson, after having given said clubs at least three
days actual notice of the time and place of said
meeting to the representatives of said clubs.
If, as a result of said meeting, no satisfactory
alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then said
birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such
manner as is deemed advisable by said health
authorities under supervision of the Chief of Police
of the Town of Hudson.
Anyone violating the provisions of this
Section shall be punished by a fine of not more than
two hundred dollars ($200) or imprisoned for a
period not to exceed thirty days. (Ord. of2/6/73, as
amended by Ord. of8/4/81 and Ord. of3/17/97)
Section 11.18 Caldwell County Animal Control
Ordinance
The Caldwell County Animal Control
Ordinance, adopted by the Caldwell County Board
of Commissioners on March 17, 1997, was adopted
in its entirety by the Town of Hudson Board of
Commissioners. The Ordinance was adopted as
follows:
CALDWELL COUNTY
ANlMAL CONTROL
ORDINANCE
Adopted this the 17th day of March, 1997
This document replaces the original Animal Control
Ordinance and amendments, beginning with Book
887, Page 419. A copy of this ordinance is on file in
the Town Clerk's Office.
Section 11.19 reserved.
Copy of Caldwell County Animal Control
Ordinance begins on Page 11-4.2.
A1TACK TRAINING FACILITY. Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation
engaged in boarding, breeding, selling or training dogs or other animals in mode of an attack.
2010 S-1
Animals
BREEDER. Any person or establishment that breeds animals for the purpose of resale to the
general public or dealers.
CAT. A domestic feline of either sex, including stray.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that has demonstrated a fierce or dangerous propensity or
tendency to do any act that may endanger persons or property; and/or any nondomesticated animal
indigenous to the state, including hybrid animals that are part wild.
5
(1) This would include, but not be limited to, any dog that either assaults, bites, attacks or
inflicts serious injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property, and/or that
has killed or injured a pet or domestic animal without provocation.
(2) Exceptions: No dog is DANGEROUS pursuant to this definition:
(a) If, at the time the threat, injury or damage was sustained, the person attacked was
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; or has in the past teased, tormented, abused or
assaulted the dog; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime; or
(b) If it has attacked or injured a pet or domesticated animal in defense of an attack by
another animal, or if it is protecting or defending its young.
DEALER. Any person who is licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as a DEALER.
DOG. A domestic canine of either sex, including stray.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any of various animals as dogs, cats, horses, sheep, cattle, goats, hogs,
poultry and the like, domesticated by man so as to live and breed in a tame condition.
EXHIBITOR. Any person who is licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as an
EXHIBITOR.
EXPOSED TO RABIES. Any person or animal that has bitten, been bitten by, or otherwise come
(
into contact with the bodily fluids of any animal lmown or suspected to have been infected with rabies.
INHERENTLY DANGEROUS MAMMAL. Any live member of the Canidae, Felidae or Ursidae
families, including hybrids thereof, which, due to their inherent nature, may be considered dangerous to
humans and which include:
(I) Canidae, including any member of the dog (canid) family not customarily domesticated
by humans, or any hybrids thereof, including wolf hybrids that are a cross between a wolf and a
domestic dog, but not including domestic dogs (Canis familiaris);
2010 S-1
6 Caldwell County - General Regulations
(2) Felidae, including any member of the cat family weighing over 15 pounds not
customarily domesticated by man, or any hybrids thereof, but not including domestic cats (Pelis catus);
and
(3) Ursidae, including any member of the bear family, or any hybrids thereof.
KENNEL. Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation engaged in boarding animals.
NEUTERED. Any male animal that has been operated upon to prevent reproduction.
NUISANCE. The acts or actions by a cat or dog shall be considered a NUISANCE if any of the
following occurs:
(1) Turns over garbage containers or removes garbage from them;
(2) Damages gardens, foliage or other real or personal property;
(3) Defecates or urinates on property other than the owners;
( 4) Is maintained in an unsanitary condition that results in offensive odors or is dangerous to
public health;
(5) Chases, harasses or otherwise molests other animals, pedestrians, bicyclists or vehicles.
OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm, partnership or corporation owning, keeping, having
custody or control over, sheltering, feeding, harboring or allowing an animal to remain on or about
(
their property for more than 72 consecutive hours. In the event that the OWNER of an animal is a
minor, for purposes of this chapter the parent or guardian of the minor shall be considered the OWNER
of that animal. The OWNER of an animal is responsible for the care, actions and behavior of his or her
animals.
PET. A domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
RESTRAINT. That portion of land owned or occupied by an owner, not including any portion of
such land that is accessible to the public as a right-of-way.
RESTRAINT. An animal is under RESTRAINT within the meaning of this chapter if it is:
(1) Controlled by means of a chain, leash or other like device;
(2) On or within a vehicle being driven or parked;
(3) Within a secure enclosure; or
2010 S-1
Animals
(4) Within the dwelling house of the owner.
7
SECURE ENCLOSURE. A feuce or structure with 4 sides of adequate height, made from metal
or chain link fencing or equivalent fencing material, forming or causing a humane secure enclosure.
The door or gate shall have a latch capable of being securely locked to prevent the animal from
escaping or the entry of young children. The secure enclosure shall have a securely fitting top made
from metal or any chain link fencing or equivalent fencing to prevent the dog from climbing out, and a
floor made of concrete, concrete pavers or equivalent to prevent the dog from digging out of the secure
enclosure. For purposes of this definition, a home, mobile home or separate garage does not qualify.
SPAYED. Any female animal that has been operated upon to prevent reproduction.
STRAY. Any dog or cat that appears STRAY, homeless or unwanted, and any dog or cat that is
not displaying a valid rabies tag.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.02 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION OF THE OFFICE OF ANIMAL
(
CONTROL.
(A) There is hereby created the Office of Animal Control within the County Health Department,
which shall be composed of such employees and/or officials as shall be determined by the Board of
Health and Board of Commissioners.
(B) Employees or agents enforcing this chapter shall be designated as animal control officers. In
the performance of their duties, animal control officers shall have all the powers, authority and
immunity granted under this chapter and by the general laws of this state to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, and the General Statutes of North Carolina as they are related to the care, treatment,
control or impounding of animals.
(C) Except as may be otherwise provided by statutes, local laws or ordinances, no officer, agent or
employee of the county charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or other
applicable laws shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of those duties, unless he or she acts with actual
malice.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.03 GENERAL DUTIES OF THE OFFICE OF ANIMAL CONTROL.
(A) The Office of Animal Control shall be charged with the responsibility of:
(1) Enforcing in this county all state laws, rules and regulations and all county ordinances
relating to the care, custody and control of domesticated dogs and cats;
2010 S-1
8 Caldwell County - General Regulations
(2) Assisting in the enforcement of the laws of the state with regard to animals, and
especially with regard to vaccination of animals against rabies, and the confinement or controlling of
dangerous animals and dangerous dogs;
(3) Investigating cruelty or abuse with regard to all animals;
(4) Making canvasses of the county, including the homes in the county, as it deems necessary
for the purpose of ascertaining that all animals are vaccinated against rabies as required by local
ordinance or state statute; and
(5) Operating, pursuant to policies of the Board of Health, Board of County Commissioners,
the county animal shelter.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Office of Animal Control to keep or cause to be kept accurate and
detailed records of:
(1) Impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into the animal shelter;
(2) Bite cases, violations and complaints, and investigation of same;
(3) All funds belonging to the county which were derived from the operation of the animal
control program;
(4) All rabies vaccinations given in the county by veterinarians and animal control staff; and
(5) All other records deemed necessary.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF A DANGEROUS DOG APPEAL BOARD.
( There is hereby created a Dangerous Dog Appeal Board to serve as the official appellate body that
hears all dangerous dog appeals. The Appeal Board will convene at the direction of the County Board
of Health or its designee. The Appeal Board is to be composed of 5 members appointed by the County
Board of Health, and shall serve staggered, 3-year terms. The Appeal Board shall be composed of 3
veterinarians licensed to practice veterinarian medicine in the state, and 2 members of the general
public.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
Statutory reference:
Dangerous dogs, see G.S.  67-4.1
2010 S-1
Animals
 90.05 ENFORCEMENT IN MUNICIPALITlES; RESTRICTED.
9
Animal control officers shall have no authority to enforce this chapter within the boundaries of any
municipality unless the governing body of that municipality adopts a resolution stating that the county
is empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter within that municipality, and repeals any
inconsistent ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.06 DECEASED ANIMALS.
(A) It shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of any animals that die from any cause,
and the owner, lessee or person in charge of any land upon which any animals die, to bury the dead
animals to a depth of at least 3 feet beneath the surface of the ground within 24 hours after the death of
the animals is known, or to otherwise dispose of the animals in a manner approved by the state
veterinarian.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the carcasses of dead animals from his or her
premises to the premises of any other person, without the written permission of the person having
charge of the premises and without burying the carcasses as provided in this section.
(C) The Animal Control Office does not pick up any deceased animal from properties or
roadways.
( (Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
 90.15 ANIMAL CRUELTY.
(A) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, tease, torture, torment, deprive of
necessary sustenance, cruelly beat, mutilate, wound, injure, poison, abandon, kill or subject to
conditions detrimental to the health or general welfare of any animal, or to cause or procure that action.
The words TORTURE and TORMENT shall be held to include every act, omission or neglect whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted. However, this section shall not
apply to the following activities:
(1) The lawful taking of animals under the jurisdiction and regulations of the North Carolina
Wildlife Resources Commission;
(2) Lawful activities conducted for purposes of biomedical research or training or for
purposes of production of livestock, poultry or aquatic species;
(
2010 S-1
1-0 Caldwell County - General Regulations
(3) Activities conducted for lawful veterinary purposes; and
(4) The lawful destruction of any animal by its owner, veterinarian, Health Director or animal
control officer, for the purposes of protecting the public, other animals, property or the public health.
(B) General care; prohibited acts. All animals shall be kept and treated under sanitary and
humane conditions, and it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in 1 or more of the following
acts:
( 1) Failure to provide adequate food, water and shelter:
(a) All animals, unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, shall be given at suitable
intervals, not to exceed 24 hours, a quantity of wholesome foodstuff in proper containers suitable for
the age and species of the animal, and sufficient to maintain a healthful level of nutrition;
(b) All animals shall have access to a constant supply of clean, fresh water; and
(c) All animals shall be provided with adequate shelter from the weather at all times.
Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Underneath outside steps, decks and stoops;
2. Underneath houses;
3. Inside or underneath motor vehicles;
4. Inside metal barrels;
5. Inside cardboard boxes;
6. Inside temporary animal carriers or crates;
7. Shelters located in flood-prone areas; and
8. Shelters surrounded by debris, obstructions or impediments that may endanger
an animal.
(2) Failure by any owner to keep his or her animal or animals in good health and comfort,
and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and humane care and treatment;
(3) Animal cruelty. Examples of cruel treatment include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(a) Allowing a collar, rope or chain to become embedded in or cause injury to an
animal's neck;
2010 S-1
Animals
(b) Allowing a choke or pinch collar to be used as a primary collar when the animal is
left unsupervised;
11
(c) Allowing a dog or cat to be tethered or contained in such a way as to prevent it from
having adequate shelter at all times;
(d) Intentionally allowing animals to engage in a fight;
(e) Allowing animals to live in crowded or unsanitary conditions; and
(f) Failure or refusal to obtain medical treatment for an animal when that treatment is
obvious.
(4) Chaining or tethering an animal to a stationary object for a period of time or under
conditions that are harmful or potentially harmful to the animal. Examples of improper chaining or
tethering include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Using a length or weight of a chain or tether that is not appropriate for the size,
weight and age of the animal;
(b) Using a chain or tether made of rope, twine, cord or similar material;
(c) Using a chain or tether that is less than 8 feet in length and/or does not have swivels
on 1 end. All chains or tethers must be attached to the animal by means of a properly fitting harness or
collar;
(d) Allowing an animal to be chained or tethered such that the animal is not confined to
(
the owner's property, or such that the chain or tether can become entangled and prevent the animal
from moving about freely, lying down comfortably or having access to adequate food, water and
shelter; and
(e) Using a chain as a primary collar. All collars used for the purpose of chaining or
tethering animal must be made of nylon or leather.
(5) Selling or offering for sale, bartering or giving away within the county baby chicks,
ducklings or other fowl under 6 weeks of age, or rabbits under 8 weeks of age, as pets, toys, premiums
or novelties; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the sale or display
of baby chicks, ducklings or other fow 1 or rabbits in proper facilities by breeders or stores engaged in
the business of selling for purposes other than for pets or novelties; and
(6) Coloring, dyeing, staining or otherwise changing the natural color of baby chickens or
other fowl or rabbits.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
2010 S-1
12 Caldwell County . General Regulations
 90.16 FEMALE IN ESTRUS (HEAT).
It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a female dog in estrus (heat) not to confine the dog
in a secured enclosure.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
 90.17 KEEPING OF INHERENTLY DANGEROUS MAMMALS
(A) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep an inherently dangerous mammal
within the county.
(B) Exemption. Traveling fairs, circuses and carnivals shall be exempt from this section.
(C) Recapturing.
(1) The owner of any inherently dangerous mammal shall reimburse the county for all costs
incurred while attempting to recapture any escaped, inherently dangerous mammal.
(2) If the animal is sheltered or euthanized by Animal Control, the owner shall also pay these
costs.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
 90.18 CONFINEMENT AND PROCEDURE OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
(A) The owner of a dog that has been deemed potentially dangerous by the Office of Animal
Control will be notified in writing, giving the reasons for the determination.
(1) The owner shall immediately confine the dog in a humane secure enclosure.
(2) If no humane secure enclosure is available at the owner's residence, the dog shall be
confined at the animal control shelter or a boarding facility at the owner's expense.
(B) The owner may appeal the determination by filing written objections with the Dangerous Dog
Appeal Board within 3 days.
(1) The Appeal Board shall schedule a hearing within 10 days of the filing of the objections.
After the appellate hearing, the Board will determine, based on the testimony and evidence, if the dog
should be considered dangerous or overturn the declaration.
(2) The owner of the dog and the complainants will be notified by mail the outcome of the
hearing.
2010 S-1
Animals 13
(3) If the dog is found by the Board to be considered a dangerous dog, the owner of the dog is
required to keep the dog in accordance with all state and local laws pertaining to dangerous dogs.
(C) If the owner of a dog that has been deemed potentially dangerous does not file an appeal with
the Dangerous Dog Appeal Board within 3 days of the notice, the dog shall be considered a dangerous
dog.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
Statutory reference:
Potentially dangerous dogs; definition and procedures, see G.S. 67-4.1through67-4.4
 90.19 CONFINEMENT REQUIREMENTS; CONFISCATION OF DANGEROUS DOGS.
(
(A) The owner of a dog that has been deemed dangerous by the Office of Animal Control or the
Dangerous Dog Appeal Board will be notified in writing, giving the reasons for the determination. The
owner shall immediately and at all times confine the dog in a humane secure enclosure. If no secure
enclosure is available at the owner's residence, the dog shall be confined at the animal control shelter or
a boarding facility, at the owner's expense, until a humane secure enclosure is constructed on the
owner's property. The enclosure must meet the approval of the Animal Control Director, who has the
authority to mandate additional confinement requirements at his or her discretion. If no adequate
humane secure enclosure is constructed upon the owner's property after the expiration of 30 days of
notice of declaration, the dog shall be euthanized.
(B) The owner shall conspicuously and securely display a uniform dangerous dog warning sign on
the secure enclosure. Additional uniform dangerous dog warning signs shall be conspicuously and
securely posted at all points of entrance to the residence, and must be visible and legible from the
public highway or street. Uniform dangerous dog warning signs must be purchased from the Animal
Control Department at the owner's expense.
(C) The owner of a dog that has been deemed dangerous shall have the dog spayed/neutered at the
owner's expense, and provide proof of the spay/neuter to the Animal Control Department within 30
days of the date of written notification.
(D) The owner of a dog that has been deemed dangerous shall have the dog micro-chipped at the
owner's expense, and register the micro-chip number with the Animal Control Department within 2
business days of the date of written notification.
(E) A dog that has been deemed dangerous either by Animal Control or by the Dangerous Dog
Appeal Board shall at all times be kept in a humane secure enclosure. The owner shall post a plainly
visible sign upon the secure enclosure warning that a dangerous dog is on the premises. The humane
secure enclosure shall be locked at all times to prevent the escape of the dog or the entry of young
children. :rhe dog may be removed from the secure enclosure for exercise or veterinary care so long as
it is under the control of its owner by the use of a securely attached leash and muzzle.
2010 S-1
14 Caldwell County - General Regulations
(F) An animal control officer is empowered to confiscate a dog and harbor it at the owner's
expense if the dog is found in violation of state and/or local laws pertaining to dangerous dogs. If any
dangerous dog is confiscated under this provision, the owner of the dangerous dog shall be given
written notice at the time of confiscation that the dog will be humanely euthanized by the Animal
Control Department at the expiration of 3 business days.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.20 REQUIRED NOTIFICATION TO ANIMAL CONTROL BY OWNERS OF
DANGEROUS DOGS.
The owner of a dangerous dog shall inform the Office of Animal Control, as soon as practicable,
but not later than 24 hours after the occurrence of any of the following:
(A) An assault, attack or biting upon any human being committed by a dangerous dog;
(B) An assault, attack or biting upon any domesticated animal or pet by a dangerous dog;
(C) The destruction of or damage to property of another by a dangerous dog; or
(D) The roaming or escape of any animal required to be restrained or confined to a secure
enclosure.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
 90.21 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHlP OR RELOCATION OF DANGEROUS DOGS.
(A) If the owner of a dangerous dog wishes to transfer ownership or possession of the dog to
another person, the owner shall provide written notice to the authority that made the determination
under this chapter, stating the name and address of the new owner or possessor of the dog before the
ownership of the dog is transferred.
(B) If the owner of a dangerous dog plans to relocate and/or change address, the owner shall
provide written notice to the authority that made the determination under this chapter, stating the new
address and or date of relocation prior to this occurrence.
(Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
 90.22 LAW ENFORCEMENT DOGS EXCLUDED.
Any dog used by a law enforcement agency in the investigation of crimes, or as otherwise
necessary in the enforcement of the law, is excluded from requirements of this chapter, with the
exception that they are regulated by the provisions of㎣ 90.15 and 90.36.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
2010 S-1
Animals 15
(
 90.23 DOGS USED FOR SENTRY OR GUARD DUTY.
A sign warning that there is a guard or sentry dog on the premises shall be displayed. The owner
shall post a plainly visible sign upon the secure enclosure, warning tbat a dangerous dog or animal is
on
tbe premises. Any person owning, maintaining or harboring a dog for sentry or guard purposes must
register tbe dog witb the Office of Animal Control.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.24 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere witb, hinder or molest tbe Animal Control Office
agents, officers or veterinarians in tbe performance of any duty authorized by tbis chapter, or to seek to
release any animal in the custody of tbose agents.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see  90.99
 90.25 ANIMALS CREATING A NUISANCE.
(A) Pursuant to G.S.  153A-121, a county may by ordinance define, regulate, prohibit or abate
acts, omissions or conditions detrimental to tbe healtb, safety or welfare of its citizens, and tbe peace
and dignity of tbe county; and may define and abate nuisances.
(B) Nothing in tbis chapter shall prevent a private citizen from bringing an action to abate a
nuisance, or from bringing an action for damage, loss or lltjury to tbe private citizen or his or her
property resulting from an animal being a public nuisance.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
 90.26 EXCLUSION FOR HUNTING DOGS.
This chapter shall oot be interpreted as restricting persons owning specially trained
hunting/working dogs from actually using their dogs for hunting/working in the presence of the owner
or an agent of the owner, and are actually lawfully being used for hunting or training in compliance
witb applicable statutes, regulations or ordinances of the state and tbe county.
(Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.27 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit a dog or cat to create a nuisance as defined by this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
2010 S-1
16 Caldwell County - General Regulations
 90.28 PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINT.
Any citizen who personally witnesses a violation of this chapter may file a complaint in the
following manner:
(A) A citizen who witnesses a violation of this chapter may submit a written complaint to the
Animal Control Department within 10 days of any alleged violation. The written complaint must be
signed by the complaining witness and include a detailed explanation of the alleged violation(s). The
written complaint must include a detailed description of the animal(s) and the name and address, if
known, of the owner or keeper of the animal(s). Any evidence (i.e., photographs) should be attached to
the complaint
(B) Within a reasonable time considering the available resources of the Animal Care and Control
Department, an animal control officer will notify the owner of the complainant and conduct an
investigation of the alleged violation. The animal control officer will prepare a written report, with
findings of fact and a determination as to whether or not the alleged violation is true, based upon a
preponderance of the evidence.
(C) If the written findings indicate that a violation has occurred, the animal control officer shall
cause the owner of the animal(s) in question to be so notified in writing to take such steps within 48
hours as may be necessary to prevent future violations.
(D) Subsequent violations of this chapter shall subject the owner of the animal(s) to civil and/or
criminal penalties as provided by the state and this chapter. Any person who has been convicted of a
criminal violation of this chapter shall restrain his/her animal(s) on his/her own premises.
(E) Any animal found off of the premises of its owner after having been convicted of a criminal
violation of this chapter shall be unlawful and may be impounded by the Animal Care and Control
Department. A notice of impoundment shall be served upon the owner or affixed to the owner's
premises.
(Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
(
(
RABIES CONTROL
 90.35 COMPLIANCE WITH AND SUPPLEMENTARY TO STATE LAW.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any animal owner or other person to fail to comply with the state laws
relating to the control of rabies.
2010 S-1
Animals 17
(B) It is the purpose of this subchapter to supplement state laws by providing a procedure for the
enforcement of state laws relating to rabies control, in addition to the criminal penalties provided by
state law.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see  90.99
 90.36 INOCULATION OF DOGS, CATS AND OTHER PETS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to provide current inoculation against rabies for any
dog or cat 4 months of age or older. Should it be ordered by the County Animal Control Office,
County Board of Health, the County Board of Commissioners or the State Public Health Veterinarian
that other
pets be inoculated in order to prevent a threatened epidemic, or to control an existing epidemic, it shall
be unlawful for an owner to fail to provide current inoculation against rabies for that pet.
(B) A rabies inoculation shall be deemed "current" for a dog or cat if 2 inoculations have been
given I year apart, and booster doses of rabies vaccine administered every 3 years.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
 90.37 INOCULATION TAG.
(A) Upon complying with the provision of  90.36, there shall be issued by the inoculator, to the
owner of the animal inoculated, a metallic tag, stamped with the number and the year for which issued,
and indicating that the animal has been inoculated against rabies.
(
(B) It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to fail to provide the dog or cat with a collar or
harness to which a current tag issued under this section is securely attached. The collar or harness,
with attached tag, must be worn at all times.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to use for any animal a rabies inoculation tag issued for
another animal.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see  90.99
 90.38 REPORT AND CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS BITING PERSONS OR
SHOWING SYMPTOMS OF RABIES.
(A) Every dog or cat that has bitten any person or that shows symptoms of rabies shall be confined
immediately and shall be promptly reported to the Animal Control Office, and thereupon shall be
securely quarantined at the direction of the Animal Control Office for a period of 10 days, and shall not
be released from the quarantine except by written permission from the Animal Control Office.
2010 S-1
18 Caldwell County - General Regulations
(B) Dogs and cats quarantined under this section shall be confined in a veterinary hospital,
boarding kennel approved by the Office of Animal Control, or county animal shelter, at the expense of
the owner; provided, however, that if an animal control officer determines that the owner of an animal
that must be quarantined has adequate confinement facilities upon his or her own premises, the animal
control officer shall authorize the animal to be confined on the premises. The animal control officer
may not authorize the animal to be confined on the owner's premises unless the owner has a fenced-in 
area in his or her yard, and the fenced-in area has no entrances or exits that are not locked, and the
animal is currently vaccinated against rabies. Proof will be required at the time of investigation. If the
animal is confined on the owner's premises, the animal control officer shall revisit the premises for
inspection purposes, at approximately the middle of the confinement period, and again at the
conclusion of the confinement period.
(C) In the case of stray dogs or cats whose ownership is not known, the dogs or cats may be
euthanized and the head examined for rabies, or kept for the supervised quarantine period required by
this section at the county animal shelter.
(D) ff rabies does not develop within 10 days after a dog or cat is quarantined under this section,
the dog or cat may be released from quarantine with the written permission of the Animal Control
Office. If the dog or cat has been confined in the county animal shelter, the owner shall pay any
necessary veterinarian fees and a boarding fee set by and approved by the County Board of
Commissioners. Any animal that has bitten a person, which has not been reclaimed within 24 hours
from the end of the 10-day rabies observation quarantine period, shall be destroyed by the Animal
Control Office.
(E) In the case of any carnivore or bat, the animal may be euthanized and the head examined for
rabies.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.39 DESTRUCTION OF ANIMAL EXPOSED TO RABID ANIMAL.
Unvaccinated animals exposed by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed. If the
animal has a current rabies inoculation, it shall be revaccinated and returned to the owner.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
 90.40 AREA-WIDE EMERGENCY QUARANTINE.
(A) When reports indicate a positive diagnosis of rabies, the County Health Director may order an
( area-wide quarantine for such period as he or she deems necessary. Upon invoking of such emergency
2010 S-1
Animals 19
quarantine, no dog, cat or other carnivore shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets
during such period. During such quarantine, no dog or cat or other carnivore may be taken or shipped
from the county without written permission of the Office of Animal Control. During the quarantine
period, the local health authorities shall be empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization
by the establishment of temporary emergency rabies vaccination facilities strategically located
throughout the county.
(B) In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of
quarantine, the period of quarantine may be extended at the discretion of the County Health Director.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.41 POSTMORTEM DIAGNOSIS.
(A) If an animal dies while under observation for rabies, the head of the animal shall be submitted
to the County Health Department for shipment to the State Laboratory of Public Health for rabies
diagnosis.
(B) The carcass of any animal suspected of dying of rabies shall be surrendered to the County
Animal Control Office. The head of the animal shall be submitted to the County Health Department
for shipment to the State Laboratory of Public Health for rabies diagnosis.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.42 UNLAWFUL KILLING, RELEASING AND THE LIKE OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or release any animal under observation for rabies, any
animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal that has bitten a human, or to remove
the animal from the county without written permission from the Animal Control Office.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
(  90.43 FAILURE TO SURRENDER ANIMAL FOR QUARANTINE OR DESTRUCTION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or
destrnction as required in this subchapter, when demand is made therefor by the Animal Control
Office.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
2010 S-1
20 Caldwell Cormty - General Regulations
IMPOUNDMENT
(
 90.55 GENERALLY 
. Any animal that appears to be lost, stray or unwanted, or that is found to be not wearing a valid
rabies vaccination tag, as required by state law and this chapter, and not under restraint in violation of
this chapter, shall be impounded by the Animal Control Office by any means necessary and confined in
an animal shelter in a humane manner. Impoundment of the animal shall not relieve the owner thereof
from any penalty that may be imposed for violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
 90.56 TRAPPING.
The Animal Control Department is authorized to place, upon request, live-capture animal traps on
private property of the requestor or public property, to trap and remove stray, at-large, unwanted or
nuisance animals. It is unlawful for any person other than an animal control officer or his or her
designee to remove any animal from the trap, or to damage, destroy, move or tamper with the trap.
(Ord. passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see 90.99
 90.57 NOTICE TO OWNER.
Immediately upon impounding an animal, the Animal Control Office shall make reasonable effort
to notify the owner and inform the owner of the conditions. If the owner is unknown or cannot be
located, Animal Control shall hold the animal for 3 days (72 hours).
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.58 REDEMPTION BY OWNER GENERALLY.
(A) The owner of an animal impounded under this subchapter may redeem the animal and regain
possession thereof within 72 hours from the time notification of impoundment is given, as required by
 90.57, by complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and paying any necessary
veterinary fees and a boarding fee set and approved by the County Board of Commissioners.
(B) No animal owner may be permitted to adopt his or her own animal under the provisions of this
section in order to reclaim an animal that has been impounded pursuant to state law or this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
2010 S-1
(
Animals 20A
 90.59 DESTRUCTION OR ADOPTION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS GENERALLY.
(A) Unredeemed animals. If an impounded animal is not redeemed by the owner within the
period prescribed in  90.57, it may be destroyed in a hnmane manner or shall become the property of
the animal shelter(s) and offered for adoption by the first person who pays the adoption fee.
(B) Emergency rabies quarantine. No animal that has been impounded by reason of its being a
stray, unclaimed by its owner, shall be allowed to be adopted from the animal shelter during a period of
emergency rabies quarantine invoked pnrsnant to  90.40, except by special authorization of the
County Health Director.
(C) Adoption contract. Any person adopting a dog or cat from the animal shelter shall be required
to sign an adoption contract with the animal shelter, the major provisions of which are outlined in this
section. The purchase of euthanized animals from the animal shelter by a duly licensed biological
supply company or veterinary researcher shall not be deemed to be an adoption.
CD) Exceptions.
(1) The Animal Control Office has the right to refuse adoption of animals to:
(a) Persons less than 18 years of age; or
(b) Persons who have previously been cited for violations of this chapter.
(2) Maximum number of animals adopted to same household is 3 per calendar year.
(E) Any animals that exhibit fierce, dangerous or aggressive behavior will not be offered for
adoption.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.60 PROCEDURE WITH RESPECT TO REDEMPTION OR ADOPTION OF
UNV ACCINATED DOG OR CAT.
All animals 4 months of age or older that leave the animal shelter or any animal hospital or
veterinary clinic shall be required to have a current rabies vaccination.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
(
2010 S-1
20B Caldwell County - General Regulations
 90.61 SUSPECTED RABID ANJMALS NOT TO BE REDEEMED OR ADOPTED.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, impounded animals that appear to be
suffering from rabies shall not be redeemed or adopted, but shall be dealt with in accordance with㎣
90.35 et seq.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.62 DESTRUCTION OF WOUNDED OR DISEASED ANIMALS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, any animal impounded that is badly
wounded or diseased (not a rabies suspect) shall be destroyed humanely, only after consultation by the
Office of Animal Control with a veterinarian licensed to practice in the State of North Carolina. This
consultation will include a physical review of the animal by a licensed veterinarian, and agreement by
the veterinarian that the animal is suffering and should be euthanized. If the animal has identification,
the Office of Animal Control shall attempt to notify the owner before consulting with a licensed
veterinarian and euthanizing the animal.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
 90.99 PENALTY.
(A) (1) Any person, fine or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the imposition by citation of a civil penalty for each such violation in the amount of $25,
which shall be paid in full within 5 business days of the service of the citation by a representative of the
County Animal Control Office or any law enforcement officer, or both in accordance with G.S. 
153A-123. If the offender does not pay the penalty within 5 business days, the county may recover the
penalty plus court costs and attorney fees in a civil action in the nature of debt.
(2) Each subsequent violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
violator to the imposition by citation of a civil penalty in the amount of $100, which shall be paid in
(
full within 5 business days of the service of the citation. If the offender does not pay the penalty within
5 business days, the county may recover said penalty plus court costs and attorney fees in a civil action
in the nature of debt.
(3) Failure to make payment and correct the violation or violations within 5 business days
will resnlt in an additional penalty of $25 per violation per day until the violation is corrected and the
citation is paid. All funds derived from the civil penalties collected shall be used in the operation and
maintenance of the county animal shelter.
2010 S-1
Animals 20C
(B) If any dangerous animal or dangerous dog (as defined in G.S.  67-4.1) shall, when
unprovoked, attack, assault, wound, bite or otherwise injure or kill a human being, the owner shall pay
a $300 civil penalty and, after a 10-day waiting period, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, the dog
shall be destroyed by the Office of Animal Control.
(C) If any dangerous animal or dangerous dog shall, when unprovoked, kill, wound, or worry or
assist in killing or wounding any domestic animal or pet, the owner of the animal or dog shall pay a
$200
civil penalty, and the dog will be humanely eutbanized by the Animal Contwl Department at the
expiration of 3 business days.
(D) If any dangerous animal or dangerous dog is found in violation of㎣ 90.19, 90.20 and/or
90.21, the owner of the animal or dog shall pay a $150 civil penalty, and the dog will be humanely
euthanized by the Animal Control Department at the expiration of 3 business days.
(E) Any person in possession of or keeping an inherently dangerous mammal within the county
shall be in violation of this chapter, and shall be subject to the imposition by citation of a civil penalty
for each such violation in the amount of $300, which shall be paid in full within 72 hours of the service
of the citation by a representative of the County Office of Animal Control, or any law enforcement
officer, or both in accordance with G.S.  153A-123. If the offender does not pay the penalty within 5
business days, the county may recover the penalty plus court costs and attorney fees in a civil action in
the nature of debt. Failure to make payment and correct the violation or violations within the 5
business days will result in an additional penalty of $600 per violation per day until the violation is
corrected. All funds derived from the civil penalties collected shall be used in the operation and
maintenance of the county animal shelter.
(
(F) Violation of this chapter may subject the violator to criminal as well as civil action. Violation
of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor for which a criminal summons may be issued. Any person
convicted of this violation shall be punishable as provided in G.S.  14-4. Each day's violation of this
section is a separate offense.
(G) In addition, enforcement of this chapter may be by appropriate equitable remedy, injunction or
order of abatement issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 2-25-2006; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-2009)
2010 S-1
Disorderly Conduct and Public Nuisances 5
ARTICLE4.
ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED
MOTOR VEIDCLES
Section 11.20. - Administration.
The police department, fire department, and
code official of the Town shall be responsible for
the administration and enforcement of this article.
The police department shall be responsible for
administering the removal and disposition of
vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the
public streets and highways within the Town and
on property owned by the Town. The Town code
official, with the assistance of the code official,
Town planner, or fire department, shall be
responsible for administering the removal and
disposition of "abandoned," "nuisance" or
'junked motor vehicles" located on private
property. The Town may, on an annual basis,
contract with private tow truck operators or
towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose
of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and
junked motor vehicles in compliance with this
article and applicable state laws. Nothing in this
article shall be construed to limit the legal
authority or powers of the Town police
department and fire department in enforcing other
laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.
Section 11.21. - Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, certain words
and terms are defined as herein indicated:
Abandoned vehicle: As authorized and
defined in G.S.160A-303, an abandoned motor
vehicle is one (I) that:
(I) ls left upon a public street or highway
in violation of a law or ordinance
prohibiting parking; or
(2) Is left on a public street or highway for
longer than seven (7) days; or
(3) Is left on property owned or operated
by the Town for longer than twentyfour
(24) hours; or
( 4) Is left on private property without the
consent of the owner, occupant or
lessee thereof, for longer than two (2)
hours.
Authorizing official: The supervisory
employee of the police department or the code
official, respectively, designated to authorize the
removal of vehicles under the provisions of this
article.
Motor velzicle or vehicle: All machines
designed or intended to travel over land or water
by self-propulsion or while attached to any selfpropelled
vehicle.
Junked motor velzicle: As authorized and
defined in G.S. 160A-303.2 the term, junked
motor vehicle means a vehicle that does not
display a current license plate lawfully upon that
vehicle and that:
(I) Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or
(2) Cannot be self-propelled or moved in
the manner in which it originally was
intended to move; or
(3) Is more than five (5) years old and
appears to be worth less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
Nuisance vehicle. A vehicle on public or
private property that is determined and declared
to be a health or safety hazard, or a public
nuisance, or unlawful, including a vehicle found
to be:
(I) A breeding ground or harbor for
mosquitoes, other insects, rats or other
pests; or
(2) A point of heavy growth of weeds or
other noxious vegetation over eight (8)
inches in height; or
(3) A point of collection of pools or ponds
of water; or
(4) A point of concentration of quantities
of gasoline, oil or other flammable or
explosive materials as evidenced by
odor, visible presence; or
(5) One which has areas of confinement
which cannot be operated from the
inside, such as trunks, hoods, passenger
interior, or other interior sections, etc.;
or
( 6) So situated or located that there is a
danger of its falling or turning over; or
Disorderly Condnct and Public Nuisances 6
(7) One (I) which is a point of collection
of garbage, food waste, animal waste,
or any other rotten or putrescible matter
of any kind; or
(8) One which has sharp parts thereof
which are jagged or contain sharp edges
of metal or glass; or
(9) So offensive to the sight as to damage
the community, neighborhood or area
appearance; or
(10) Used by children in play activities;
or
(11) Any other vehicle specifically
declared a health and safety hazard
and a public nuisance by the Town
Commission.
Section 11.22. - Abandoned vehicle unlawful;
removal authorized.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the registered
owner or person entitled to possession
of a vehicle to cause or allow such
vehicle to be abandoned as the term is
defined herein.
(b) Upon investigation, proper authorizing
officials of the Town may determine
that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle
and order the vehicle removed.
Section 11.23. - Nuisance vehicle unlawful;
removal authorized.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the registered
owner or person entitled to possession
of a motor vehicle, or for the owner,
lessee, or occupant of the real property
upon which the vehicle is located to
leave or allow the vehicle to remain on
the property after it has been declared a
nuisance vehicle.
(b) Upon investigation, the code
enforcement office may determine and
declare that a vehicle is a health or
safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as
defined above, and order the vehicle
removed.
Section 11.24. - Junked motor vehicle
regulated; removal authorized.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the registered
owner or person entitled to the
possession of a junked motor vehicle,
or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of
the real property upon which a junked
motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the
property after the vehicle has been
ordered removed.
(b) Subject to the provisions of subsection
( c ), upon investigation, the code
official may order the removal of a
junked motor vehicle as defined in this
article after finding in writing that the
aesthetic benefits of removing the
vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed
on the private property owner. Such
finding shall be based on a balancing of
the monetary loss of the apparent
owner against the corresponding gain
to the public by promoting or
enhancing community, neighborhood
or area appearance. The following
among other relevant factors may be
considered:
(1) Protection of property values;
(2) Promotion of tourism and other
economic development
opportunities;
(3) Indirect protection of public
health and safety;
(4) Preservation of the character and
integrity of the community, and
(5) Promotion of the comfort,
happiness and emotional stability
of area residents.
( c) Permitted concealment or enclosure of
junked motor vehicle: Any other
junked motor vehicle(s) must be kept
in a garage or building structure that
provides a complete enclosure so that
the junked motor vehicle(s) cannot be
seen from a public street or abutting
property. A garage or building
structure means one which is erected
Disorderly Conduct and Public Nuisances 7
pursuant to the lawful issuance of a
zoning permit and a building permit
which has been constructed in
accordance with all zoning and
building code regulations.
Section 11.25. - Declared to be a health or
safety hazard.
Any partially dismantled or wrecked
vehicle, vehicle which is incapable of selfpropulsion
or being moved in the manner for
which it was originally intended, vehicle left on
private property without the consent of the
owner, occupant or lessee thereof, or any junk
motor vehicle is declared to be an attractive
nuisance for children, a breeding place for rats
and vermin, and a potential fire hazard. All
vehicles abandoned upon privately owned
property, which have been abandoned for as
long as 30 days are declared to constitute a
health and safety hazard.
Section 11.26. - Removal of abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pretowing
notice requirements.
Except as set forth in section 11.27 below,
an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which
is to be removed shall be towed only after notice
to the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle. In the case of a
nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the
names and mailing addresses of the registered
owner, or person entitled to the possession of the
vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the
real property upon which the vehicle is located
can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, notice shall be given by first class mail
(or any other method authorized for service by
North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure). The
person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a
written record to show the name(s) and address
(es) to whom the notice is mailed, and the date
mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be
ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an
abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given
by affixing on the windshield or some other
conspicuous place on the vehicle. The notice shall
state that the vehicle will be removed by the
Town on a specified date, no sooner than seven
(7) days after the notice is affixed or mailed,
unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal
possessor prior to that time.
An order to remove abandoned vehicles on
private property, nuisance vehicles and junked
motor vehicles to which notice is required to be
given, may be appealed by the registered owner
or person entitled to possession to the BOA
within the time period stated in the notice to
remove by appearing before the BOA at the
appeal hearing date and time given on the notice.
Such appeal shall stay the order of removal until
final determination by the BOA. The appeal shall
consider the determination that the vehicle is
abandoned, or in the case of a nuisance vehicle or
in the case of a junked motor vehicle that the
aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle
outweigh the burdens. In the event no appeal is
taken within the time period stated in the notice
to remove, the code official may proceed to
remove the vehicle.
Section 11.27. - Exceptions to prior
requirement.
The requirement that notice be given prior to
the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked
motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those
circumstances where there is a special need for
prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or
to otherwise maintain and protect the public
safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in all
cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the
appropriate daily records. Circumstances
justifying the removal of vehicles without prior
notice include:
(1) Vehicles abandoned on the streets
within the Town. For vehicles left on
the public streets or highways, the
Town Commission hereby determines
that immediate removal of such
vehicles therefrom for safekeeping by
or under the direction of the police
department, the department of planning
and community development, or the
department of public works, to a
storage garage or area may be
warranted when they are:
a. Obstructing traffic;
Disorderly Condnct and Pnblic Nnisances 8
b. Parked in violation of an ordinance
prohibiting or restricting parking;
c. Parked in a no-stopping or
standing zone;
d. Parked in loading zones;
e. Parked in bus zones, or;
f. Parked in violation of temporary
parking restrictions imposed under
Code sections.
(2) Other abandoned or nuisance
vehicles. With respect to abandoned or
nuisance vehicles left on Town-owned
property other than the streets and
highways, and on private property,
such vehicles may be removed without
giving prior notice only in those
circumstances where the authorizing
official finds a special need for prompt
action to protect and maintain the
public health, safety and welfare;
therefrom for safekeeping by or under
the direction of the police department,
the department of planning and
community development, or the
department of public works, to a
storage garage or area. By way of
illustration and not of limitation, such
circumstances include vehicles
blocking or obstructing ingress or
egress to businesses and residences,
vehicles parked in such a location or
manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and
vehicles causing damage to public or
private property.
Section 11.28. - Removal from private
property.
(a) Before any vehicle may be removed by the
Town from private property as defined
above to be abandon, junk or nuisance, the
owner of the real property on which any such
vehicle is located must be given at least five
days' written notice from the Town of the
vehicle removal. The owner may request in
writing that the code official review the
determination that the vehicle to be removed
is in violation of the ordinance. No such
vehicle shall be removed from privately
owned premises without the written request
of the owner, lessee or occupant of the
premises on which the vehicle is located
unless the vehicle has had the status of an
abandoned vehicle on such privately owned
premises for as long as 30 days and has,
therefore, become a health and safety hazard
in accordance with the declaration of the
Commission as set out in section 11.25.
When a vehicle is removed from privately
owned property at the request of a person,
the person at whose request such vehicle is
moved shall indemnify the Town against
loss or expense incurred by reason of
removal, storage or sale thereof.
Section 11.29. - Removal of vehicles; posttowing
requirements.
Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor
vehicle which has been ordered removed may, as
directed by the Town, be removed to a storage
garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing
business contracting to perform such services for
the Town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed,
the authorizing Town official shall immediately
notify the last known registered owner of the
vehicle, such notice to include the following:
(1) The description of the removed
vehicle;
(2) The location where the vehicle is
stored;
(3) The violation with which the owner is
charged, if any;
(4) The procedure the owner must follow
to redeem the vehicle; and
(5) The procedure the owner must follow
to request a probable cause hearing on
the removal.
The Town shall attempt to give notice to the
vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or
not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in
subsections (1) through (5) above, shall also be
mailed to the registered owner's last known
address, unless this notice is waived in writing by
the vehicle owner or agent.
Disorderly Condnct and Pnblic Nnisances 9
If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina,
notice shall be given within twenty-four (24)
hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state,
notice shall be given to the registered owner
within seventy-two (72) hours from the removal
of the vehicle.
Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked
motor vehicle is removed, and such vehicle has
no valid registration or registration plates, the
authorizing Town official shall make reasonable
efforts, including checking the vehicle
identification number, to determine the last
known registered owner of the vehicle and to
notify him of the information set forth in
subsections(!) through (5) above.
Section 11.30. - Right to probable cause
hearing before sale or final disposition of
vehicle.
After the removal of an abandoned vehicle,
nuisance vehicle or junked motor vehicle, the
owner or any other person entitled to possession
is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of
determining if probable cause existed for
removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must
be filed in writing with the county magistrate
designated in G.S.20-219.1 l(c) to receive such
hearing requests, the magistrate will set the
hearing within seventy-two (72) hours ofreceipt
of the request, and the hearing will be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 20-
219.11 as amended.
Section 11.31. - Redemption of vehicle during
proceedings.
At any stage in the proceedings, including
before the probable cause hearing, the owner may
obtain possession of the removed vehicle by
paying the towing fee, including any storage
charges, or by posting a bond for double the
amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck
operator or towing business having custody of the
removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a
vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the
possession of the vehicle shall not allow or
engage in further violations of this article.
Section 11.32. - Sale and disposition of
unclaimed vehicle.
Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor
vehicle which is not claimed by the owner or
other party entitled to possession will be disposed
of by the tow truck operator or towing business
having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such
a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with
the Town and in accordance with Article 1 of
Chapter 44A of the North Carolina General
Statutes, except no probable cause hearing in
addition to the hearing provided for in Section
2.11 is required.
State Law reference- Disposal of abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle, by tow truck
operator or towing business, G.S.  Art.!, Ch.
44A.
Section 11.33. - General penalty.
(a) Except as set forth in subsection (b),
violation of any provision of this Code or any
other Town ordinance shall be a misdemeanor
as provided by G.S.  14-4(a).
(b) Violation of any provision of this Code
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in
the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), to be
recovered by the Town in a civil action in the
nature of debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within a period of seventy-two (72)
hours after he has been cited for violation of
the ordinance. Citation shall be in writing,
signed by the code official and shall be
delivered or mailed to the offender either at the
residence or at the place of business or at the
place where the violation occurred. Each day's
continuing violation shall be a separate and
distinct offense. Any action to recover such
civil penalty may be joined in action for
appropriate equitable or other legal remedy,
including injunctions and orders of abatement
and including an action to recover damages
owing to the Town by reason of expenses
incurred by the Town in abating, correcting,
limiting and otherwise dealing with the harmful
effects of the offending action.
Section 11.34. - Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any
vehicle:
Disorderly Conduct and Public Nuisances
(I) Regulated under G.S.  160A-303.2
which is kept or stored at a bona fide
"automobile graveyard" or ''.junkyard"
as defined in G.S.  136-143, in
accordance with the "Junkyard Control
Act," G.S.  136-141, et seq., or the
removing or disposing of any motor
vehicle that is used on a regular basis
for business or personal use; and
(2) Regulated under G.S.  160A-303
which is in an enclosed building or any
vehicle on the premises of a business
enterprise being operated in a lawful
place and manner if the vehicle is
necessary to the operation of the
enterprise, or to any vehicle in an
appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and
manner by the Town.
Section 11.35. - Unlawful removal of
impounded vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove
or attempt to remove from any storage facility
designated by the Town any vehicle which has
been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this
Code unless and until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu
of such fees, have been paid.
State Law reference- Definition of junkyard,
G.S.  136-143, Junkyard Control Act, G.S.
Junkyard Control Act, G.S. 136 136-141
Section 11.36. - Protection against criminal or
civil liability.
No person shall be held to answer in any civil or
criminal action to any owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle,
for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this
article.
10
Sex Offenders Prohibited
AiticleS
(Adopted 912008)
Sex offenders prohibited in certain
areas.
Section 11.31 Authority.
In accordance with G. S. l 60A-l 74, a
city may by ordinance define, prohibit,
regulate or abate acts, omissions or
conditions which are detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of its citizens
and the peace and dignity of the city.
Further, under the general ordinance
making authority that has been delegated
to municipalities as a part of its police
power, cities and towns have the
authority to enact ordinances to protect
the safety and general welfare of its
citizens. This chapter is therefore
adopted under the authority vested in
cities and towns by the Legislature of the
State of North Carolina as well as the
decisions of the courts of this State
interpreting and applying the powers
delegated to municipalities.
Section 11.32 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply for
the purposes of administering this
Chapter.
Registered Sex Offender. Any
individual who is required to register or
is registered with the North Carolina Sex
Offender and Public Protection Registry
(established under Article 27 A of
Chapter 14 of the North Carolina
General Statutes) or, the Dru Sjodin
National Sex Offender Public Registry
(maintained by the United States
Department of Justice), or any other
official state or federal registered sex
offender listing maintained by either the
United States Department of Justice or
any of the several states. For purposes
of determining if any individual is
registered or is required to register with
11
any one of the official registries, law
enforcement officers may rely upon the
official website of any state or federal
registry of sex offenders and the
descriptions published and available
from such registry.
Public Park. Any publicly owned or
maintained land desiguated by the Town
of Hudson as a park or recreational
facility including any adjacent public
parking area, as well as the driveway,
entrance way or pedestrian walkway
used by the public to access the public
park or recreational facility provided the
public walkway, entrance or driveway is
not more than 1,000 ft. from the park or
recreational facility.
Section 11.33 Sex Offenders
Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any registered
sex offenders to knowingly enter into or
on any public park as defined herein.
Section 11.34 Sex offender Permit.
Any person adjudicated a "Sex
Offender" may obtain a permit to visit
any Public Park facility provided they
are not listed as a "Predator." Permits
will be issued to any "Sex Offender"
wishing to visit any Public Park within
the Town of Hudson provided the "Sex
Offender" provides a valid justification
to visit the Public Park, and the person
requesting the permit is not a "Predator."
Permits shall clearly state the dates and
times the "Sex Offender" may be in the
Public Park and which location the
person may visit.
Section 11.35 Posting Required.
Each Public Park or recreational facility
shall be posted to the effect that
registered sex offenders are prohibited.
If there is a public bulletin board at or
near the entrance or the main parking lot
Sex Offe11ders Prohibited
of each such Public Park or recreational
facility, posting a copy of this Ordinance
shall be sufficient for compliance.
Otherwise, a separate sign or posting
indicating that registered sex offenders
are prohibited shall be sufficient.
Having been posted as required
hereunder, subsequent unauthorized
removal of such notice, sign or posting,
or the damage or destruction of such
sign, notice or posting shall not excuse a
violation ofthis Chapter.
Section 11.36 Violation.
If any person shall violate this Chapter,
that person shall be guilty of a class 3
misdemeanor and shall be fined not
more than FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS
($500.00). Each and every entrance into
a Public Park as defined herein shall
constitute a separate offense under this
Chapter and subject the offender to a
separate fine.
Section 11.37 Severabilitv.
If any court of competent jurisdiction
shall determine that any word, clause,
phrase, sentence, paragraph, or
subsection ofthis Chapter is
unconstitutional as written, the court
shall first attempt to construe the
unconstitutional provisions so as to
enable such provision to be
constitutional as construed. If the court
cannot construe such provision narrowly
so as to render the same constitutional,
then it is hereby declared and the Town
of Hudson Board of Commissioners
intends that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this
Chapter are severable, and if any phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph or section
shall be declared unconstitutional or
invalid, then such declaration shall not
affect any of the remaining phrases,
clauses, sentences, paragraphs or
sections, and that the same would have
been enacted by the Town of Hudson
Board of Commissioners without such
words, clauses, phrases, sentences,
paragraphs or sections being included.
Adopted this the 16'h day of
September, 2008.
12
Adopted 9/1612008
Section 12.1
Section 12.1
Section 12.2
Section 12.3
Section 12.4
Secdon 12.5
Section 12.6
Section 12.7
CHAPTER 12
Planning
ARTICLE 1
Planning Board
Planning Board created.
Members of Planning Board.
Organization and rules.
Staff and finances.
General powers and duties.
Purposes in view.
Miscellaneous powers and duties of Planning Board.
AllTICLE 2
Zoning (Reserved)
Article 3
One-Mile Perimeter Planning Area (Reserved)
AlITICLE 1
Planning Board
Section 12.1 Planing Board created
A Town Planning Board for the Town of
Hudson, North Carolina, is 11ereby created under the
authority of G.S. 160A-361. (Ord. of 7/1/69, Sec. 1)
Section 12.2 Members of Planning Board.
The Town Planning Board shall consist of five
members who shall be persons of recognized
experience and qualifications. At the time of their
appoinnnen~ members shall hold no other official
municipal government position except on a wning
board, zoning board of appeals or housing authority
board. The Mayor may appoint two ex officio
members to the Board who shall have no vote but
who shall act as advisors to the Planning Board.
The citizen members shall be appointed by the
Town governing board upon creation of tl1e Planning
Board to hold office as follows: two members for one
year, two members for two years and one member for
three years; thereafter, members shall be appointed
for a cerm of three years. All members of che Planning
Board shall serve as such without compensation.
Members may, after a public hearing, be removed by
the Mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or
malfeasance in office. The Mayor shall file a written
ALP Supp. No. 13
Planning 12-1
sra.tement of reasons for such removal. Vacancies
occurring otherwise than tl1rough the expiration of term
shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Town Board
Two additional members shall be selected by the
Caldwell County Board of Commissioners from among
those residents residing within the one-mile perimeter
area, as set out in Article 3 of this chapter and said
members shall serve for two years and shall enjoy all the
rights, privileges, duties, responsibilities andqualifications
of those members of said Board who are residents of the
Town of Hudson which are not inconsistent with otl1er
provisions of law; provided that such members to said
Board chosen from within the one-mile perimeter
planning area shall enjoy the right to vote at such
meetings of said Board on matters only involving the
planning, development and wning and other pertinent
maners \Vithin the one-mile perimeter planning area.
(Ord. of 7/1/69, Sec. 2, as amended by Ord. of 1/4/77)
Section 12.3 Organi2ation and rules.
Wit11in tl1irty days after appointment, the Planning
Board shall elect its chairman from among the appointed
citizen members and create and fill such other of irs
offices as it may determine. The term of office for the
chairman shall be two years. The Planning Board shall
hold at least one regular meeting in each month which
shall be open to the public. It shall adopt rules for
transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations.
which record shall be a public record. (Ord. of 7/1/69,
Sec. 3)
Section 12.4
Section 12.4 Staff and finances.
The Planning Board may contract with city
planners, engineers, architects, and other
consultants for such services as it may require. The
expenditures of the Planning Board, exclusive of
gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for
the purpose by the Town Board and no
indebtedness for which the Town shall be liable
shall be contracted by the Planning Board unless
an appropriation is made by the Town Board for
such purposes, as authorized by G.S. 160A-363, and
then only to the extent of the appropriation. The
Planning Board shall have the right to accept gifts
and donations for the exercise of its functions and
for giving publicity to its work and may expend the
money received from such donations and gifts as
in its judgment may appear best. (Ord. of 7/1/69,
Sec. 4)
Section 12.5 General powers and duties.
It shall be the function and duty of the
Planning Board to make and adopt a suggested
master plan for the physical development of the
municipality or modified parts of such plan as the
Planning Board and governing body may deem
best. Such plan, with the accompanying maps,
plats, charts, and descriptive matter may show the
Planning Board's recommendations for the
development of said territory, including among
other things, the general location, character, and
extent of streets, viaducts, bridges, waterways,
water fronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds,
squares, parks, aviation fields, and other public
ways, grounds and open spaces, the general
location of public buildings and other public
property, and the general location and extent of
public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or
privately owned or operated, for water, light,
sanitation, transportation, communication, power,
and other purposes; also the removal, relocation,
widening, na1T0wing, vacating, abandonment,
change of use or extension of any of the foregoing
ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property,
utilities, or terminals, as well as a zoning plan for
the control of the height, area, bulk, location and
use of buildings and premises. The Planning Board
may from time to time recommend amendments,
extensions, or additions to the plan. (Ord. of 7/1/69,
Sec. 5)
ALP Supp. No. 9
Planning 12-2
Section 12. 6 Purposes in view.
In the preparation of such plan or modified plan
or parts thereof, the Planning Board shall make careful
and comprehensive surveys and studies of present
conditions and future growth of the municipality and
with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory.
The plan shall be made with the general purpose of
guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and
harmonious development of the municipality and its
environs which will, in accordance with present and
future needs, best promote health, safety, morals,
order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, as
well as efficiency and economy in the prooess of
development, including among other things, adequate
provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire
and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air,
the promotion of the healthful and convenient
distribution of population, the promotion of good civic
design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure
of public funds, and the adequate provision of public
utilities and other public requirements.
(Ord. of 7/1/69, Sec. 6)
Section 12. 7 Miscellaneous powers and duties of
Planning Board.
Before the adoption by the Planning Board of the
plan or any such part, amendment, extension, or
addition, the Planning Board shall hold at least one
public hearing thereon. The Planning Board shall have
power to promote public interest in and understanding
of the plan and to that end may hold public hearings,
publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any
report and may employ such other means of publicity
and education as it may determine. Members of the
Planning Board, when duly authorized by the Planning
Board, may attend city planning conferences or
meetings of city planning institutes or hearings upon
pending city planning legislation, and the Planning
Board may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay
the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such
attendance. All officers and employees of the Town
shall render such reasonable assistance and any such
information to the Planning Board as may be
requested by the Planning Board for its work.
The Planning Board shall from time to time, and
at least annually, submit reports in writing to the
Town Board giving information regarding the condition
of the Town and any plans or proposals for the
development of the Town and estimates of the cost
thereof, and these reports shall contain such other
recommendations as the Planning Board feels should
have immediate attention. (Ord. of 7/1/69, Sec. 7)
ARTICLE 2
The Town's Zoning Ordinance is included in this
code by reference. A copy is on file in the Town
Clerk's Office.
ARTICLE 3
One-Mile Perimeter Planning Area (Reserved)
Alp Supp No. 13
Planning 12-3
Section 13.1 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 13-1
CHAPTER 13
Flood Damage Prevention Regulations
ARTICLE 1
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact,
Purpose and Objectives
Section 13.1
Section 13.2
Section 13.3
Section 13.4
Section 13.5
Section 13.6
Section 13. 7
Section 13.8
Section 13.9
Section 13.10
Section 13.11
Section 13.12
Section 13.13
Section 13.14
Section 13.15
Section 13.16
Section 13.17
Section 13.18
Section 13.19
Statutory authorization; findings of fact
Statement of purpose; objectives
ARTICLE 2
General Purposes
Definitions
Lands to which this chapter applies
Basis for establishing the areas of special
flood hazard
Establishment of development permit
Compliance
Abrogation and greater restrictions
Interpretation
Warning and disclaimer of liability
ARTICLE 3
Administration
Designation of local administrator
 Development permit and certification
requirements
Duties and responsibilities of the local
administrator
Administrative procedures
Variance procedures
ARTICLE 4
Flood Hazard Reduction
General standards
Specific standards
Standards for streams without established
base flood elevations and/or flood.ways
Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO
Zones)
ARTICLE 5
Penalty
Section 13.20 Penalties for violation
ARTICLE 1
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact,
Purpose and Objectives
Section 13.1 Statutory authorization; findings
of fact.
The Legislature of the State of North Carolina
has in Part 6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3,
ALP Supp. No. 11
5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8
of Chapter 160A of the N.C. General Statutes,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units
to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the town
does ordain as follows:
(a) The flood hazard areas of the town are
subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of
life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are caused by the
cumulative effect of obstructions in flood plains causing
increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are
inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise
unprotected from flood damage. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.2 Statement of purpose; objectives.
(a) It is the purpose of this chapter to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses which are
dangerous to health, safety and property due to water
or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods,
including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural flood
plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers
which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and
other development which may increase erosion or flood
damage; and,
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of
flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood
waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(b) The objectives of this chapter are:
Section 13-2 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 13-2
(1) To protect human life and health;
(2) To minimize expenditure of public
money for costly flood control projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and
relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of tbe general public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business
interruptions;
(5) To nunnmze damage to public
facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and
bridges located in flood plains;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by
providing for the sound use and development of
flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
flood blight areas; and
(7) To insure that potential home buyers
are notified that property is in a flood area. (Ord.
90-01 of 1/16/90)
ARTICLE 2
General Purposes
Section 13.3 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
Appeal - A request from a review of the local
administrator's interpretation of any provision of
this chapter.
Addition (to an existing building) - Any walled
and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building
in which the addition is connected by a common
load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled
and roofed addition which is connected by a fire
wall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing
walls is new construction.
Area of shallow flooding - A designated AO or
VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be
evident.
Area of special flood hazard - The land in the
ALP Supp. No. 11
flood plain within a community subject to a one
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.
Base flood - The flood having a one percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement - That lowest level or story which has
its floor subgrade on all sides.
Breakaway wall - A wall that is not part of the
structural support of the building and is intended
through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or the
supporting foundation system. A breakaway wall shall
have a design safe-loading resistance of not less than
ten or more than 20 pounds per square foot. A wall
with loading resistance of more than 20 pounds per
square foot requires an architect's or professional
engineer's certificate.
Building - Any structure built for support, shelter,
or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Development - Any man-made change to improved
or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
Elevated building - A non-basement building built
to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground
level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls,
pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or
breakaway walls.
Existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision - A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lot on which the manufactured home
is to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of
streets) is completed before the effective date of this
chapter.
Flood or flooding - A general and temporary
condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
and,
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation of
runoff of surface waters from any source.
Section 13.3 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 13-3
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) - An
official map of a community, issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, where the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
have been defined as Zone A
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) -An official
map of a community, on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - The official report
provided by the Federal Emergency management
Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well
as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodway - The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot.
Floor .- The top surface of an enclosed area in
a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in
concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring
in wood frame construction. The term does not
include the floor of a garage used solely for
parking vehicles.
Functionally dependent facility - A facility
which cannot be used for its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include
long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service
facilities.
Highest Adjacent Grade - The highest natural
elevation of the ground surface, prior to
construction, next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
Levee - A man-made structure, usually an
earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to
contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as
to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee System - A flood protection system
which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated
structures, such as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
ALP Supp. No. 11
Lowest Floor - The lowest floor of the lowest
enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or
floor resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's
lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built
so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
Manufactured home -A structure, transportable in
one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel
trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on
a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended
to be improved property.
Manufactured home park or subdivision -A parcel
(or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - The average height of the sea
for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for
establishing various elevations within the flood plain.
For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous
with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - A
vertical control used as a reference for establishing
varying elevations within the flood plain as corrected
in 1929.
New construction - Constructures for which the
'start of construction' commenced on or after the
effective date of this chapter.
Nonconforming building or use - Any legal existing
building or use which fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
Remedy a Violation - To bring the structure or
other development into compliance with state or local
flood plain management regulations, or, if this is not
possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.
Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting
the structure or other affected development from flood
damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of
this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar
violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with
regard to the structure or other development.
Start of construction - (For other than new
construction or substantial improvements under the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348)) Includes
substantial improvement, and means the date the
Section 13.3 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 13-4
building penni t was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or
improvement was within 180 days of the pennit
date. The actual start means the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure (including a
manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring
of slabs or footings, installation of piles,
construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure.
Structure - A walled and roofed building that
is principally above ground, a manufactured home,
a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made
facilities or infrastructures.
Substantial improvement Any repair,
reconstruction, or improvement of a structure,
where the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure, either before the
improvement or repair is started, or if the
structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purposes of
this definition, substantial improvement is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either any
project for improvement of a structure to comply
with existing state and local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary
to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration
of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state Inventory of Historic
Places.
Variance - A grant of relief to a person from
the requirements of this chapter which pennits
construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this chapter where specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship.
Violation - The failure of a structure or other
development to be fully compliant with the
community's flood plain management regulations.
A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
ALP Supp. No. 11
evidence of compliance required in Articles 3 and 4 is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.4 Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special
flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the town and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction which may be amended
from time to time. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.5 Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) #37027C0077D,
37027C0040D, 37027C0085D, and 37027C0045D, dated
August 16, 1988, with accompanying maps and other
supporting data, and any revision thereto are adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.6 Establishment of development
permit.
A Development Pennit shall be required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior
to the commencement of any development activities.
For the purposes of this section, the term Development
Pennit shall mean a Zoning Compliance Certificate as
provided for in the town Zoning Code. (Ord. 90-01 of
1/16/90)
Section 13. 7 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.8 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate,
or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 90-01 of
1/16/90)
Section 13.9 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this
chapter, all provisions shall be:
(a) Considered as minimum requirements;
Section 13.9 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 13-5
(b) Liberally construed in favor of the
governing body, and;
(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any
other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord.
90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.10 Werning and disclaimer of
liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the town or
by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter
or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
ARTICLE 3
Administration
Section 13.11 Designation of local
administrator.
The Caldwell County Planning and Inspections
Department is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 90-
01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.12 Development permit and
certification requirements.
Application for a Development Permit shall be
made to the local administrator on forms furnished
by him or her prior to any development activities.
The Development Permit may include, but not be
limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures; and the location of fill,
materials storage areas and drainage facilities.
Specifically, the following information is required:
(a) Where base flood elevation data is
provided in accordance with Section 13.13 (j), the
application for a development permit within the
Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map shall
show:
ALP Supp. No. 11
(1) The elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new and substantially improved structures, and
(2) If the structure has been flood-proofed
in accordance with Section 13.17 (b), the elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was
flood-proofed.
(b) Where the base flood elevation data is not
provided, the application for a development permit
must show construction of the lowest floor at least
two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
(c) Where any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development, the
application for a development permit shall include: a
description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation; an engineering report on the effects of the
proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse and the effects to properties located both
upstream and downstream; and a map showing the
location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
(d) When a structure is flood-proofed, the
applicant shall provide a certificate from a registered
professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
flood-proofed structure meets the floodproofing
criteria in Section 13.17 (b).
(e) A floor elevation or flood-proofing certification
is required after the lowest floor is completed. Within
21 calendar days of establishment of the lowest floor
elevation, or flood-proofing by whatever construction
means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of
the permit holder to submit to the local administrator
a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, or
flood-proofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as
built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of
a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for
a particular building, said certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer or architect and certified by
same. Any work done within the 21-day calendar
period and prior to submission of the certification shall
be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator
shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected
by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure
to submit the survey or failure to make said
corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.13 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 13-6
Section 13.13 Duties and responsibilities of the
local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include,
but not be limited to:
(a) Review all development permits to assure
that the requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied;
(b) Advise permittee that additional federal
or state permits may be required, and if specific
federal or state permits are known, require that
copies of such permits be provided and maintained
on file with the development permit.
(c) Notify adjacent communities and the N.C.
Department of Crime Control and Public Safety,
Division of Emergency Management, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance
Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(d) Assure that maintenance is provided
within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished.
(e) Prevent encroachments within floodways
unless the certification and flood hazard reduction
provisions of Article 4 are met.
(D Obtain actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, in accordance with Section 13.12 (e).
(g) Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) to which the new or substantially
improved structures have been flood-proofed, in
accordance with Section 13.12 (e).
(h) When flood-proofing is utilized for a
particular structure, obtain certifications from a
registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with Section 13.17 (b).
(i) Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to
be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary
interpretation. The person contesting the location
of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided
ALP Supp. No. 11
in this article.
(j) When base flood elevation data or floodway
data has not been provided in accordance with Section
13. 6, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation data and floodway data available from
a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to Section 13.17 (d), in order to
administer the provisions of this chapter.
(k) Make on-<lite inspections of projects in
accordance with Section 13.14.
0) Serve notices of violations, issue stop orders,
revoke permits and take corrective actions in
accordance with Section 13.14.
(m) Maintain all records pertaining to the
administration of this chapter and make these records
available for public inspection. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.14 Administrative procedures.
(a) Inspections of Work in Progress: As the work
pursuant to a permit progresses, the local
administrator shall make as many inspections of the
work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is
being done according to the provisions of this chapter
and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power,
the administrator has a right, upon presentation of
proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
(b) Stop Orders: Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or
repaired in violation of this chapter, the administrator
may order the work to be immediately stopped. The
stop order shall be in writing and directed to the
person doing the work. The stop order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the
stoppage, and the conditions under which the work
may be resumed. Violation of a stop order constitutes
a misdemeanor.
(c) Revocation of Permits: The local administrator
may revoke and require the return of the
development permit by notifying the permit holder in
writing stating the reason for the revocation. Permits
shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, or specifications; for
refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of
state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable
state or local law may also be revoked.
Section 13.14 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 13-7
(d) Periodic Inspections: The local administrator
and each member of his inspections
department shall have a right, upon presentation
of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the department
at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action.
(e) Violations to be Corrected: When the lornl
administrator finds violations of applicable state
and local laws, it shall be his duty to notify the
owner or occupant of the building of the violation.
The owner or occupant shall each immediately
remedy the violations of law in the property he
owns.
(f) Actions in Event of Failure to Take
Corrective Action: If the owner of a building or
property shall fail to take prompt corrective action,
the administrator shall give him written notice, by
certified or registered mail to his last known
address or by personal service:
(1) That the building or property is in
violation of this chapter.
(2) That a hearing will be held before
the local administrator at a designated place and
time, not later than 10 days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled
to be heard in person or by counsel and to present
arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter;
and,
(3) That following the hearing, the local
administrator may issue such order to alter, vacate,
or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
appears appropriate.
(g) Order to Take Corrective Action: If, upon
a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed
above, the administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this
chapter, he shall make an order in writing to the
owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation,
within such period, not less than 60 days, the
administrator may prescribe; provided, that where
the administrator finds that there is imminent
danger to life or other property, he may order that
corrective action be taken in such lesser period as
may be feasible.
(h) Appeal: Any owner who has received an
order to take corrective action may appeal from the
order to the Board of Commissioners by giving
notice of appeal in writing to the administrator and
the Town Clerk within 10 days following issuance
ALP Supp. No. 11
of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the
order of the administrator shall be final. The Board of
Commissioners shall hear an appeal within a
reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm,
or revoke the order.
(i) Failure to Comply with Order: If the owner
of a building or property fails to comply with an order
to take corrective action from which no appeal has
been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the
governing body following an appeal, he shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the
discretion of the court. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 18.15 Variance procedures.
(a) The Board of Adjustment as established by
the town shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such
decision to the Court, as provided in Chapter 7 A of the
N.C. General Statutes.
(c) Variances may be issued for the
reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic places without
regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of
this section.
(d) In passing upon such applications, the Board
of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations,
all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept
onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to
flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility
and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided
by the proposed facility to the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a
waterfront location, where applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations,
not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
Section 13.15 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 13-8
(7) The rompatibility of the proposed use
with existing and anticipated development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use
to the romprehensive plan and flood plain
management program for that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property
in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity,
duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and,
(11) The rosts of providing governmental
services during and after flood ronditions including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(e) Upon ronsideration of the factors listed
above and the purposes of this chapter, the appeai
board may attach such ronditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(f) Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(g) Conditions for Variances:
(1) Variances may not be issued when
the variance will make the structure in violation of
other federal, state, or local laws, regulations or
ordinances.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon
a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, ronsidering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
(3) Variances shall only be issued upon
a showing of good and sufficient cause, a
determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship, and a
determination that the granting of a variance will
not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or ronflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
( 4) Any applicant to whom a variance is
granted shall be given written notice specifying the
ALP Supp. No. 11
difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and a
written statement that the rost of flood insurance will
be rommensurate with the increased risk resulting
from the reduced lowest floor elevation. Such
notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions.
(5) The local administrator shall maintain
the records of all appeai actions and report any
variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency upon request.
ARTICLE 4
Flood Hazard Reduction
Section 13.16 General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following
provisions are required:
(a) All new ronstruction and substantial
improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
rollapse or lateral movement of the structure;
(b) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, rollapse, or lateral movement. For
the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation,
rollapse, or lateral movement in accordance with the
Regulations for Mobile Homes and Modular Housing
adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to
G.S. 143.143.15.
(c) All new ronstruction and substantial
improvements shall be ronstructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
(d) All new ronstruction or substantial
improvements shall be ronstructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damages;
(e) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
ronditioning equipment, and other service facilities
shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the romponents
during ronditions of flooding;
(f) All new and replacement water supply
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system;
(g) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of flood waters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into flood waters;
Section 13.16 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 13-9
(h) On-site waste disposal systems shall be
located and constructed to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding;
and,
(i) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or
improvements to a structure which is in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of 'new construction' as contained
in this chapter.
(j) Nonconforming buildings or uses.
Nonconforming buildings or uses may not be
enlarged, replaced or rebuilt unless such
enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
Provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the repair, reconstruction or replacement
of a building or structure existing on the effective
date of this chapter and located totally or partially
within the Floodway Zone, provided that the bulk
of the building or structure below base flood
elevation in the Floodway Zone is not increased
and provided that such repair, reconstruction or
replacement meets all of the other requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.17 Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base
flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth
in Section 13-6, or Section 13.13 (j), the following
provisions are required:
(a) Residential Construction. New
construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure (including manufactured
homes) shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated no lower than one foot above
the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation
perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure,
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of flood waters shall be provided.
(b) Non-Residential Construction. New
construction or substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated no lower than one foot above the level of
the base flood elevation. Structures located in Azones
may be flood-proofed in the required
elevations [if they] are water tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water,
using structural components having the capability
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effect of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that
ALP Supp. No. 11
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in Section 13.12 (e).
(c) Elevated Buildings. New construction or
substantial improvements of elevated buildings that
include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall
be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls.
(1) Designs for complying with this
requirement must either be certified by a professional
engineer or architect or meet the following minimum
criteria:
(i) Provide a minimum of two openings
having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be
no higher than one foot above grade; and,
(iii) Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters
in both directions.
(2) Access to the enclosed area shall be the
minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance:
equipment used in connection with the premises
(standard exterior door) or entry to the living area
(stairway or elevator).
(3) The interior portion of such enclosed
area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate
rooms, except to enclose storage areas.
(d) Floodways. Located within areas of special
flood hazard established in Section 13.6 are areas
designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters
which carry debris and potential projectiles and has
erosion potential. The following provisions shall apply
within such areas:
(1) No encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other
developments shall be permitted unless certification
(with supporting technical data) by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
such encroachments shall not result in any increase
in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood
Section 13. l 7 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 13-10
discharge.
(2) If Section 13.17 (d)(l) is satisfied, all
new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of Article 4.
(3) No manufactured homes shall be
permitted, except in an existing manufactured
homes park or subdivision. A replacement
manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision
provided the anchoring standards of Section 13.16
(b) and the elevation standards of Section 13.17 (a)
are met. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.18 Standards for streams without
established base flood elevations
and/or floodways.
Located within the areas of special flood
hazard established in Section 13. 6 are small
streams where no base flood data has been
provided or where no floodways have been
identified. The following provisions apply within
such areas:
(a) No encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements or new
development shall be permitted within a distance
of the stream bank equal to five times the width
of the stream at the top of bank or 20 feet each
side from top of bank, whichever is greater, unless
certification with supporting technical data by a
registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that such encroachments shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) If subsection (a) above is satisfied and
base flood elevation data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial
improvements within such areas shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard chapter provisions of
this article and shall be elevated or flood-proofed
in accordance with elevations established in
accordance with Section 13.13 G). When base flood
elevation data is not available from a federal, state
or other source, the lowest floor, including
basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above
the highest adjacent grade. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
Section 13.19 Standards for areas of shallow
flooding (AO Zones).
Located within the areas of special flood
hazard established in Section 13.6 are areas
ALP Supp. No. 11
designated as shallow flooding. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths
of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel
does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate. The following
provisions shall apply within such areas:
(a) All new construction and substantial
improvements of residential structures shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in
feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth
number is specified, the lowest floor, including
basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(b) All new construction and substantial
improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to the depth number specified on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the
highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified,
the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated
at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or,
(2) Be completely flood-proofed together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities to or above that
level so that any space below that level is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy. (Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
ARTICLE 5
Penalty
Section 18.20 Penalties for violation.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of its requirements,
including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or
special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Violations of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties and remedies contained in the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 90-01 of 1/16/90)
(
\
(
I
Section J 60A-60 Related State Laws S-1
STATE LAWS GOVERNING THE
ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES
OF THE
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
ARTICLES
Form of Government.
Part 1. General Provisions.
Section 160A-60 Qualifications for appointive
office.
Residence within a city shall not be a qualification
for or prerequisite to appointment to any
city office not filled by election of the people,
unless the charter or an ordinance provides
otherwise. City councils shall have authority to
fix qualifications for appointive offices, but shall
have no authority to waive qualifications for
appointive offices fixed by charters or general
Jaws. 
Section 160A-61 Oath of office.
Every person elected by the people or ap.
pointed to any city office shall, before entering
upon the duties of the office, take and subscribe
the oath of office prescribed in Article VI, Section
7 of the Constitution. Oaths of office shall
be administered by some person authorized by
law to administer oaths, and shall be filed with
the city clerk.
Section 160A-62 Officers to hold over until
successors qualified.
All city officers, whether elected or appoint-.
ed, shall continue to hold office until their successors
are chosen .and qualified. This section
'shall not apply when an office or position has
been abolished, when an appointed officer or
employee has been discharged, or when an elected
officer has been removed from office.
Section 160A-63 Vacancies.
All vacancies that occur in any elective office
of a city shall be filled by appointment of the
city council for the remainder of the unexpired
term. If the number of vacancies on the council
is such that a quorum of the council cannot be
obtained, the mayor shall appoint enough members
to make up a quorum, and the council shall
then proceed to fill the remaining vacancies. If
the number of vacancies on the council is such
that a quorum of the council cannot be obtained
and the office of mayor is vacant, the Governor
may ftll the vacancies upon the request of any
remaining member of the council, or upon the
petition of any five registered voters of the city.
Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled by
the same authority that makes the initial appointment.
This section shall not apply to vacancies
in cities that have not held a city election,
levied any taxes, or engaged in any municipal
functions for a period of five years or more.
In cities whose elections are conducted on a
partisan basis, a person appointed to fill a vacancy
in an elective office shall be a member of the
same political party as the person whom he replaces
if that person was elected as the nominee
of a political party .
Section 160A-64 Compensation of mayor and
council.
(a) The council may fix its own compensation
and the compensation of the mayor and any
other elected officers of the city by publication
in and adoption of the annual budget ordinance,
but the salary of an elected officer other than H
member of the council may not be reduced during
the then-current term of office unless he
agrees thereto. The mayor, councilmen, and
other elected officers are entitled to reimbursement
for actual expenses incurred in the course
of performing their official duties at rates not in
excess of those allowed to other city officers
and employees, or to a fixed allowance, the amount
of which shall be established by the
council, for travel and other personal expenses
of office; provided, any fixed allowance so established
during a term of office shall not be
increased during such term of office.
(b) All charter provisions in effect as of January
1, 1972, fixing the compensation or allow\
(
Section 160A-64 Related State Laws S-2
ances of any city officer or employee are repealed,
but persons holding office or employment
on January 1, 1972, shall continue to receive the
compensation and allowances then prescribed by
law until the council provides otherwise in accordance
with this section or G.S. l 60A-162.
Section 160A-65 Fidelity bonds.
(a) Every officer, employee, or agent of a city
who handles or has in his custody more than
$100 of city funds at any time shall, before assuming
his duties, give bond with good sureties
payable to the city in an amount to be determined
by the council, that he will faithfully perform
the duties of his office and render a true
accounting for all city funds that may come into
his custody or control. Unless otherwise required
by law, the council may waive the faithful
performance bond, but may not waive the
true accounting bond. The city may pay the premiums
on all bonds. The bond, when approved,
shall be deposited with the city clerk.
(b) Cities may adopt a system of blanket
faithful performance or true accounting bonding
as an alternative to individual bonds. When such
a system is adopted, statutory requirements of
individual bonds, except for accountants, treasurers,
and tax collectors by whatever title
known, shall not apply to any officer or employee
covered by the blanket bond.
Part 2. Mayor and Council.
Section 160A66 Composition of council.
Unless otherwise provided by its charter, each
city shall be governed by a mayor and a council
of three members, who shall be elected from the
city at large for terms of two years.
Section 160A-67 General powers of mayor and
council.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the government
and general management of the city
shall be vested in the council. The powers and
duties of the mayor shall be such as are conferred
upon him by law, together with such other
powers and duties as may be conferred upon
!rim by the council pursuant to law. The mayor
shall be recognized as the official head of the
city for the purpose of service of civil process
and for all ceremonial purposes.
Part 3. Organization and Procedures
of the Council.
Section 160A-68 Organizational meeting of
council.
The organizational meeting of the council
shall be held on the date and at the time of the
first regular meeting in December after the results
of the election have been certified pursuant
to Subchapter IX of Chapter 163 of the General
Statutes. At the organizational meeting, the
newly elected mayor and councilmen shall qualify
by taking the oath of office prescribed in
Article VI, Sec. 7 of the Constitution. The organization
of the council shall take place notwithstanding
the absence, death, refusal to serve
failure to qualify, or nonelection of one or mor~
members, but at least a quorum of the members
must be present.
* * *
Section 160A-70 Mayor pro tempore; disability
of mayor.
At the organizational meeting, the council
shall elect from among its members a mayor pro
tempore to serve at the pleasure of the council.
A councilman serving as mayor pro tern pore
shall be entitled to vote on all matters and shall
be considered a councilman for all purposes, including
the determination of whether a quorum
is prese_nt. During the absence of the mayor, the
council may confer upon the 'mayor pro
tempore any of the powers and duties of the
mayor. If the mayor should become physically
or mentally incapable of performing the duties
of his office, tile-council may be unanimous vote
.declare 톞hat he렁is incapacitated and confer any
-of his office, the council may by unanimous /
vote declare that he is incapacitated and confer:
any of his powers and duties on the mayor pro
tempore. Upon the mayor's declaration that he
is no longer incapacitated, and with the concurrence
of a majority of the council, the mayor
shall resume the exercise of his powers and
duties.
Section 160A-71 Regular and special meetings;
procedure.
(a) The council shall fix the time and place
for its regular meetings. If no action has been
taken fixing the time and place for regular meet,.

(
Section J60A-71 Related State Laws S-3
ings, a regular meeting shall be held at least once
a month at 10:00 A.M. on the first Monday of
the month. (1973, c. 426, s. 14)
(b) The mayor, the mayor pro tempore, or
any two members of the council may at any
time call a special council meeting by signing a
written notice stating the time and place of the
meeting and the subjects to be considered. The
notice shall be delivered to the mayor and each
councilman or left at his usual dwelling place at
least six hours before the meeting. Special meetings
may be held at any time when the mayor
and all members of the council are present and
consent thereto, or when those not present have
signed a written waiver of notice. Only those
items of business specified in the notice may be
transacted at a special meeting, unless all members
are present or have signed a written waiver
of notice.
(c) The council may adopt its own rules of
procedure, not inconsistent with the city charter,
general law, or generally accepted principles
of parliamen_tary procedure.
Section 160A-72 Minutes to be kept; ayes and
noes.
Full and accurate minutes of the council pro
ceedings shall be kept, and shall be open to the
inspection of the public. The results of each vote
shall be recorded in the minutes, and upon the
request of any member of the council, the ayes
and noes upon any question shall be taken.
* * *
Section 160A-74 Quorum.
A majority of the actual membership of the
. council excluding vacant seats, shall constitute a
quorum. A member who has withdrawn from a
meeting without being excused by majority vote
of the remaining members present shall be
counted as present for purposes of determining
whether or not a quorum is present.
Section 160A-75 Voting.
No member shall be excused from voting except
upon matters involving the consideration of
his own financial interest or official conduct. In
all other cases, a failure to vote by a member
who is physically present in the council cham- 
ber, or who has withdrawn without being excus
ed by a majority vote of the remaining members
present, shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.
The question of the compensation and allowances
of members of the council is not a matter
involving a member's own financial interest or
official conduct.
An affirmative vote equal to a majority of all
the members of the council not excused from
voting on the question in issue (including the
mayor's vote in case of an equal division) shall
be required to adopt an ordinance, take any action
having the effect of an ordinance, authorize
or commit the expenditure of public funds, or
make, ratify, or authorize any contract on behalf
of the city. In addition, no ordinance nor
any action having the effect of any ordinance
may be finally adopted on the date on which it
is introduced except by an affirmative vote equal
to or greater than two thirds of all the
members of the council (not including the
Mayor unless he has the right to vote on all ques
tions before the council).
* * *
Section 160A-80 Power of investigation; sub ,
poena power.
(a) The council shall have power to investigate
the affairs df the city, and for that purpose may
subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel
the production of evidence.
(b) If a person fails or refuses to obey a sub
poena issued pursuant to this section, the council
may apply to the General Court of Justice for
an order requiring that its order be obeyed, and
that court shall have jurisdiction to issue these
orders after notice to all proper parties. No testi
mony of any witness before the council pursuant
to a subpoena issued in exercise of the power
conferred by this section may be used against
him on the trial of any civil or criminal action
other than a prosecution for false swearing com
mitted on the examination. If any person, while
under oath at an investigation by the council,
willfully swears falsely, he is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(c) This section shall not apply to cities having
a population of less than 5,000.
Section 160A-81 Conduct of public hearings.
Public hearings may be held at any place with
,;
(
(
Section ! 60A-81 Related State Laws S4
in the city or within the county in which the
city is located. The council may adopt reasonable
rules governing the conduct of public hearings,
including but not limited to rules (i) fixing
the maximum time allotted to each speaker, (ii)
providing for the designation of spokesmen for
groups of persons supporting or opposing the
same positions, (iii) providing for the selection
of delegates from groups of persons supporting
or opposing the same positions when the number
of persons wishing to attend the hearing exceeds
the capacity of the hall, and (iv) providing.
for the maintenance of order and decorum in
the conduct of the hearing.
The council may continue any public hearing
without further advertisement. If a public hearing
is set for a given date and a quorum of the
council is not then present, the hearing shall be
continued until the next regular council meeting
without further advertisement.
ARTICLE 7
Administrative Offices
Part 1. Organization and Reorganization of City
Government.
Section 160A-146 Council to organize city
government.
The council may create, change. abolish. and consolidate
offices, positions, departments, boards. commissions,
and agencies of the city government and
generally organize and reorganize the city government
. in order to promote orderly and efficient administration
of city affairs, subject to the following limitations:
(1) The council may not abolish any office, position,
department, board, comrnisison. or agency established
and required by law;
(2) The council may not combine offices or confer
certain duties on the same officer when such action
is specifically forbidden by law:
(3) The council may not discontinue or assign elsewhere
any functions or duties assigned by law to a
particular office, position, department. or agency.
(1971. c. 698, S. l.) (Ord. of 1/3/84)
Part 2. Administration of Council-1\llanager Cities.
Section 160A-147 Appointment of city manager.
In cities whose charters provide for the councilmanager
form of government, the council shall appoint
a city manager to serve at its pleasure. The
manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his
executive and administrative qualifications. He need
not be a resident of the city or State at the time of
his appointment. The office of city manager is hereby
declared to be an office that may be held concurrently
with other appointive (but not elective) offices pursuant
to Article VI. Sec. 9. of the Constitution. (1969.
c. 629. s. 2; 1971. c. 698. s. l.) (Ord. of 1/3/84)
Section 160A-148 Powers and duties of Manager.
The manager shall be the chief administrator of
the city. He shall.be responsible to the council for administering
all municipal affairs placed in his charge
by them. and shall have the following powers and
duties:
( I) He shall appoint and suspend or remove all city
officers and employees not elected by the people, und
whose appointment or removal is not otherwise pro-
ALP Supp. No. (>
/ (
{
(
Section !60A-148 Related State Laws S4.l
vided for by law, except the city attorney, in accordance
with such general personnel rules, regulations.
policies, or ordinances as the council may adopt.
(2) He shall direct and supervise the administration
of all departments, offices, and agencies of the
city, subject to the general direction and control of
the council, except as otherwise provided by law.
(3) He shall attend all meetings of the council and
recommend any measures that he deems expedient.
(4) He shall see that all laws of the State, the city
charter, and the ordinances, resolutions, and regulations
of the council are faithfully executed within the
city.
(5) He shall prepare and submit the annual budaet
and capital program to the council.
"' (6) He shall annually submit to the council and
make available to the public a complete report on the
finances and administrative activities of the city as of
the end of the fiscal year.
(7) He shall make any other reports that the council
may require concerning the operations of city
departments, offices, and agencies subject to his direction
and control.
(8) He shall perform any other duties that may be
required or authorized by the council. (Ord. of 1/3/84)
Section 160A-149 Acting city manager.
By letter filed with the city clerk, the manager may
designate, subject to the approval of the council, a
qualified person to exercise the powers and perform
the duties of manager during his temporary absence
or disability. During this absence or disability, the
council may revoke that designation at any time and
appoint another to serve until the manager returns or
his disability ceases. (1971. c. 698, s. l.) (Ord. of
1/3/84)
Section 160A-150 Interim city manager.
When the position of city manager is vacant, the
council shall designate a qualified person to exercis~
the powers and perform the duties of manager until
the vacancy is filled. (1971. c. 698, s.l.) (Ord. of
1/3/84)
Section 160A-151 Mayor and councilmen ineligible
to serve or act as manager.
Neither the mayor nor any member of the council
shall be eligible for appointment as manager or acting
or interim manager. ( 1971. c. 698. s. l.) (Ord.
of 113/84)
ARTICLES
Delegation and Exercise
of the
General Police Power
Section 160A175 Enforcement of ordinances.
(a) A city shall have power to impose fines
and penalties for violation of its ordinances, and
may secure injunctions and abatement orders to
further insure compliance with its ordinances as
provided by this section.
(b) Unless the council shall otherwise provide,
violation of a city ordinance shall be a misdemeanor
as provided by G.S. 14-4. An ordinance
may also provide by express statement that the
maximum fine or term of imprisonment to be
imposed for its violation shall be some figure or
number of days less than the maximum penalties
prescribed by G.S. 14-4.
(c) An ordinance may provide that violation
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty to be
recovered by the city in a civil action in the
nature of debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within a prescribed period of time after
he has been cited for violation of the ordinance.
(d) An ordinance may provide that it may be
enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing
from a court of competent jurisdiction. In
such case, the G.eneral Court of Justice shall
have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be
appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to the
application of the city for equitable relief that
there is an adequate remedy at law.
(e) An ordinance that makes unlawful a con
dition existing upon or use made of real proper
ty may be enforced by injunction and order of
abatement, and the General Court of Justice
shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When
a violation of such an ordinance occurs the city
may apply to the appropriate division of the
General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory
injunction and order of abatement commanding
the defendant to correct the unlawful
condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the
property. The action shall be governed in all re
spects by the laws and rules governing civil pro
ceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure
in general and Rule 65 in particular.
In addition to an injunction, the court may
enter an order of abatement as a part of the
judgment in the cause. An order of abatement
may direct that buildings or other structures on
the property be closed, demolished, or removed;
Ar .P "\11no Nn. 6
r
(
Section 160A-l 75 Related State Laws
that fixtures, furniture, or other movable pro
perty be removed from buildings on the property;
that grass and weeds be cut; that improvements
or repairs be made; or that other action
be taken that is necessary to bring the property
into compliance with the ordinance. If the
defendant fails or refuses to comply with an in
junction or with an order of abatement within
the time allowed by the court, he may be cited
for contempt, and the city may execute the
order of abatement. The city shall have a lien on
the property for the cost of executing an order
of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and
materialman's lien. The defendant may secure
cancellation of an order of abatement by paying
all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond
for compliance with the order. The bond shall
be given with sureties approved by the clerk of
superior court in an amount approved by the
judge before whom the matter is heard and shall
be conditioned on the defendant's full compli
ance with the terms of the order of abatement
within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of
an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel
an injunction issued in conjunction therewith.
(f) Subject to the express terms of the ordinance,
a city ordinance may be enforced by any
one, all, or a combination of the remedies authorized
and prescribed by this section.
(g) A city ordinance may provide, when ap
propriate, that each day's continuing violation
shall be a separate and distinct offense.
S-5
Section 101 A-1
Appendix
APPENDIX I
Streets and Sidewalks
Section 101 Crossing gates required at the
following grade crossings
(See Section 5.23(c)):
Section 102 Warning required by
watchman or flagman at the
following grade crossings
(See Section 5.23(d)):
Section 103
Appendix
Section 103 Warning or automatic
flashing light signals required
at the following grade
crossing (See Section 5.23
(e)):
A-2
Section 201 A-3
Appendix
APPENDIX II
Traffic
Section 201 Parking prohibited at all
times on the following streets
(See Section 7.125):
Throneburg A venue
(Ord. of 9/2/86)
Section 202 Warning required by
watchman or flagman at the
following grade crossings
(See Section 5.23(d)):
Section 203
Section 203 Parking limited to two hours
between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 6:30 p.m. on any
day except Sundays and
public holidays within the
district or upon any of the
streets as follows (See
Section 7.126):
A-4
Appendix
Section 204 Parking limited to one hour
between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 6:30 p.m. on any
days except Sundays and
public holidays within the
district or upon any of the
streets as follows (See
Section 7.126):
Section 205
Section 205 Parking limited to ten
minutes (See Section 7.126):
A-5
Appendix
Section 206 The following streets or
portions of streets shall be
reserved as stands for the
specific purpose and at the
exact location described in
the following (See Section
7.120):
Loading zone on Central
Street (Ord. of9/2/86)
Section 207 A-6
Appendix
Section 207 Diagonal parking. All
vehicles shall be parked at an
angle of approximately 45
degrees with the curb on the
following streets or portions
thereof (See Section 7.107):
Section 206 Through streets (See Section
7.41 ):
Section 209 A-7
Appendix
Section 209 Intersections at which "stop"
is required before entering
(See Section 7 .59):
Section 210 One-way streets (See Section
7.56):
Section 211
Section 211 Left turns to be made to the
left of the center at the
following intersections. (See
Section 7.52):
Appendix
Section 212 No left turns at following
intersections (See Section
7.52):
A-8
Section 213
Section 213 No right turns at the
following intersections (See
Section 7.52):
"No Right Turn on Red"
Central Street/Huss A venue
Intersection - Approved
3/20/2012
A-9
Appendix
Section 214 No complete or "U" turns at
the following intersection
(See Section 7.52):
Section 215
Section 215 Twenty-five mile per hour
speed limit on the following
streets (See Section 7.49(a)):
A-10
Appendix
Section 216 Thirty-five mile per hour
speed limit on the following
streets (See Section 7.49(b)):
Enact 35 mph on the following streets:
(1) Cedar Valley Avenue (SR 1127)
from US 321-A to the eastern
corporate limit, approximately 1.04
miles east of US 321-A.
(2) Cajah Avenue (SR 1127) from US
321-A to a point 0.37 miles west of
us 321A.
(3) Legion Avenue (SR 1156) from US
321-A to SR 1158.
(4) Caldwell Avenue (SR 1159) from
US 321-A to the western corporate
limit, approximately 50 feet east of
SR 1158.
(5) SR 1161 from US 321-A to Hilltop
Street (SR 1161).
( 6) Mt. Herman A venue (SR 1160) from
US 321-A to the eastern corporate
limit, approximately 0.43 miles east
of US 321-A.
(7) Main Street (US 321-A) from Cedar
Valley Avenue (SR 1127) to a point
0.10 miles north of Caldwell Avenue
(SR 1159).
INDEX TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
(References are to section numbers)
A
ALLEYS See STREETS AND SIDEWALKS;
TRAFFIC
ANIMALS
At large, 11.15
Bird sanctuary, 11.17
Butchering restrictions, 9.8
Caldwell County Animal Control Ordinance, 11.18
Control, 11.16-2
Dead, deposition of, 9 .4(b)
Equestrian, definition of, 7.8(d)
Livestock, definition of, 9 .13
Livestock, keeping of, 9.12
Nuisance, 11.16
Penalty, 11.16-2
Running on owner's property, 11.16-1
Vicious
taking to parades and demonstrations, 5.13(2)
Walking, owing, harboring dog, 11.15-1
Wastes, deposition of, 9.4(a)
ARCADES
Definition, 10.32.l
Permit Holders
A WNlNGS OR SHEDS
Not to obstruct streets or sidewalks, 5.21
1-1
B
BEER AND WINE
Sale of Beer, Wine and Mixed Beverages, 10.41
BICYCLES (See also TRAFFIC, Bicycle regulations)
Definition of, 7.3(a)
BIRD SANCTUARY
Town designated as, 11.17
BOARD OF COMMISSIONS (BOARD)
Administrative Offices, S-1, Article 7 160A-146
Acting City Manager S-4.1 Section 160A-149
Appointment of City Manager S-4 160A-14 7
Council to organize city government S-4, Section 160A-146
Interim City Manager S-4.1, Section 160A-150
Mayor and Council ineligible to serve or act as manager, S-4.1, Section 160A-151
Powers and duties of Manager, S-4, Section 160A-148
Compensation of Mayor and Council, S-1, Section 160A-64
Composition of Council, S-2, Section 160A-66
Conduct of Public Hearings, S-3, Section 160A-81
Enforcement of Ordinances, S-4.1, Section 160A-l 75
Fidelity Bonds, S-2, Section 160A-65
General powers of mayor and council, S-2, Section 160A-67
Mayor pro tempore, disability of mayor, S-2, Section 160A-70
Minutes to be kept; ayes and noes, S-3, Section 160A-72
Oath of Office, S-1, Section 160A-61
Officers to hold over until successors qualified; S-1, Section 160A-62
Organization meeting of council; S-2, Section 160A-68
Power of investigation; subpoena power, S-3; Section 160A-80
Qualifications for appointive office, S-1, Section 160A-60
Quorum, S-3, Section 160A-74
Regular and special meetings; procedures, S-2, Section 160A-71
Vacancies, S-1, Section 160A-63
Voting, S-3, Section 160A-75
BOWLING ALLEYS (See POOL ROOMS AND BOWLING
ALLEYS)
BRIDGES
Damaging of, 5.7
1-1
BUTCHERING
Restrictions on, 9.8
BUILDING CODE OF THE TOWN
Adoption of, 8.2
BUILDING INSPECTOR
Building regulation amendments, 8.7, 8.9
Inspection procedure, 8.14
Issuance of Permits, 8.23
Oversight by, 8.15
Permit fees, 8.24(a)
Powers of, 8.16
BUILDING REGULATIONS (See also BUILDINGS;
ZONING, PLANNING)
Condemnation, repair and demolition of unsafe buildings
action to be taken if building is not condemned as specified, 8.44
appeal by owner, 8.46
building defects to be corrected, 8.41
changes in work, 8.37
condemned buildings, removal of notice, 8.43
equitable enforcement, 8.48
failure to comply, 8.47
finality of order if not appealed, 8.46
financial support for inspection department, 8.32
fire limits, primary, restrictions within, 8.50
fire limits, secondary, restrictions within, 8.51
inspection department, 8 .29
inspections by other counties, 8.31
inspectors' duties and responsibilities, 8.30
inspectors' failure to perform duties, 8.34
inspectors not to have conflicting interests, 8.33
joint inspections, 8.31
order to take corrective action, 8.45
periodic inspections, 8.40
permits, 8.35
revocation of permits 8.39
stop orders, 8 .3 8
time limitations on validity of permits, 8.36
unsafe buildings to be condemned, 8.42
Enforcement of
issuance of building permit, 8.23
limitations on permit issuance, 8.22
new developments, regulation of, 8.25
permit fees, 8.24
plans and specifications, 8.21
House numbering, 8.52
Inspection department
inspection officials, powers of, 8.16
inspection procedure, 8. 14
1-1
oversights of are not a legal violation, 8.15
reports and records, 8. 13
Regulatory codes, adoption of, by reference
amendments to, 8. 7
building code, 8.2
compliance with, 8.8
copies of codes to be filed with clerk, 8.9
electrical code, 8.5
heating code, 8 .4
BUSES
ordinances and codes, scope of, 8.1
plumbing code, 8.3
residential building code, 8.6
Restricted use of stops, 7.122
Stopping, standing, parking, regulations on, 7.121
Stops, designation of by signs, 7.120
1-1
c
CABLE TELEVISION
Basic service tier rates, regulation of, 6.38
Installation, regulation of, 6.38
Related equipment, regulation of, 6.38
Service charges, regulation of, 6.38
CEMETERIES See HEALTH AND SANITATION, Cemeteries
CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY
Taxicabs
application required, 10.11
burden of proof, 10.17
determination for, 10.15
duration of, 10.14
failure to begin operations, 10.18
hearing, cost for, 10.16
issuance of, 10.13
notification of hearing, 10.16
one certificate for every business, 10.22
operation of unlawful without, 10.12
revocation of, 10.20
substitution of vehicles, 10.21
transfer restrictions, 10.19
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Issuance of, 8.14( d)
CERTIFICATES See PERMITS
CLERK, TOWN
Appointment of, 2.18
Bills, posting of, 11.12
Bond, posting of, 2.20
Building condemnation, appeal of, 8.46
Building regulation amendments, 8.7, 8.9
Certificate of convenience and necessity,
taxicabs
application required, 10.11
hearing, notification of, 10.16
substitution of vehicles, 10.21
Dance halls, permit for, 11.7
Digging in streets, permit for, 5.1
Duties of, 2.18
1-1
Minutes of town board, 2.6
Mobile homes, permit to park on streets, 7.83
Noises prohibited, without permission from, 11. l 0
Official copy of ordinance shall be attested by, 2.14
Ordinance book, keeping of, 2.16
Ordinance, technical filing of, 2.11
Peddling and soliciting permit
appeal of, 10.36
application for, 10.34
duration of, 10.37
issuance of, 10.35
renewal of, 10.37
revocation of, 10.39
Police oaths on file with, 3 .4
Public nuisances
abatement notice, 9 .19
failure of owner to comply with abatement, 9.20
Purchase order, issuance of, 2.22
Septic tanks, permit for, 9 .5(b)
CLERK-TREASURER See CLERK, TOWN
CODE OF ORDINANCES See ORDINANCES,
CONDUCT, DISORDERLY See DISORDERLY CONDUCT
CONSTRUCTION See BUILDING REGULATIONS
COUNTY BOARD OF HEAL TH
Regulations, unlawful to violate, 9 .1
CULVERTS
Construction of, 5 .22
Damaging of, 5.7
1-1
D
DANCE HALLS
Rules governing, 11. 7
DEVICES, CONTROL See TRAFFIC, Control devices
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Boisterous conduct, 11.4
Dance halls, rules governing, 11. 7
Drinking in public, 11.6
General rules, 11.1
House ofill fame, 11.3
Profanity, 11.4
Public drunkenness, 11.5
Sex offenders prohibited in certain areas 11.31
Street lights, breaking of, 11.8
Vagrants, 11.2
DISTRICTS
Business, 7.15(a)
Residential, 7 .15 (b)
1-1
E
ELECTRICAL CODE FOR THE TOWN
Adoption of, 8.5
Permits, 8.35
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
Creation of, 8.29
Permit fees, 8.24
EMERGENCIES
Curfew authorization, 2.23
Enforcement of rules during, 2.24
State of, 2.23
EMPLOYEES, TOWN
Bonds to be posted, 2.20
Building inspector, 8.7
Clerk, 2.18
County health officer, 9 .1
Inspectors, building regulation, 8.29
Mayor,2.17
Officers and employees, appointment of, 2.19
Police, chief of, 3.3
Records, personnel
authority for procedures, 2.33
confidential information
inspections permitted of, list of, 2.36(b)
manner of obtaining, 2.40
correction of erroneous material, 2.42(1)
coverage of regulations, 2.34
custodian
clerk serves as, 2.37
duties, 2.38
objections to contents of
action on, 2.42
procedure for making, 2.41
review of, 2.42
policy of town, 2.35
public information, list of, 2.36(a)
purpose ofregulations, 2.32
removal of erroneous material, 2.42(1)
requests for information
procedure, 2.39
review of, 2.40
title of provisions, 2.31
Traffic regulations, obeying of, 7.30
EQUESTRIAN
Definition of, 7.8(d)
1-1
F
FEES
Building permit, 8.24, 8.32
Dance hall permit. 11. 7
FESTNALS
Hudson Butterfly Festival 10.61
FINES
Code violations, 1.5
Street lights, damaging of, 11.8
FIREARMS
Concealed handguns prohibited, 11.11-1
Regulations of, 11.11
FIRE CHIEF (FIRE INSPECTOR)
Citizens, calling upon for assistance, 4.4
Duties as fire inspector, 4.3
Duties of, general, 4.2
Fire protection outside of town, 4.11
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Apparatus, interfering with, 4.6, 4.8
Chief, 4.2
Chiefs duties as fire inspector, 4.3
Equipment not to be followed, 4.5
False alarms, 4.9
Firemen, interfering with, 4.6
General authority at fires, 4.4
Hose, 4.10
Obedience to officials required, 7 .27
Organization of, 4.1
Protection outside oflimits, 4.11
Right-of-way of streets when going to fires, 4.4( 4)
Traffic, directing or assisting police at fire, 7.26
FIRE EQUIPMENT
Apparatus, following, 7.65
Control of, 4.2
Fire hose, crossing of, 7.66
FIRE HAZARDS
Building constituting, 4.15
Building defects, 8.41
Encumbrances before or on fire exits, 4.12
1-1
Exit door to be unlocked, 4.13
Lots to be kept free of rubbish and combustible matter, 4.14
Public places, passageways to be kept open, 4.13
FIRE LIMITS
Primary, restrictions within, 8.50
Secondary, restrictions within, 8.51
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
FOOD
Administration
Administrative procedures, 13 .14
Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator, 13 .13
Development permit and certification requirements, 13.12
Designation oflocal administrator, 13.11
Variance procedures, 13 .15
Flood Hazard Reduction
General standards, 13 .16
Specific standards, 13 .17
Standards for streams without established
base flood elevations and or floodways, 13 .18
Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), 13.19
General Purposes
Abrogation and greater restrictions, 13.8
Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, 13 .5
Compliance, 13.7
Definitions, 13 .3
Establishment of development permit, 13.6
Interpretation, 13 .9
Lands to which this ordinance applies, 13 .4
Warning and disclaimer ofliability, 13.10
Penalty
Penalties for violation, 13 .20
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose
and 0 bj ecti ves
Statement of purpose; objectives, 13.2
Statutory authorization; findings of fact, 13.1
Sale of; health rules, 9 .10
FRANCHISES
Granting of; 2.11
1-1
G
GAMEROOMS (See ARCADES, 10.32.1)
GARBAGE (See also HEALTH AND SANITATION,
Garbage refuse collection and disposal)
GENERAL STATUTES OF NORTH CAROLINA
Limitations on issuance of building permits, 8.22(a)
Permits, rules governing, 8.35(4)
1-1
H
HANDGUNS
Carrying concealed handguns prohibited on Town property, 3.9
HEALTH AND SANITATION (See also GARBAGE)
Cemeteries
burial regulations, 9.45
cleanliness of, 9 .44
conduct in, 9.42
damaging of property, 9.46
use of; rules governing, 9 .41
vehicles in, 9.43
Garbage, refuse collection and disposal
function and power of the responsible department, 9.27
prohibited activities, 9 .31
purpose and definitions, 9 .25
responsibility for administration, 9 .26
standards and regulations collection, 9 .28
disposal, 9.30
storage, 9 .29
Garbage health regulations
animal waste, depositing of, 9.4(a)
animals, dead, depositing of, 9.4(a)
butchering restrictions, 9.8
county health regulations, violation of, 9 .1
food, sale of, 9.10
health officer, unlawful to interfere with, 9 .2
human waste, depositing of, 9.4(a)
livestock, keeping of, 9 .12
milk, 9.7
privies, regulated, 9.5(a)
right of entry, 9.3
septic tanks regulated, 9.5(b)
stagnant waters, removal of, 9 .9
trees, planting and protection of, 9.6
water tank, town, 9 .11
Weeds, growth of and refuse, accumulation of regulated
complaint and investigation of, 9 .18
cost incurred by owner, 9.21
debris from construction, 9 .24
declaration as public nuisance, 9 .17
failure of owner to comply with abatement, 9.20
notice to abate nuisance, 9 .19
procedure is alternative to other authorized procedures, 9 .23
removal charge to become a lien, 9 .22
1-1
HEALTH OFFICER
Board of health, county, supervisor of, 9.1
Delaying or hindering prohibited, 9 .2
Right of entry, 9.3
HEATING-AIR CONDITIONING INSPECTOR
Creation of, 8.29
Permit fees, 8.24( c)
HEATING CODE FOR THE TOWN
Adoption of, 8.4
Permits, 8.35
HOUSES
Moving of; 5.6
HOUSING CODE See MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
1-1
I
INSPECTION, BUILDINGS See BUILDING REGULATIONS,
Inspection department
INSPECTION DEPARTMENT See BUILDING REGULATIONS
1-1
1-1
L
LICENSES See PERMITS
LOTS
Rubbish and combustible matter not to accumulate on, 4.14
M
MAYOR
Committees, creation of, 2.9
Curfew authorization, 2.23
Disability of, provisions for, 2.2
Emergency, proclamation of, 2.23
Emergency rules, enforcement of, 2.24
No voting privilege on board matters except to break tie, 2.8
Oath taken at organizational meeting, 2.1
Office of, 2.17
Official copy of ordinances, signing of, 2.14
Planning board, appointment and removal of members, 12.2
Presiding over board meetings, 2. 7
Regular meetings with board, 2.3
Report to board, annual, 2.17
Special meetings, calling of, 2.4
MAYOR PRO TEMPO RE
Appointment of, 2.2
Duties of, 2.2
MILK
Emergency rules, enforcement of, 2.24
Presiding over board meetings, 2. 7
Special meetings, calling of, 2.4
MEETINGS, TOWN BOARD
Mayor to preside over, 2. 7
Minutes to be kept, 2.6
Organizational board, 2.1
Quorum, constitution of, 2.5
Regular, 2.3
Special, 2.4
Health regulations governing, 9. 7
MINIMUM HOUSING ST AND ARDS
Alternative remedies, 8.70
Board of adjustment as housing appeals board 8.71
Conflicting provisions, 8. 72
Costs a lien, 8.69
Definitions, 8.54
Electrical equipment, 8.57
Enforcement, 8.66
Findings, 8.53
Fitness of dwellings, 8.55
Heating, 8.57
1-1
Housing inspector, 8.64
In rem action, 8 .68
Insect control, 8.61
Inspections, 8.65
Location standards, 8.59
Owner and occupant responsibilities, 8.63, 8.65
Penalty, 8.73
Plumbing, 8.57
Purpose, 8.53
Rodent control, 8.61
Rooming houses, 8.62
Sanitary maintenance, 8.60
Service of complaints and orders, 8.67
Space, 8.59
Structural condition, 8.56
Use, 8.59
Ventilation, 8.58
Violations, 8.73
MOBILE HOMES
Parking on streets, 7.83
MOTORCYCLES
Defmition of, 7.3(b)
Riding on, rules governing, 7. 73
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES See UTILITIES,
MUNICIPAL
1-1
N
NORTH CAROLINA BUILDING CODE COUNCIL
Adoption of building code, 8.2
electrical code, 8.5
heating code, 8 .4
plumbing code, 8.3
residential building code, 8.6
NORTH CAROLINA BUILDING INSPECTORS ASSOCIATION
Adoption of, 8.6
NORTH CAROLINA COMMISSIONER OF INSURANCE
Appeals in general, building regulations, 8.49
Fire limits, primary, rules governing, 8.50
Stop orders, appeals made to, 8.3 8
NORTH CAROLINA ELECTRICAL CODE
(NORTH CAROLINA STATE BUILDING CODE VOLUME IV, ELECTRICAL)
Adoption of, 8.5
Electrical systems, maintenance of, to comply with, 8.8( d)
NORTH CAROLINA HEATING CODE (NORTH CAROLINA STATE BUILDING CODE
VOLUME III, HEATING)
Adoption of, 8.4
Mechanical systems, maintenance of, to comply with, 8.8(c)
NORTH CAROLINA INSURANCE COMMISSIONER
Fires to be reported to, 4.3
NORTH CAROLINA PLUMBING CODE (NORTH CAROLINA STATE BUILDING CODE,
VOLUME II, PLUMBING)
Adoption of, 8.3
Buildings or structures to comply with, 8.8(b)
NORTH CAROLINA STATE BUILDING CODE VOLUME I, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION
Adoption of, 8.2
Appeals in general, 8.49
Buildings or structures to comply with, 8.8(a)
Permits, rules governing, 8.35( 4)
Work changes, rules governing, 8.37
NORTH CAROLINA UNIFORM RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
Adoption of, 8.6
I-1
Buildings or structures to comply with, 8.8(a)
NUISANCES (See also HEALTH AND SANITATION,
Weeds, growth of and refuse, accumulation of regulated)
Animals, 11.16
Concealed handguns prohibited, 11.11-1
Fire arms, regulation of, 11.11
Fire bombs, prohibition of, 11.13
Noises, unnecessary, prohibited, 11.10
Posting of bills and advertisements, 11.12
1-1
0
ONE-MILE PERIMETER PLANNING AREA
Refer to Zoning Ordinance
ORDINANCE BOOK
Rules governing, 2.16
ORDINANCES, CODE OF
Appropriation of money, 2.15
Book of, 2.16
Confined to one subject, 2.13
Construction of, 1.1
Damaging of prohibited, 1.7
Definition of terms used, 1.1
Effective date of, 2.12
Official copy, definition of, 2.14
Provisions herein are continuations of existing ordinances, 1.2
Remedies for penalties not exclusive, l .5(b)
Repeal or expiration, effect of, 1.4
Section designations are in bold type, 1.3
Severability to parts of, 1.6
Technical, adoption of, 2.11
Violation of penalties of code, 1.5
Violations, continuance of, l.5(a)
I-1
p
PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS See STREETS AND SIDEWALKS,
Obstruction of
PARKING (See also STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; TRAFFIC; VEHICLES)
Method of
angle parking signs, obedience to, 7.108
angle parking to be indicated, 7.107
lights on parked vehicles, 7.109
standing or parking close to curb, 7 .106
Stopping for loading or unloading only
buses and cabs, restricted use of stands, 7.122
buses and cabs, stopping of, regulated, 7.121
freight curb loading zone, 7.119
passenger curb loading zone, 7 .118
public carrier stops and stands, 7.120
Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places
adjacent to schools, 7.115
alleys, restrictions on, 7.112
all-night parking prohibited, 7.113
certain purposes prohibited, 7 .114
hazardous or congested places, 7 .117
no signs required, 7 .110
one-way roadways, 7.116
vehicles not to obstruct traffic, 7.111
Stopping, standing or parking restricted or
prohibited on certain streets
application of article, 7.123
certain streets, parking prohibited at all times, 7 .125
certain streets, parking time limited, 7 .126
regulations not exclusive, 7.124
signs required, 7.127
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
Permit required, 10.33
application for, 10.33
duration of, 10.37
exceptions to, 10.40
issuance of, 10.35
refusal to issue, appeal of, 10.36
revocation of, 10.39
transferability prohibited, 10.38
PEDESTRIANS See TRAFFIC, Pedestrians,
rights and duties
1-1
PENALTIES
Animals, 11.16-2
Bird sanctuary violations, 11.17
Code violations, 1.5
Street lights, damaging of, 11.8
PERMITS (See also CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY)
Bills, posting of, 11.12
Building regulations
building condemnation, appeal of, 8.46
changes in work, 8.35
corrective action, notice of, 8.44, 8.45
fees for, 8.24, 8.32
inspection, 8.14
issuance of, 8.23, 8.32
limitations on issuance, 8.22
plans and specifications to accompany, 8.21
revocation of, 8.39
time limitations on validity, 8.36
Dance halls, rules governing, 11. 7
Mobile homes, parking on streets, 7.83
Noises prohibited without permission, 11.10
Parades and demonstrations
issuance of, 5.12
requirements of, 5.11, 5.12
revocation of, 5 .14
Peddling and soliciting
application for, 10.34
duration of, 10.37
issuance of, 10.35
refusal, appeal of, 10.36
renewal of, 10.37
requirement of, 10.33
revocation of, 10.39
transferability prohibited, 10.38
Pool rooms and bowling alleys
application for, 10.26
form and content of, 10.28
holder of permit responsible for employees actions, 10.31
prohibitions to be observed, 10.29
refusal of, 10.27
requirement for, 10.25
revocation of, 10.32
rules for operation of pool rooms, 10.30
Processions and parades, requirement of, 7. 70
Septic tanks, 9.5(b)
Sidewalk construction, 5.2
Streets, digging in, 5 .1
1-1
PERSONNEL See EMPLOYEES, TOWN
PICKETING See STREETS AND SIDEWALKS,
Obstruction of
PLANNING BOARD
Creation of, 12. l
Members of, 12.2
Organization and rules, 12.3
Powers and duties, 12.5, 12.7
Purposes in view, 12.6
Staff and finances, 12.4
PLUMBING CODE
Adoption of, 8.3
Permits, 8.35
PLUMBING INSPECTOR
Creation of, 8.29
Permit fees, 8.24(b)
POLICE, CHIEF OF
Duties of, 3 .3
Emergency rules, enforcement of, 2.24
Fire bombs, prohibition of, 11.14
Holding of other office, 3 .4
Oath of office, 3 .4
Officers assigned to enforce traffic regulations, 7 .26
Parades and demonstrations
issuance of permits, 5.12
picket lines, allotment oftime, 5.16(5)
revocation of permits, 5 .14
Police department organization, 3 .1
Vehicles, abandoned
disposition of, 11.27
removal of, 11.23
sale of, 11.25
POLICE, DEPARTMENT
Auxiliary Police Division, 3 .10
Board to control, 3 .2
Dogs, impoundment of, 11.16
Extraterritorial jurisdiction of policemen, 3. 7
Funeral processions, designation of, 7.69
Holding of other office, 3.4
1-1
Oath of office, 3 .4
Organization of, 3.1
Police, resisting of, prohibited, 3.8
Policemen, duties and powers of, 3.6
Suspension of members, 3.2
Traffic division
definition of, 7 .9(b)
Traffic officers
authority of, 7.26(a), (b)
definition of, 7.9(a)
obedience to, 7.27
POOL ROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS
Arcades, 10.32.1
Permits
application for, 10.26
form and content, 10.28
permit holder responsible for employee action, 10.31
pool rooms, rules for operation of, 10.30
prohibitions to be observed, 10.29
refusal of, 10.27
requirement of, 10.25
revocation of, 10.32
PORNOGRAPHY
Sales or distribution, 10.51
PRIVIES
Regulation of, 9.5(a)
PROCESSIONS (See also STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS, Parades and demonstrations)
Drivers in, rules governing, 7.68
Driving through, 7.67
Exemptions from regulations, 5 .17
Funeral, to be identified, 7 .69
Permit, requirement of, 7. 70
PROSTITUTION
Prohibition of, 11.3
PURCHASING
Rules governing, 2.22
1-1
Q
QUORUM
Constitution of, 2.5
R
RAILROAD CROSSINGS (See also RAILROADS)
Bridges and underpasses, improvements of, 5.24(b)
Costs for construction, 5.23(b)
Elimination of grade crossings for bridges and underpasses, 5.24(a)
Gates required, 5 .23 ( c)
Obstructing streets, 5.23(a)
Trains approaching gates, 5.23(d)
Warning devices for gates, 5.23(e)
Warning devices, responsibility of costs for, 5.23(f)
RAILROADS (See also RAILROAD CROSSINGS)
Obedience to signal, indicating approach of train, 7.64
Sign and signal, interference with, 7.45
Trains blocking crossings regulated, 7 .81
Trains, speed limit of, 7.82
REFUSE See HEALTH AND SANITATION
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE FOR ONE
AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS OF THE TOWN
Adoption of, 8.6
RESIDENTIAL ZONES See ZONING, PLANNING,
Zones, division of
1-1
s
SANITATION See HEALTH AND SANITATION
SEPTIC TANKS
Regulations of, 9 .5(b)
SEWERS See UTILITIES, MUNICIPAL, Water and sewer
SIGNALS See TRAFFIC, Control devices
SIGNS (See also TRAFFIC, Control devices)
Damaging of, 5.8
SMOKING
In municipal buildings and vehicles, 9.51 - 9.55
SOLICITING See PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
SPEED LIMITS
Exceptions, 7.49
General rules, 7.48
STATE BOARD OF HEALTH
Food, sale of, 9.10
Privies, regulated, 9.5(a)
Septic tanks regulated, 9.5(b)
STATE IDGHWAY COMMISSION
Railroad crossing equipment, maintenance costs, method of, 5.23(f)
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS (See also TRAFFIC; PARKING; VEIDCLES)
Cleanliness of
ball, playing of, 5 .28
burning of trash, 5.25
nail and tack restrictions, 5 .29
snow and ice removal, 5.27
throwing of trash, 5.25
tree trimmings on, 5.26
Damaging of
bridges and culverts, 5. 7
excavations to be covered or lighted, 5 .4
1-1
house moving, 5.6
lights and signs, 5. 8
machinery, damaging to prohibited, 5.5
permit to dig in, 5 .1
repair of, 5 .3
sidewalk construction, 5.2
Obstruction of
assembly on sidewalks, 5 .9
building or structures, construction, not to encroach upon, 8.14( c)
construction near sidewalk, 5 .20
culvert construction, 5 .22
display of goods on prohibited, 5 .18
parades and demonstrations
certain activities are prohibited, 5 .13
definition of terms used, 5 .10
exceptions to rules, 5 .17
interference with prohibited, 5.15
permit required, 5 .11
permit requirements and issuance of, 5 .12
permit revocation, 5 .14
picket lines, specific rules applying to, 5 .16
placing of objects on, 5.19
railroad bridges and underpasses, replacing crossings, 5.24
railroad crossings, rules governing, 5 .23
sheds and awnings, 5.21
One-way streets and alleys
signs to indicate one-way, 7.55
streets and part streets that are one way, 7.56
Play streets, declaration of, 7.46
1-1
T
TAXES
Gross Receipts Tax, from short-term lease or rental vehicles I 0.9
TAXICABS (See also CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY)
Certificate of public convenience, rules governing, 10.11- 10.22 et seq.
Definition of terms used, 10.10
Stands, designation of by signs, 7 .120
Stands, restricted use of, 7.122
Stopping, standing, parking, regulations on, 7.121
TOWN PLANNING BOARD SEE PLANNING BOARD
TRAFFIC (See also PARKING; STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; VEHICLES)
Bicycle regulations
bicycle path, riding on, 7.98(c)
carrying articles, 7 .102
clinging to vehicles, 7. I 0 I
톍ontrol devices, obedience to, 7.96
effect of regulations, 7 .94
emerging from alley or driveway, 7.100
equipment required, 7.105
number of persons riding restricted, 7.97(b)
parking, 7.103
riding on, permanent scat required, 7.97(a)
roadways, riding on, 7.98(a), (b)
speed, 7.99
traffic laws apply to bicycle riders, 7.95
Control devices
authority to install, 7.3 7
flashing signals, 7.4 3
interference with, 7.45
maintenance of, 7.37
obedience to, 7.39
pedestrian signals, 7.42
play streets, marking of, 7.46
railroad, interference with, 7.45
signal legend, 7.41
signs must be in proper place for enforcement of violation, 7.40
specifications for, 7.38
traffic lanes, 7.4 7
unauthorized signs, signals, or markings, 7.44
Driving rules, miscellaneous
alighting from public conveyances or other vehicles, 7.76
backing up, limitations on, 7. 72
boarding to public conveyances or other vehicles, 7.76
clinging to vehicles, 7. 7 4
controlled access, 7.75
1-1
drivers in a procession, 7.68
fire apparatus, following of, 7 .65
fire hose, crossing of, 7.66
front seat, 3 person limit, 7.80
funeral or other procession driving through, 7.67
funeral processions to be identified, 7.69
mobile home restrictions, 7.83
motorcycles, 7. 73
persons riding, to stay inside vehicle, 7. 79
processions and parades, when permits are required, 7. 70
riding unlawful, description of, 7. 77
sidewalks, driving on, 7.71
trains blocking crossings regulated, 7 .81
trains, speed limit of, 7 .82
vehicles, entering of, riding in, or jumping
on prohibited without owner's permission, 7.78
Enforcement of regulations
animals, riding on, traffic regulations apply, 7.28
coasters, use of restricted, 7.29
employees, public to obey traffic regulations, 7.30
fire department, directing traffic at fires, assisting police, 7.26( c)
obedience to police and fire department officials, 7.27
police, authority of, 7.26(a), (b)
push carts, propelling of, traffic regulations apply, 7.28
skates, use of restricted, 7.29
vehicles, emergency, approaching of, rules governing, 7.32
vehicles, emergency authorized, rules governing, 7.31
Words and phrases
alley,7.lO(e)
bicycles, 7.3
block, 7.lO(f)
control devices, 7. l 4(b)
control devices, official, 7.14(a)
crosswalk, 7.12(b)
definition of terms used. 7.1
districts, 7 .15
driver, 7.8(b)
equestrian, 7.8 (d)
intersection, 7.12(a)
motorcycles, 7.3
official time standard, 7. 7
parking, 7.6( c)
pedestrian, 7 .8( c)
person, 7.8(a)
police,7.9(a)
private driveway, 7.lO(b)
private road, 7.1 O(b)
railroads, 7.4( a)
right-of-way,7.5(b)
roadway, 7.lO(c), 7.11
sidewalk,7.10( d)
1-1
stopping, 7.6(a), (b)
streets, 7.lO(a) traffic, 7.5(a)
traffic division, 7 .9(b)
trains, railroad, 7.4
vehicles, 7 .2
zones, 7.13
Pedestrians rights and duties
crossing at right angles, 7.88
drivers to exercise due care, 7.93
prohibited crossing, 7.90
right half of cross walk to be used by, 7 .87
right-of-way at cross walk, 7.86
soliciting rides or business, 7.92
subject to traffic signals, 7.85
yielding regulations, 7.89
walking along roadways, 7.91
Special stops required
emerging from alley, driveway or building, 7.62
intersections, where stop is required, 7 .59
railroad signal, obedience to approach of train, 7.64
stopping when traffic is obstructed, 7.63
stop signs, erection of, 7.58
stop signs, specification for, 7.60
vehicles to stop at stop signs, 7.61
Speed regulations
exceptions to general rules on state highways, 7.49
Trucks
no thru truck traffic, 7.128
Turning movements
markers, turning, 7 .51
rules, general, 7.48
TRASH
no-turn signs, obedience to, 7.53
position required for turning at intersection, 7 .50
signs, turning, restricted, authority to place, 7.52
turning around, limitations on, 7.54
Burning of, 5.25
Throwing of, 5.25
TREES
Planting and protection of, 9 .6
Trimmings of, not to be left on street, 5 .26
1-1
u
UTILITIES, MUNICIPAL
Article 1 and Article 2
City of Lenoir's Water/Sewer Ordinance
v
VEHICLES (See also PARKING; STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; TRAFFIC)
Abandoned
costs of removal, 11.24
definition of, 11.20
disposition of, 11.27
immunity of liability, 11.30
junked, definition of, 11.21
notice to owner of removal, 11.24
owner to remove, 11.22
proceeds of sale, disposition of, 11.26
removal by town, 11.23
sale of, 11.25
unidentified, disposition of, 11.28
unidentified, proceeds of sale, 11.29
Definition of, 7 .2
Emergency, approaching of, 7.32
Emergency, authorized, 7.31
Fire apparatus, approacbrnent of, 4.4(5)
Fire equipment not to be followed, 4.5
Tax, gross receipts tax from short-term lease vehicles, 10.9
VIOLATIONS See PENALTIES
w
W ARN1NG DEVICES
Railroad, 5.23(e), (f)
WATER, MUNICIPAL See UTILITIES, MUNICIPAL, Water and sewer
WATERS, STAGNANT
Removal of, 9.9
1-1
WEAPONS
Parades and demonstrations, carrying of, during, 5.13(1)
WEEDS See HEALTH AND SANITATION, Weeds,
growth of and refuse, accumulation of regulated
WINE
Sale of prohibited, 10.41
z
ZONES, TRAFFIC
Definition of terms used, 7 .13
Freight curb loading, 7 .119
Passengers curb loading, 7 .118
Passenger loading, 7.121, 7.122
ZONING CODE
Reserved, See Chapter 12, Article 2
1-1

Amended-
February, 2006
September,2006
December, 2008
July,2011
October, 2012
March,2014
June,2015
August, 2017
May, 2018
November 18, 2019
ZONING ORDINANCE
OF THE
TOWN OF HUDSON
NORTH CAROLINA
Compiled by:
Western Piedmont Council of Governments
May, 1989
Amended-
February, 2006
September,2006
December, 2008
July,2011
October, 2012
March,2014
June,2015
August, 2017
May, 2018
November 18, 2019
TOWN OF HUDSON, NORTH CAROLINA
Janet Winkler, Mayor
Rebecca M. Bentley, Town Manager
Tamra T. Swanson, Town Clerk
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Larry Chapman, Mayor Pro Tem Jonathan Greer
Jeff Link Barry Mitchell
Rick Shew Ann Smith
PLANNING AND BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Roger Barlow, Chairman James J. Amelia
Dale Caldwell (ETJ) Dot Coleman
Tim Gordon (ETJ) Jerry Triplett
Betty Smith (ETJ), Vice Chairman David Deal (Alternate)
Town Planner: Teresa Kinney
Technical Assistance Provided By: Western Piedmont Council of Governments
Amended-
February, 2006
September,2006
December, 2008
July,2011
October, 2012
March,2014
June,2015
August, 2017
May, 2018
November 18, 2019
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
ARTICLE II: SHORT TITLE
ARTICLE III: ENACTMENT CLAUSE
ARTICLE IV: ZONING INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION
Section 40 Interpretation and Application
Section 40.1 Compliance with Ordinance
Section 40.2 Zoning Jurisdiction
ARTICLE V: PROVISION FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
Section 50 Official Zoning Map
Section 50.1 Identification of Official Zoning Map
ARTICLE VI: DEFINITION OF TERMS
Section 60 Interpretations and Definitions of Certain Words and Terms
Section 60.1 Definitions
ARTICLE VII: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Section 70 Use Districts
Section 71 District Boundaries Shown on Map
Section 72 Due Consideration Given to District Boundaries
Section 73 Rules Governing Boundaries
ARTICLE VIII: USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT
Section 80.1 R-20 Residential Low Density District
Section 80.2 R-15 Residential Medium Density
Section 80.3 RA-15 Residential-Agricultural District
Section 80.31 R-12 Medium Density Residential District
Amended-
February, 2006
September,2006
December, 2008
July,2011
October, 2012
March,2014
June,2015
August, 2017
May, 2018
November 18, 2019
Section 80.4 R-85 Residential Medium-High Density District
Section 80.5 R-75 Residential High Density District
Section 80.55 R-SF Residential Single Family District
Section 80.6 R-75A Residential High Density District
Section 80.7 R-MH Residential-Manufactured Home District
Section 80.8 O-I Office-Institutional District
Section 80.9 N-B Neighborhood Business District
Section 80.10 C-B Central Business District
Section 80.11 H-B Highway Business District
Section 80.12 L-I Light Industrial District
Section 80.13 H-I Heavy Industrial District
ARTICLE IX: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 90 Application
Section 91 Reduction of Lot and Yard Areas Prohibited
Section 92 Relationship of Building to Lot
Section 93 Nonconforming Uses
Section 94 Sign Regulations
Section 95 Permitted Signs by Zoning District
Section 96 Regulations Governing Manufactured Home Parks
Section 97 Provisions for Individual Manufactured Homes
Section 98 Prohibition of Manufactured Homes as Office Buildings
ARTICLE X: EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
Section 100 Lot of Record
Section 101 Front Yard for Dwellings
Section 102 Height Limitations
Section 103 Visibility at Intersections
Section 104 Relationship of Building to Lot
Section 105 Planned Unit Development
Section 106 Provisions for Group Projects
Section 107 Provisions for Satellite Dish Antennas
Amended-
February, 2006
September,2006
December, 2008
July,2011
October, 2012
March,2014
June,2015
August, 2017
May, 2018
November 18, 2019
Section 108 Provisions for Automobile Dealerships
Section 109 Trash Container and Dumpster Screen/Buffers
Section 109.5 Provisions for Sedimentation and Erosion Control
ARTICLE XI: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Section 110 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Section 111 Multi-Family and Commercial Landscaping Requirements
ARTICLE XII: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 120 Zoning Enforcement Officer
Section 121 Zoning Compliance Certificate Required
Section 122 Application for Zoning Compliance Certificate
Section 123 Zoning Certificate of Occupancy for New and Altered Structures
Section 124 Remedies, Civil and Criminal Penalties
ARTICLE XIII: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 130 Establishment of Board of Adjustment
Section 131 Jurisdiction and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
Section 132 Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment
Section 133 Appeals, Hearings, and Notice
Section 134 Stay of Proceedings
Section 135 Powers and Duties of the Board of Adjustment
Section 136 Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
Section 137 Duties of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Board of Adjustment, Courts and Town Board of Commissioners on Matters of Appeal
ARTICLE XIV: AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES
Section 140 Procedure for Amendments
Section 141 Protest Petition
Section 142 Procedure for Resubmission of a Proposed Amendment
Amended-
February, 2006
September,2006
December, 2008
July,2011
October, 2012
March,2014
June,2015
August, 2017
May, 2018
November 18, 2019
ARTICLE XV: LEGAL PROVISIONS
Section 150 Interpretation, Purpose, and Conflict
Section 151 Reenactment and Repeal of Existing Zoning Ordinance
Section 152 Validity
ARTICLE XVI: WATERSHED PROTECTION
Section 160 Authority and Enactment
Section 161 Jurisdiction
Section 162 Exceptions to Applicability
Section 163 Low Density Development Standards
Section 164 High Density Development Standards
Section 165 High Density Development Permit Application
Section 166 Stormwater Control Structure
Section 167 Posting of Financial Security Required
Section 168 Maintenance and Upkeep
Section 169 Application and Inspection Fees
Section 1610 Inspections and Release of the Performance Bond
Section 1611 Cluster of Planned Unit Development
Section 1612 Buffer Areas Required
Section 1613 Watershed Administrator and Duties thereof
Section 1614 Appeal from the Watershed Administrator
Section 1615 Establishment of a Watershed Review Board
Section 1616 Powers and Duties of the Board of Adjustment
Section 1617 Appeals from the Board of Commissioners or the Board of Adjustment
Section 1618 Remedies
Section 1619 Sanctions
Section 1620 Amendments
Section 1621 Definitions
Section 1622 Effective Date
Section 1623 Adoption Date
2
ARTICLE I
PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the community, an ordinance regulating the uses of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, commerce, residence, recreation, public activities or other purposes; the size of yards, courts and other open spaces; the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the density and distribution of populations; creating districts of said purposes, and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method of administration, amendment and enforcement; providing penalties for violations; providing for a Board of Adjustment and defining the duties and powers of said board; repealing conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes pursuant to the authority granted by the General Statutes of North Carolina, Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 3.
ARTICLE II
SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Hudson, North Carolina," and the map which is identified by the title "Official Zoning Map, Hudson, North Carolina," may be known as the "Zoning Map."
ARTICLE III
ENACTMENT CLAUSE
The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Hudson, in pursuance of the authority granted by the General Statutes of North Carolina, particularly Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 3, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following Articles and Sections.
ARTICLE IV
ZONING INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION
Section 40. Interpretation and Application. In interpreting and applying this Ordinance, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purposes of the Ordinance. Except as herein provided, this Ordinance shall not be deemed to
3
interfere with, abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this Ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of the land or buildings or upon the height of buildings or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules,
regulations, permits or any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern, except as provided in Article XV of this Ordinance.
40.1 Compliance with Ordinance. No land, building, or structure shall be used, no buildings or structure shall be erected, and no existing building or structure shall be moved, added to, enlarged or altered except in conformity with this Ordinance.
40.2 Zoning Jurisdiction. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the Town of Hudson and that land designated by the Zoning Map as authorized by North Carolina General Statute 160A-360, to be known as extraterritorial area.
ARTICLE V
PROVISIONS FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
Section 50. Official Zoning Map. The districts established in Article VII of this Ordinance as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, are hereby adopted as part of this Ordinance.
Section 51. Identification of Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by signature of the Mayor, attested by the Town Clerk, and bearing the seal of the Town of Hudson.
ARTICLE VI
DEFINITION OF TERMS
Section 60. Interpretation and Definition of Certain Terms and Words. For the purpose of interpreting this Ordinance, certain words or terms are herein defined. Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall for the purpose of this Ordinance have the meaning herein indicated.
a. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
b. Words used in the singular tense include the plural and words used in the plural number include the singular.
c. The word "person" includes a firm association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust and company, as well as an individual.
4
d. The word "lot" includes the word "structure".
e. The word "building" includes the word "structure".
f. The word "shall" is mandatory, not directory.
g. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or buildings shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
Section 60.1 Definitions.
60.11 Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building.
60.12 Alley. A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means or access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
60.12.1 Automobile Dealership: Storage and display for sale of more than two motor vehicles or any type of truck semi-trailer, and where repair, body work or part sales is incidental to the operation of the new or used vehicle sales. Motor vehicles sales include motor vehicle retail or wholesale sales. Motor vehicle may include, but is not limited to boats, trucks and truck-semi trailer dealerships. All Automobile Dealerships are subject to the provisions of Article X Section 108 of this ordinance. (5/03)
60.13 Billboard. An outdoor structure or display, pictorial or otherwise, either freestanding or attached to a building, which advertises or attracts attention to a business, commodity, service or other activity conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises on which said sign is located. Billboards located within the Hudson Planning Jurisdiction shall not exceed 300 square feet and shall not be located within 500 feet of another billboard.
60.14 Boarding House. A building where, for compensation, lodging and/or meals are provided for not more than ten (10) persons. This term shall also include the term rooming house and tourist home.
60.14a. Brew Pub :A restaurant-pub that sell 25% of its own beer on site. The beer is brewed primarily for sale in the restaurant or pub (bar). Brew Pub/Bar is considered a conditional use in Central Business District (C-B), and Highway Business District (H-B). Adopted 4/19/2018
60.15 Buffer Strip. A buffer strip as required by certain sections of this Ordinance shall be one of or equal to the following:
5
a. A six-foot high wood, basket weave type face;
b. A six-foot high solid picket type fence with the pickets being placed facing the adjoining property;
c. A six-foot high chain link type fence with panel inserts;
d. A six-foot high, open type fence with evergreen vegetation planted facing the adjoining property and completely blocking the view from one area to another;
e. A six-foot high masonry wall;
f. Additional suitable landscaping as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. This landscaping may include existing vegetation.
Each application for a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy for those use districts where a buffer is required shall include information as to the location and type of buffer to be erected. In instances where a commercial or industrial use directly abuts a residential use, a fence or wall may be required by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Once the buffer strip is erected, it shall be property maintained.
60.16 Building. Any roofed structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property.
60.17 Building, Accessory. A building subordinate to the main building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or principal building, and located on the same lot therewith. Such accessory buildings may not be used for human habitation. No transport trailer, or manufactured home shall be allowed as an accessory building or use. Pools and spas shall be included in this definition as well as detached canopies. See definition Pool, spas 60.57.1 Adopted 8/22/2017
60.18 Building Height. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front building line to the highest point of the roof beams adjacent to the front of the wall in the case of a flat roof, to the average height of the gables in the case of a pitched roof, and to the deck line in the case of a masonry roof.
60.19 Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
60.20 Building Setback Line. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building (excluding the outermost three feet of any uncovered porches, steps, eaves, gutters, and similar fixtures), and the street or highway right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto.
60.21 Cellar. A story having more than one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
6
60.22 Clinic. An establishment where patients are admitted for special study and treatment by one or more licensed practitioners in medically related arts.
60.23 Conditional Use Permit. A permit granted by the Board of Adjustment after said Board holds a public hearing. Such a permit authorizes a use, the nature of which, would not be appropriate generally throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, size, location or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
60.24 Condominium. A system of separate ownership of individual units in a multiple-unit building.
60.24-a. Craft Beer Bottle Shop/Taproom. An establishment that offers various beers for sale on tap or for on-premise consumption and by the bottle, for off-premise consumption. Adopted 4/19/2018
60.25 Customary Home Occupation. Any use conducted entirely within the dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof, nor is visible from a street and in connection with which there is no display, no outside storage, or display of anything, no stock-in-trade nor commodity sold on the premises; provided further that no person not a resident on the premises is employed in connection with the activity, except that not more than two assistants may be employed by the following occupations: physician, dentist, attorney, chiropractor. Such occupation shall be carried on solely within the main dwelling and shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor space of the dwelling.
60.26 Day Nursery. An agency, organization, or individual providing daytime care of six (6) or more children not related by blood or marriage to, or not the legal wards or foster children of the attendant adult.
60.27 Dwelling Unit. An enclosure containing sleeping, kitchen and bathroom facilities designed for and used or held ready for use as a permanent residence by one family.
60.28 Dwelling, Single-Family. A building designed for and containing one (1) dwelling unit.
60.29 Dwelling, Two-Family. A building designed for and containing two (2) dwelling units.
60.30 Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building designed for and containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
60.30.1Event definition
7
An event is an activity or gathering which meets any of the following criteria:
 Event definition means an activity or gathering in any calendar year which is conducted, organized and sponsored by non-profit organizations or for-profit organizations and is open to all participants on an equal basis.
1. Use of or impact/encroachment on any city street, sidewalk, alley or other right-of-way area (which includes any indirect impact that will affect the flow of typical vehicular or pedestrian traffic). 2. Is likely to draw a crowd to a venue not properly suited and has the potential to require special accommodations, regulations, traffic control devices, noise control, or public service personnel. 3. Presence or participation of any for-profit or non-profit vendor that intends to make a sale, advertise for sale, solicit sales, offer for sale, distribute business/organizational information, or provides a service or offer/advertise to provide a service and is not already properly licensed to do so by the Town of Hudson Adopted 11/19/2019. 4. May require the approval of two or more town departments for inspections, assistance or permits. Adopted11/19/2019
60.31 Family. One or more blood or marriage related persons or five (5) or fewer unrelated persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boarding house or hotel as herein defined.
60.32 Family Care Home. A home licensed by the North Carolina State Department of Human Resources with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment for not more than six (6) resident handicapped persons defined by the State of North Carolina. Such family care homes shall not be within a one-half mile radius of an existing family care home or group home as measured from property line to property line. This definition shall also include the term "Group Home."
60.32.1 Farm Winery The use of land for producing agricultural products including grapes and other fruit used by the winery in the manufacture of unfortified wine owned by the winery and approved by the Alcohol Beverage Control Commission for sale in North Carolina upon obtaining the appropriate permit under G.S. 18B-1001. Farm Wineries meet the bonafide farm exemption of G.S. 153A-340(b2). These facilities may incorporate tasting rooms, tours, and/or other forms of agritourism. A facility which only provides tasting or retail sale of wine is not considered a farm winery. Adopted 11/19/2019
60.32a Food Cart (Unmotorized). A cart not to exceed thirty (30) cubic feet of storage area for goods beings sold. Entire size of cart may be no larger than thirty-five (35) square feet. A food cart may not have any sign larger than three square feet associated with the business,
8
must be attached to the cart, and not be a banner.
60.32-b. Food Service Truck/Trailer. Food truck shall mean a vehicle propelled by an engine which has been specifically designed or used for mobile food vending. 밊ood truck industry shall mean both food trucks and food trailers shall mean, for the purposes of a mobile food vending license, a place, location, site, or separate area where food intended to be served in individual portions is prepared or served for a charge or required donation. Adopted 04/19/2018
60.33 Grade. An average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure.
60.34 Gross Floor Area. The total floor area of all buildings in a project including basements, mezzanines and upper floors exclusive of stairways and elevator shafts. It excludes separate service facilities outside the main building such as boiler rooms and maintenance shops.
60.35 Group Camp. A camp providing camping facilities for ten (10) or more people.
60.36 Heliports. A landing and takeoff place for a helicopter.
60.36.1 Internet Sweepstakes Caf뭩/Electronic Gaming Establishment. Any business enterprise where persons utilize electronic machines, including but not limited to computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games of chance, including sweepstakes, and where cash, merchandiser or other items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such distribution is determined by electronic games played or by predetermined odds. Electronic gaming operations may include, but are not limited to, internet cafes, internet sweepstakes, electronic gaming machines/operations, or cyber cafes. This does not include any lottery approved by the State of North Carolina or any non-profit operation that is otherwise lawful under State Law (i.e. church or civic organization fundraisers). Such uses will be permitted in the H-B (Highway Business) District
60.37 Junkyard. The use of more than 200 square feet of the area of any lot for the storage, keeping
or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals, or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or parts thereof.
60.38 Kennel. Any location where boarding, caring for or keeping of more than a total of three (3) dogs or cats or other small animals or a combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, and also raising, breeding, caring for or boarding dogs, cats or other small animals for commercial purposes.
60.39 Kennel, Noncommercial. Any location where the boarding, caring for and keeping of more than three (3) but not more than ten (10) dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, not for
9
commercial purposes, but as a hobby such the raising of show and hunting dogs.
60.40 Lot. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same.
60.41 Lot, Corner. A lot which occupies the interior angle at the intersection of two street lines which make an angle of more than 45 degrees and less than 135 degrees with each other. The street line forming the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot except where the two street lines are equal, in which case the owner shall be required to specify which is the front when requesting a zoning compliance permit.
60.42 Lot Coverage. The percentage of a lot which may be covered with buildings or structures, excluding walks, drives, and other similar uses and recreational facilities which are accessory to a permitted use.
60.43 Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
60.44 Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Caldwell County Register of Deeds or a lot described by metes and bounds, description of which has been so recorded at the Caldwell County Register of Deeds.
60.45 Lot Width. The distance between side lot lines measured at the building setback line.
60.46 Manufactured Home. A dwelling unit constructed and designed for transportation on its own chassis and placement on a temporary or semi-permanent foundation having a measurement of forty (40) feet or more in length and eight (8) feet or more in width. It shall also comply with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards adopted by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and meet the Appearance Criteria established by Section 97 of this Ordinance. This term shall also include the term "Mobile Home".
60.47 Manufactured Home Park. Any place or tract of land maintained, offered or used for the parking of two or more mobile homes or trailer houses, used or intended to be used as a dwelling unit.
60.48 Manufactured Home Stand. That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of one manufactured home unit.
60.48- a. Micro-Brewery. A brewery that produces less than 15,000 barrels of beer per year with 75% or more of its beer sold off-site. Micro-brewery may also include a tasting room and retail space to sell to patrons onsite. Appropriate accessory uses such as outdoor taproom/tap-shack maybe included on the premises as the micro-brewery.
10
The micro-brewery is allowed as a conditional use in Central Business District (C-B) and Highway Business District (H-B) and a permitted use in the Light-Industrial District (L-I) if the operation is no greater than 4,500 square feet of floor space. Consisting of no outdoor storage visible to the passing public, and appropriate loading and unloading facilities. Adopted 04/19/2018
60.49 Modular Home. A dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the North Carolina State Building Code and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. A modular home shall consist of two or more sections transported to the site on a truck and erected or joined together on the site.
60.50 Motel. A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for transient guests and offered to the motoring public for compensation in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made primarily direct from an exterior walkway rather than from an inside lobby.
60.50-b. Nano-Breweries. Sometimes referred to as pico breweries, or bucket breweries, distribute to a limited area and only make beer in very small quantities (typically three (3) barrels or less).
Nano-brewery is a conditional use in the Central Business District (C-B), and Highway Business District (H-B) and permitted use in the Light-Industrial District (L-I). Adopted 04/19/2018
60.51 Nonconforming Use. A building or land which does not conform to the use regulations of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Ordinance, or as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this Ordinance.
60.52 Nursing Home. A home for the aged or ill persons in which three (3) or more persons not of the same immediate family are provided with food, shelter and care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. This definition shall also include the term "rest home."
60.53 Open Space. Any front, side or rear yards, courts, usable open space provided about a building in order to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
60.54 Open Storage. Unroofed storage area, whether fenced or not.
60.55 Parking Space. A storage space of not less than 9 feet by 18 feet for one automobile plus the necessary access space.
60.56 Parking Lot. Any designated area designed for temporary accommodation of motor vehicles of the motoring public in normal operating condition whether for a fee or as a service.
11
60.57 Planned Unit Development (PUD). A form of development characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units, clustering of buildings and providing common open space, density increases, and a mix of building types. It permits the planning of a project and a calculation of densities over the entire development rather than on an individual lot-by-lot basis. The site must include two or more principal buildings. Such development shall be based on a plan which allows for flexibility of design most available under normal district requirements.
60.57.1 Pools,spas. Includes all above ground, below ground, portable, nonportable, pools and spas. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes a spa in which all controls, water-heating and water-circulating equipment are an intergral part of the product (Appendix G. Section AG101-108, 2012 North Carolina Residential Code). Adopted 8/22/2017
60.58 Principal Use. The primary use and chief purpose of a lot or structure. See Principal Building (60.19).
60.58- a. Regional Brewery. A brewery with the annual beer production of 15,000-60,000 gallon barrels. The regional brewery is a permitted use in Light-Industrial District (L-I) and Heavy- Industrial District (H-I). Any floor space greater than 4,501 must be located in the Light-Industrial District (L-I) or Heavy-Industrial District (H-I) with no less than two (2) loading docks. Outdoor storage must be contained under a shelter out of view of the general passing public. Adopted 04/18/2018
60.59 Satellite Dish Antenna. An antenna, three (3) feet in diameter or larger, designed to receive television, radio, and other communication signals primarily from orbiting satellites.
60.60 Sewerage System, Public. A system serving two or more connections. Plans for public and community sewer systems must be approved by the Division of Environmental Management, North Carolina Department of Natural Resources and Community Development.
60.61 Sewerage System, Individual. An individual septic tank system of sewage disposal. Individual sewage disposal systems must be installed and maintained in accordance with the Division of Health Services, North Carolina Department of Human Services "Rules and Regulations Governing the Disposal of Sewage from any Residence, Place of Business or Place of Public Assembly in North Carolina," and the regulations of the County Board of Health.
60.62 Sign. Any form of publicity, visible from any public thoroughfare directing attention to an individual activity, business, service, commodity or product and conveyed by means of words, figures, numerals, lettering, emblems, devices, designs, trademarks, or trade names or other pictorial matter designed to convey such information and displayed by means of bills, panels, posters, paints, or other devices erected on an open framework, or attached or
12
otherwise applied to posts, stakes, poles, trees, buildings or other structures or supports.
60.63 Sign, On-Site. A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached.
60.64 Sign, Off-Site. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, activity, service or product not necessarily conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. (See Billboard, 60.13).
60.65 Sign Area. Sign area shall be measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof, which will encompass the entire advertising copy area, excluding architectural trim and structure members. In computing area, only one side of a double-faced sign shall be considered.
60.66 Story. That portion of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. The first floor of a two or multi-story building shall be deemed the story that has no floor immediately below it that is designed for living quarters or for human occupancy. Those stories above the first floor shall be numbered consecutively.
60.67 Street (Road, Lane, Way, Terrace, Drive). A dedicated, recorded and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
60.68 Structure. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground, including but not limited to principal and accessory buildings, pools and spas (Section 60.57.1), Adopted 8/15/2017manufactured homes, signs, fences, walls, bridges, monuments, flagpoles, antennas, transmission poles, towers, and cables.
60.69 Structural Alterations. Any change on the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any structural change in the roof, or dimensions of the rooms therein.
60.70 Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose of a sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or change in existing streets; but the following shall not be included within this definition:
a. The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the Town of Hudson Subdivision Regulations, as amended; and
13
b. The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres where no new street right-of-way dedication is involved; and
c. The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets; and
d. The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the Town of Hudson Subdivision Regulations, as amended.
60.70.1 Tasting Room 밫asting room means a facility at which guests may sample and purchase alcoholic beverages, and where retail sales of merchandise related to the products being tasted are sold. Prepackaged foods such as cheese, crackers, etc. may be sold. Nothing shall prohibit a guest from providing their own food and/or snacks to be consumed at the tasting room or winery premises. Adopted 11/19/2019
60.71 Temporary Health Care Structure (Granny Pods) A temporary health care structure, commonly referred to as a 밎ranny Pod is defined as a 뱓ransportable residential structure, providing an environment facilitating a caregivers provision of care for a mentally or physically impaired person, that is (i) primarily assembled at a location other than its site of installation, (ii) is limited to one occupant who shall be the mentally or physically impaired person, or to that persons caregiver (iii) has no more than 300 gross square feet, and (iv) complies with applicable provisions of the State Building Code and G.S. 143-139.1(b). Placing the temporary family health care structure on a permanent foundation shall not be required or permitted.
60.72 Variance. The term "Variance" shall mean a modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance granted when strict enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. See Section 135.3.
60.73 Water System, Public. Water supply systems serving ten (10) or more connections are classified as a public water supply by State law. Plans and specifications must be approved by the Sanitary Engineering Section, Division of Health Services, North Carolina Department of Human Resources.
60.74 Water System, Semipublic. Water supply systems serving from two (2) to nine (9) connections, inclusive. This system may be regulated by the County Board of Health, and plans should be approved by the Caldwell County Health Department.
60.74-a. Wine Shop/Wine Bar. An establishment that offers various wines for sale by the glass, for on-premise consumption and by the bottle, for off-premise consumption. Adopted 04/19/2018
14
60.74- b. Winery. Wineries in the ETJ of Hudson established after this date of ADOPTION_November 19, 2019 shall be treated as a conditional use if they are wanting to establish events and food trucks as part of their operation.
1. Winery means an agriculturally related facility for the production and/or packaging of alcoholic beverages for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on or off-premises. A winery is specifically designed to include, at a minimum, two or more of the following: vineyards, crushing, fermentation, and barrel/tank aging of wine. A winery may also include any of the following; barrel rooms, bottling rooms, tank rooms, laboratories, and offices. Uses that are clearly incidental to the production of wine are allowed accessory uses to a winery. These may include but are not limited to the following; bottling, case goods storage, retail and/or wholesale sales of wine, tours, tastings, and salesrooms when they are accessory to the onsite production facility, and ancillary retail sales, and picnic areas. Additional requirements are found in the Winery-Vineyard RA-15 Site standards. Adopted 11/19/2019
60.75 Water System, Individual. A drilled or bored well or spring which serves a single connection. Individual water supply systems should be located, constructed and operated in accordance with the Division of Health Services, North Carolina Department of Human Resources.
60.76 Yard. An open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward.
60.77 Yard, Front. An open space on the same lot with a principal building, between the front line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the front property or street right-of-way line and extending across the full width of the lot.
60.78 Yard, Rear. An open, unoccupied space extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot.
60.79 Yard, Side. An open, unoccupied space situated between the side line of the building and adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard.
60.80 Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Town of Hudson official, duly appointed by the Board of Commissioners, who is charged with the responsibility of enforcing this Ordinance.
60.81 Zoning Compliance Certificate. A permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer authorizing the recipient to make use of the property in accord with the requirements of this Ordinance.
15
ARTICLE VII
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Section 70. Use Districts. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Town of Hudson is hereby divided into thirteen (13) use districts with the designations as listed below:
1. R-20 Residential Low Density District
2. R-15 Residential Medium Density District
3. RA-15 Residential-Agricultural District
4. R-85 Residential Medium-High Density District
5. R-75 Residential High Density District
6. R-75A Residential High Density District
7. R-MH Residential-Manufactured Home District
8. O-I Office-Institutional District
9. N-B Neighborhood Business District
10. C-B Central Business District
11. H-B Highway Business District
12. L-I Light Industrial District
13. H-I Heavy Industrial District
Section 71. District Boundaries Shown on Map. The boundaries of the districts are shown on the map accompanying this Ordinance and made a part thereof entitled "Official Zoning Map, Hudson, North Carolina." The zoning map and all the notations, references and amendments thereto, and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this Ordinance the same as if such information set forth on the map were all fully described as set forth herein. The zoning map properly attested is posted at the Hudson Town Hall and is available for inspection by the public.
Section 72. Due Consideration Given to District Boundaries. In the creation by this Ordinance of the respective districts, careful consideration is given to the general suitability of each and every district for the particular uses and regulations applied thereto, and the necessary and proper grouping and arrangement of various uses and densities of population in accordance with a well-considered comprehensive plan for the physical development of the Town.
Section 73. Rules Governing Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply (Such uncertainty shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment):
73.1 Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways, railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerlines, street lines, or railroad right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
16
73.2 Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
73.3 Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways, or railroads, or right-of-ways of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by use of the scale shown on said zoning map.
73.4 Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the district requirements for the least restrictive portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extensions shall not include any part of such a lot more than thirty-five (35) feet beyond the district boundary line. The term "least restricted" shall refer to zoning restrictions, not lot or tract size.
ARTICLE VIII
USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICTS
Within the districts indicated on the zoning map, no building or land shall be used, and no building shall be erected or altered which is intended or designed to be used in whole or in part, for any use other than those listed as permitted for that district in this Article.
Section 80.1 R-20 Residential Low Density District. This district is composed of certain quiet, low density residential sections of the community, plus certain open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur, as indicated by the Land Development Plan. The regulations of this district are intended to discourage any use which, because of its character, would substantially interfere with the development of single-family residences in the districts which would be detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the areas included within this district.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. Single Family Dwellings; exclusive of manufactured homes.
b. Accessory buildings to residential uses, provided that no accessory building shall be rented or occupied for gain, and provided further, that no accessory building shall be used for human habitation.
c. Any form of agriculture or horticulture.
d. Churches and other places of worship.
17
e. Home occupation, as defined in Section 60.25.
f. Small professional or announcement sign unilluminated not over two (2) square feet in area mounted flat to the main wall of the building, and unilluminated real estate signs not over six (6) square feet in area.
g. Off-street parking.
h. Temporary Health Care Structures
(1) Temporary health care structures are permitted as accessory uses to single-family
homes, if a zoning permit is obtained from the town.
(2) The temporary health care structure my not exceed 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Temporary health care structures must be located in the rear yard of the property.
(4) Temporary health care structures must be a minimum of 20 feet from all side and rear property lines.
(5) No signage advertising or otherwise promoting the existence of the temporary health care structure shall be permitted either on the exterior of the building or elsewhere on the property.
(6) Any temporary family health care structure installed shall be removed within 60 days from the time which the mentally or physically impaired person is no longer receiving or is no longer in need of the assistance provided for in this section. If the temporary health care structure is needed for another mentally or physically impaired person, the temporary health care structure may continue to be used provided another zoning permit is issued.
(7) Only one temporary health care structure is permitted per lot.
(8) Each permit to allow a temporary health care structure is valid for a period of twelve (12) months. Any person proposing to install a temporary health care structure shall first obtain a zoning permit from the Town. The Town may charge a fee of up to one-hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial permit and an annual renewal fee of up to fifty dollars ($50.00). The Town may not withhold a permit if the applicant provides sufficient proof of compliance with this section. The Town requires that the applicant provide evidence of compliance of this section on an annual basis as long as the temporary health care structure remains on the property. The evidence may involve the inspection by the Town of the temporary health care structure at reasonable times convenient to the caregiver, not limited to any annual compliance confirmation and annual renewal of the doctor뭩 certification.
II. Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the Hudson Board of Adjustment after said Board holds a public hearing:
a. Cemeteries.
18
b. Fire Stations.
c. Colleges and schools.
d. Grounds and facilities for recreational and community center buildings, country clubs, lakes, parks, and similar facilities operated on a non-profit basis.
e. Public utility distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission lines and towers, water tanks, but not service or storage tanks.
f. Nursing Homes.
III. Dimensional Requirements:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 20,000 sqft. (15,000 sqft. with public sewer)
b. Minimum mean lot width: 100 ft.
c. Minimum front yard setback: 50 ft.
Note: May be 40 ft. if not located on a major or minor thoroughfare as designated in the Lenoir-Hudson Thoroughfare Plan. (5-21-91)
d. Minimum side yard setback: 12 ft.
Side yard abutting a street: 15 ft.
e. Minimum rear yard setback: 35 ft.
f. Maximum height of buildings: 35 ft.
g. Maximum permissible lot coverage by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the total lot area.
IV. Location of Accessory Buildings:
No accessory building shall be erected in any front or side yard or within twenty (20) feet of any street or highway line or within ten (10) feet of a lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located no less
than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear.
Location of Accessory Structures/Building:
19
No accessory structure/building shall be erected in any front or side yard or within twenty (20) feet of any street or highway line or within (10) of a lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory structure/building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located no less than ten (10) from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reverse frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory structure/building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear, except in the case of irregularly shaped lots, and corner lots with multiple street frontage. Location of the front, side and rear yard building lines shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
On lots with three or more street frontages, accessory structures may be placed in rear and side yards, as long as the accessory structure meets the setbacks of that district. A buffer strip is also required, as defined in Section 60.15. Buffer Strip. Adopted 8/15/2017
V. Corner visibility:
On a corner lot, within the area formed by the centerlines of the intersecting streets and a line joining points of such centerlines at a distance of eighty (80) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and height of ten (10) feet above the average centerline grade of each street.
VI. Off-street Parking:
Off-street parking shall be provided, as required in Article XI, Section 110 of this Ordinance.
Section 80.2 R-15 Residential Medium Density District. This district is established to provide a quiet, medium density living environment consisting of single-family detached dwellings and related uses necessary for a sound neighborhood. The regulations for this district are designed to stabilize and encourage a healthful environment for family life in areas where either or both public water or sewer facilities are available.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in R-20.
II. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the Hudson Board of Adjustment after said Board holds a public hearing:
a. Same as R-20.
III. Dimensional Requirements:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 15,000 sqft.*
20
b. Minimum mean lot width 100 ft.
c. Minimum front yard setback: 50 ft.
Note: May be 40 ft. if not located on a major or minor thoroughfare as designated in the Lenoir-Hudson Thoroughfare Plan. (5-21-91)
d. Minimum side yard setback: 12 ft.
Side yard abutting a street: 15 ft.
e. Minimum rear yard setback: 35 ft.
f. Maximum height of buildings: 35 ft.
g. Maximum permissible lot coverage by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area.
* - Lots dependent upon septic tanks for sewage disposal may require 20,000 sqft. by Caldwell County Health Department for septic tank installation.
IV. Location of Accessory Buildings:
Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in rear yard provided it is located not less than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear.
Location of Accessory Structures/Building:
No accessory structure/building shall be erected in any front or side yard or within twenty (20) feet of any street or highway line or within (10) of a lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory structure/building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located no less than ten (10) from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reverse frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory structure/building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear, except in the case of irregularly shaped lots, and corner lots with multiple street frontage. Location of the front, side and rear yard building lines shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
On lots with three or more street frontages, accessory structures may be placed in rear and side yards, as long as the accessory structure meets the setbacks of that district. A buffer strip is also required, as defined in Section 60.15. Buffer Strip. Adopted 8/15/2017
21
V. Corner Visibility:
On corner lot, within the area formed by the centerlines of the intersecting streets and a line joining points of such centerlines at a distance of eighty (80) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and a height ten (10) feet above the average centerline grade of each street.
VI. Off-street Parking:
Off-street parking shall be provided as required in Article XI, Section 100 of this Ordinance.
Section 80.21 R-12 Middle Residential Density District
The R-12 Middle Residential Density District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for single-family, two-family and multi-family residences. The regulations of this district are intended to provide areas in the community for those persons desiring small residences and multi-family structures within a mixed density district. The regulations are intended to prohibit any use, which because of its character, would interfere with the residential nature of this district. It is expected that municipal water and sewer facilities be used in this district.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in the R-15 Residential District
b. Modular Homes
c. Two Family Dwellings
d. Multi-family Dwellings
II. Conditional Uses: The following uses are permitted when allowed by the Board of Adjustment
a. Rooming and Boarding houses and tourist homes
b. Family Care Homes
c. Planned Unit Developments, subject to conditions under Article X, Section 105 of this Ordinance.
III. Dimensional Requirements: Within the R-12 Middle Residential Density District(s), as shown on the Zoning Map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:
a. Minimum Lot Area 1st Dwelling Unit: 12,000 Sq. Ft.
2nd Dwelling Unit: 9,000 Sq. Ft.
22
Further Units: 5,650 Sq. Ft.
NOTE: Density shall not exceed six (6) units per acre.
b. Minimum Lot width: 85 ft.
Lots with (2) or more units: 95 ft.
c. Minimum front yard setback: 30 ft.
d. Minimum side yard setback: 10 ft.
facing a street 12 ft.
e. Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft.
f. Maximum height of buildings: 35 ft.
g. Maximum lot coverage by principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty percent or Watershed District Requirements; whichever is more stringent.
IV. Location of Accessory Structures:
Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located not less than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear yard.
V. Corner Visibility:
On a corner lot, within the area formed by the centerlines of the intersecting streets and a line joining points of such centerlines, at a distance of eighty (80) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and a height of ten (10) feet above the average centerline grade of each street
VI. Off Street Parking
Off street parking shall be provided, as required in Article XI, Section 110, of this Ordinance.
Section 80.3 RA-15 Residential-Agricultural District. This district is composed of medium density residential development and of open areas which are used as farmland and woodland. The regulations of this district are intended: (1) to insure that residential development not having access to public water supplies and dependent upon septic tanks for sewage disposal will occur at sufficiently medium densities to insure a healthful environment and (2) to protect agricultural and
23
residential areas from an influx of incompatible uses which would render such areas undesirable for farms and future development.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. Single-family dwellings.
b. Modular Homes.
c. Manufactured Homes, on individual lots, subject to the provisions of Article IX, Section 97, of this Ordinance.
d. Two-family dwellings.
e. Multi-family dwellings up to 3 dwelling units.
f. Accessory buildings to residential uses, provided that no accessory building shall be rented or occupied for gain, and provided further, that no accessory building shall be used for human habitation.
g. Any form of agriculture or horticulture (greenhouses and nurseries), including the sale of products at a retail stand on the property where produced.
h. Cemeteries, public and private.
i. Customary home occupations, including dressmaking, cooking and baking, hairdressing, music instruction, the renting of not more than one (1) room; the practice of such professions as insurance and accounting, shall be permitted as accessory uses in a residence; backyard workshops for building tradesmen, small appliance repair shops, but excluding open storage; the Board of Adjustment shall decide whether other home occupations not listed here are within the spirit of this category of accessory uses.
j. Kindergartens and day nurseries, provided that not less than two hundred (200) square feet of play area is provided for each child and provided further, said aggregate play space is surrounded by a sturdy fence at least five (5) feet in height.
k. Nursing Homes.
l. Churches and their customary related uses, including cemeteries provided that all buildings and graves shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property line.
24
m. Public and private elementary and secondary schools having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools.
n. Industrial trade schools.
o. Public and private parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs, and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools, fishing lakes, family campgrounds and similar recreational uses.
p. Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters, provided that all vehicles and equipment shall be stored indoors; provided further, that all buildings shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend with the surrounding area.
q. Public works and public utility facilities such as transformer stations, water towers and telephone exchanges, provided:
(1) Such facilities are essential to the service of the immediate area and no vehicles or material shall be stored on the premises;
(2) All buildings and apparatus shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines an shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area; and
(3) Such facilities as water towers, pumping stations, and so forth, shall be surrounded by a chain link fence at least six (6) feet in height.
II. Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the Hudson Board of Adjustment after said board holds a public hearing:
a. Manufactured home parks, subject to conditions listed under Article IX, Section 96 of this Ordinance.
b. Planned Unit Developments, subject to conditions under Article X, Section 105 of this Ordinance.
c. Airstrips and heliports.
d. Hotels, inns and motels.
e. Multi-family development over 3 dwelling units. (5-21-91)
f. Winery-Vineyards that are planning to host food trucks and events. See Exceptions and Modifications. Approved 11/19/2019
25
III. Dimensional requirements:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 15,000 sqft.*
Note: Density shall not exceed three (3) units per acre. (5-21-91)
b. Minimum mean lot width: 100 ft.
c. Minimum front yard setback: 50 ft.
Note: May be 40 ft. if not located on a major or minor thoroughfare as designated in the Lenoir-Hudson Thoroughfare Plan. (5-21-91)
d. Minimum side yard setback: 12 ft.
Side yard abutting a street: 15 ft.
e. Minimum rear yard setback: 35 ft.
f. Maximum height of buildings: 35 ft.
g. Maximum permissible lot coverage by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area.
* - Lots dependent upon septic tanks for sewage disposal may require 20,000 sqft. by Caldwell County Health Department for septic tank installation.
IV. Location of Accessory Buildings:
Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located not less than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear.
Location of Accessory Structures/Building:
No accessory structure/building shall be erected in any front or side yard or within twenty (20) feet of any street or highway line or within (10) of a lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory structure/building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located no less than ten (10) from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reverse frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory structure/building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear, except in the case of irregularly shaped lots, and corner lots with multiple street frontage. Location of the front, side and rear yard building lines shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator. On lots with
26
three or more street frontages, accessory structures may be placed in rear and side yards, as long as the accessory structure meets the setbacks of that district. A buffer strip is also required, as defined in Section 60.15. Buffer Strip. Adopted 8/15/2017
V. Corner Visibility:
On a corner lot, within the area formed by the centerline of the intersecting streets and a line joining points of such centerlines at a distance of eighty (80) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and a height of ten (10) feet above the average centerline grade of each street.
VI. Off-Street Parking:
Off-street parking shall be provided, as required in Article XI, Section 110 of this Ordinance.
Section 80.4 R-85 Residential Medium High Density District. The R-85 Residential Medium High District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for single-family, two-family and multi-family residences. The regulations of this district are intended to provide areas in the community for those persons desiring small residences and multi-family structures in relatively high density neighborhoods. The regulations are intended to prohibit any use, which, because of its character, would interfere with the residential nature of this district. It is expected that municipal water and sewerage facilities will be available to each lot in such districts.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in the R-15 Residential District
b. Modular Homes.
c. Two-family dwellings.
d. Multi-family dwellings.
II. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the Hudson Board of Adjustment after said board holds a public hearing:
a. Rooming and boarding houses and tourist homes.
b. Family Care Homes.
27
c. Planned Unit Developments, subject to conditions under Article X, Section 105 of this Ordinance.
III. Dimensional requirements: Within the R-85 Residential Medium High Density District(s), as shown on the zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:
a. Minimum lot area: 1st dwelling unit: 8,500 sqft.
2nd dwelling unit: 6,000 sqft.
Each additional unit over two (2): 3,000 sqft.
Note: Density shall not exceed ten (10) units per acre.
b. Minimum mean lot width: 70 ft.
Lots with two (2) units or more: 80 ft.
c. Minimum front yard setback: 30 ft.
d. Minimum side yard setback: 10 ft.
Side yard abutting a street: 12 ft.
e. Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft.
f. Maximum height of buildings: 35 ft.
g. Maximum permissible lot coverage by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area.
IV. Location of Accessory Buildings:
Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located not less than
10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear.
V. Corner Visibility:
On a corner lot, within the area formed by the centerlines of the intersecting streets and a line joining points of such centerlines, at a distance of eighty (80) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and a height of ten
28
(10) feet above the average centerline grade of each street.
VI. Off-Street Parking:
Off-street parking shall be provided, as required in Article XI, Section 110, of this Ordinance.
Section 80.5 R-75 Residential High Density District. The R-75 Residential High Density District is established in which the principal use of land is for high density single-family, two-family and multi-family residences, along with limited home occupations and public and private community uses. The regulations are intended to prohibit any use which, because of its character, would interfere with the residential nature of this district. It is expected that municipal water and sewerage facilities will be available to each lot is such districts, or a reasonable expectation of such service in the near future.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in the R-85 district.
II. Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the Hudson Board of Adjustment after said board holds a public hearing:
a. Same as R-85.
III. Dimensional Requirements:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 7,500 sqft.
Each additional unit: 3,000 sqft.
Note: Density shall not exceed ten (10) units per acre.
b. Minimum mean lot width: 75 ft.
c. Minimum front yard setback: 30 ft.
d. Minimum side yard setback: 8 ft.
Side yard abutting a street: 10 ft.
e. Minimum rear yard setback: 25 ft.
f. Maximum height of buildings: 35 ft.
29
g. Maximum permissible lot coverage by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the total lot area.
IV. Location of Accessory Buildings:
Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located not less than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear.
V. Corner Visibility:
On a corner lot, within the area formed by the centerlines of the intersecting streets and a line joining points of such centerlines, at a distance if eighty (80) feet from their intersection, there shall be obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and a height of ten (10) feet above the average centerline grade of each street.
VI. Off-Street Parking:
Off-street parking shall be provided, as required in Article XI, Section 110, of this Ordinance.
Section 80.55: R-SF Residential Single Family District. The R-SF Residential Single Family District is established in which the principal use of land is for single family residences, along with limited home occupations and public and private community uses. The regulations are intended to prohibit any use which, because of its character, would interfere with the residential nature of this district. It shall be required that municipal water and sewerage facilities will be available to each lot in such districts.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. Cluster Subdivisions: as defined in Section 72.10 of the Town of Hudson's Subdivision Ordinance.
II. Conditional Uses:
a. No Conditional Uses are allowed in this district.
30
III. Dimensional Requirements:
a. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 7,500 sqft.
b. Minimum mean lot width: 75 ft.
c. Minimum front yard setback: 15 ft.
d. Minimum side yard setback: 8 ft.
Side yard abutting a street: 10 ft.
e. Minimum rear yard setback: 25 ft.
f. Maximum height of buildings: 35 ft.
g. Maximum permissible lot coverage by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the total lot area.
IV. Location of Accessory Buildings:
Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located not less than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear.
V. Corner Visibility:
On a corner lot, within the area formed by the centerlines of the intersecting streets and a line joining points of such centerlines, at a distance if eighty (80) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and a height of ten (10) feet above the average centerline grade of each street.
VI. Off-Street Parking:
Off-street parking shall be provided, as required in Article XI, Section 110, of this Ordinance.
Section 80.6 R-75A Residential High Density District. The purpose of the T-75A District is to provide high density living areas consisting of single-family detached and attached dwellings and
31
multi-family dwellings. Housing types include both immobile and mobile dwellings, subject to the applicable housing provisions of this Ordinance. The regulations are intended to prohibit any use which, because of its character, would interfere with the residential nature of this district. It is expected that municipal water and sewerage facilities will bee available to each lot in such districts, or a reasonable expectation of service in the near future.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in R-75.
b. Manufactured Homes, located on individual lots, subject to Article IX, Section 98, of this Ordinance.
II. Conditional Uses:
a. Same as R-75.
III. Dimensional requirements:
a. Same as R-75.
IV. Location of Accessory Buildings:
Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located not less than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear.
V. Corner Visibility:
On a corner lot, within the area formed by the centerlines of the intersecting streets and a line joining points of such centerlines at a distance of eighty (80) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and a height of ten (10) feet above the average centerline grade of each street.
VI. Off-Street Parking:
Off-street parking shall be provided, as required to Article XI, Section 110, of this Ordinance.
Section 80.7 R-MH Residential Manufactured Home District. The R-MH Residential
32
Manufactured Home District permits high density residential development in the perimeter planning area. Individual or park water and sewerage facilities are expected to service this district.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. Manufactured home parks, subject to Article IX, Section 96, of this Ordinance.
II. Dimensional requirements:
See Article IX, Section 96.
Section 80.8 Office and Institutional District The Office and Institutional District is designed to provide a wide range of professional and economic office space, as well as space for public and quasi-public uses. The regulations are intended to provide for adequate traffic access and parking facilities in addition to prohibiting any use which, because office/institutional nature of this district.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. Public or privately owned medical and dental clinics, and offices where medical or dental services are rendered.
b. Funeral homes.
c. Banks, loan offices and agencies.
d. Business, professional, government, religious, charitable or fraternal offices or agencies and private clubs not engaged in retail sales to the general public or the maintenance of a stock of goods, merchandise or supplies on the premises.
e. Libraries, art galleries, museums, music or dancing institutions or schools.
f. Auditoriums, armories, and publicly owned and operated recreational facilities.
g. Publicly owned institutions, except jails, and other types of correctional institutions. This exception shall also include hospitals or institutions operated principally for the treatment of mental, alcoholic or narcotic patients.
h. Customary accessory uses and structures when located on the same zoning lot as the principal structure, excluding however, open storage.
II. Conditional Uses:
a. Public utility and service uses.
33
b. Boarding houses and tourist homes.
c. Group Commercial or Office Projects, subject to the provisions of Article X, Section 106 of this Ordinance.
III. Dimensional requirements:
a. Minimum Lot Area per Building: 7,500 sqft.
NOTE: Any other dimensional requirements shall be the same as the R-75 District.
IV. Location of Accessory Structures:
Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located not less than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear. Any open storage is strictly prohibited. Accessory structures used for signs shall comply with Article IX, Section 94.9 of this Ordinance.
V. Corner Visibility:
On a corner lot, within the area formed by the centerlines of the intersecting streets and a line joining points of such centerlines at a distance of eighty (80) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and a height of ten (10) feet above the average centerline grade of each street.
VI. Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements:
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Article XI, Section 110, of this Ordinance.
VII. Buffer/Screening Requirements:
Whenever any O-I District rear and/or side property line abuts upon a residential district with no intervening street or highway or natural buffer, any buildings or parking area use for O-I purpose shall construct and maintain a buffer as defined in Section 60.15 of this Ordinance.
Dumpster and Trash Containers shall be screened in accordance with section 109 of this ordinance (5/03)
Section 80.9 N-B Neighborhood Business District. The N-B Neighborhood Business District is intended for the use of those businesses and other uses which are properly located near residential
34
areas and which cater to the everyday needs of a limited residential area.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses allowed in the O-I district.
b. Animal hospitals or kennels.
c. Banks and other financial institutions.
d. Barbershops and beauty shops.
e. Bakeries, retail.
f. Boarding houses and tourist homes.
g. Convenience stores, excluding gas pumps.
h. Customary accessory uses and structures when located on the same lot as the main structure, excluding open storage.
i. Dry cleaning or laundry pickup stations.
j. Drug stores.
k. Electrical and electronic products.
l. Electric repair shops.
m. Florists and gift shops.
n.. Furniture and household appliance stores.
o. Grocery, food, produce, fruit and meat stores.
p. Hardware stores.
q. Jewelry repair shops and opticians.
r. Laundromats and similar automatic laundries.
s. Newspaper offices.
t. Offices supplies and equipment, sales and services.
u. Photographic studios and camera supply stores.
v. Parking lots and parking garages.
w. Radio and TV repair shops.
x. Restaurants.
y. Shoe repair shops.
z. Tailor and dressmaking shops.
II. Conditional Uses:
The following uses are permitted when authorized by the Hudson Board of Adjustment after said Board holds a public hearing:
a. Mixed uses, that is, buildings erected for both dwelling and business purposes, provided such buildings shall be furnished with side yards on each side of the building measuring not less than 8 feet in width, provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the side street of a corner lot.
b. Service stations, provided that all gasoline pumps and other stationary equipment
35
shall be located at least 12 feet behind the property line, provided further that on all
sides where such stations abut residential districts, a 6 foot high fence and suitable landscaping shall be provided.
c. Drive-in restaurants.
d. Cabinet, woodworking and upholstery shops; not to exceed ten (10) employees.
e. Convenience stores with gasoline pumps.
f. Group Commercial Projects, subject to the provisions of Article X, Section 106 of this Ordinance.
III. Dimensional requirements:
a. Minimum lot area per unit: 8,000 sqft.
b. Minimum mean lot width: 100 ft.
c. Minimum front yard setback: 50 ft.
d. Minimum side yard setback: 15 ft.
Side yard abutting a street: 20 ft.
e. Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft.
f. Maximum height for buildings and structures: 50 ft.
IV. Location of Accessory Structures:
Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located not less than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear. Any open storage is strictly prohibited. Accessory structures used for signs shall comply with Article IX, Section 94.9 of this Ordinance.
V. Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements:
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be provided as required in Article XI, of this Ordinance.
NOTE: Off-street parking as required by this Ordinance may be permitted in required yards
36
but shall not be closer than 10 feet from the front property line or any dedicated street or railroad right-of-way line.
VI. Buffer/Screening Requirements:
Same as O-I District.
Section 80.10 C-B Central Business District. The Central Business District (C-B) is established as the centrally located trade and commercial service area of the community. The regulations of this district are designed to encourage the continued use of land for community trade and commercial service uses, and to permit a concentrated development of permitted uses while maintaining a substantial relationship between the intensity of land uses and the capacity of utilities and streets.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in the (N-B) Neighborhood Business District.
b. Automobile parts and supplies, repair garages, excluding open storage of wrecked vehicles.
c. Automobile parking lots and structures.
d. Automobile washing establishments.
e. Bus stations.
f. Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, art schools, music and dance studios and similar uses.
g. Convenience stores with gas pumps, provided such pumps are located at least 15 feet from all property lines.
h. Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing for retail sales on the premises only.
i. Hotels, inns and motels.
j. Indoor Shooting Ranges; subject to the following conditions (7/20/99)
1. must be further than 200 feet from church owned property
2. must be further than 500 feet from school owned property
3. Business must not open before 7:00AM and close before 10:00PM. The business is also not allowed to be open before noon on Sunday.
37
k. Locksmiths and gunsmiths.
l. Retail establishments such as department, clothing, fabric, variety, floor covering, paint, antique, art goods, gift, music, toy, sporting goods, book and stationery, magazine, candy, tobacco, pet and hobby and craft stores, but not excluding similar retail outlets.
m. Service stations, provided that all gasoline pumps and other stationary equipment shall be located at least twelve (12) feet behind the property line, provided further
that on all sides where such stations abut residential districts, a six (6) foot high fence and suitable landscaping shall be provided.
n. unmotorized food cart
n. UNMOTORIZED OR MOTORIZED FOOD TRUCKS.
Food trucks shall be permitted in accordance with the Permitted Uses subject to the following standards:
1. Food trucks may conduct sales while parked on a public street when the Town Commissioners has approved a temporary street closing for a Town-sponsored or civic event such as a street festival/fair. Food truck appearance must be in excellent condition (maintained outer appearance, paint, temporary vinyl skirting to conceal the main chassis), no visible signs of body damage, and must be licensed and permitted with a Town뭩 Zoning Compliance Permit, Environmental Health Dept. approvals and NC Dept. of Revenue (business license).
Each food truck must be inspected by the Town뭩 Zoning Administrator in order to receive a Zoning Compliance Permit at the time of inspection the operator shall provide a copy of Environmental Health Permit and NC Dept. of Revenue Business License. If there are issues with the inspection the operator may request a new inspection in 7 days.
2. Food trucks may operate on an individual private property for a maximum of twenty (20) days, three individual weekend events, or both each calendar year when utilizing an annual Zoning Compliance Permit for operation within the Town of Hudson뭩 Jurisdiction. Exceptions to the twenty (20) days, may be waived by the Zoning Administrator if the owner of the food truck locates on the same premises as the principal business.
3. Food Truck Location. Food trucks must be located at least 100 feet from the front or rear door of any restaurant and outdoor dining area and at least 25 feet from any permitted mobile food vending cart location. Additionally, food trucks must be parked at least 15 feet from any fire hydrant, and 5 feet away from any driveway, sidewalk, utility
38
box or vault, handicapped ramp, building entrance or exit, or emergency call box. These minimum distance requirements are all measured in a straight line from the closest point of the proposed food truck location to the closest point from the buffered point, or in the case of a restaurant measured from the closest point of the restaurant's main entrance. If a zoning permit is issued and a restaurant subsequently opens within 100 feet (measured from the restaurants main and rear entrances) of the approved food truck location, the food truck may continue to operate until the permit expires.
4. Zoning Permit. A zoning permit is required for each site and must be signed by the property owner, and completed and submitted along with a site plan or plot plan. If a property owner has a property large enough to accommodate more than one food truck, only one zoning permit is required to be submitted showing the location of all food trucks. The plot plan must show the limits of the property, the location(s) of the proposed food truck, and label adjoining uses on neighboring properties. The applicant must also submit an NC Department of Agriculture Permit and a copy of the vehicle or trailer registration.
5. Parking. Food trucks may not occupy any required parking space for the primary use while the primary use is open to the public. Food trucks and the primary use may share parking spaces when having separate hours of operation. Food trucks may not park in handicapped accessible parking spaces, nor can they park in access or drive aisles. The approved location for the parking trucks, as shown on the zoning permit, must be physically marked. The food truck parking space can be marked with paint, tape or other easily identifiable material. Food trucks may not be parked in an approved location after hours of operation.
6. Hours of Operation. Food trucks may operate between the hours of 6 a.m. and 11 p.m., unless the food truck is located within 150 feet of a property with a single- or two-family residential dwelling. When located within 150 feet of this residential dwelling, the hours of operation shall be between 7 a.m. and 6 p.m. This measurement is taken from the property line of the residential dwelling in a straight line to the closest point of the approved food truck location.
7. Prohibitions. Food trucks may not use audio amplification or freestanding signage. All equipment associated with the food trucks must be located within three (3) feet of the food truck. The food truck operator is responsible for disposing of all trash associated with the operation of the food truck. Town trash receptacles may not be used to dispose trash or waste. All areas within five (5) feet of the food truck must be kept clean. Grease and liquid waste may not be disposed in tree pits, storm drains, the sanitary sewer system or public streets. Food trucks are all subject to the Town-wide noise ordinance.
8. Maximum Number of Trucks Per Property. Maximum of two (2) food trucks on lots of one-half acres or less.
39
9. Maximum of three (3) food trucks on lots between one-half acre and 1 acre.
10. Maximum of four (4) food trucks on lots greater than 1 acre.
11. Outdoor seating associated with a food truck is only permitted on lots at least two acres in size or greater. Adopted 04/19/2018
II. Conditional Uses:
The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the Board of Adjustment after said Board holds a public hearing:
a. All conditional uses permitted in N-B except group commercial projects.
b. Mixed uses, that is, buildings erected for both dwellings and business purposes, provided such buildings shall be furnished with side yards on each side of the building measuring not less than eight (8) feet in width, provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the side street of a corner lot.
c. Cabinet, woodworking and upholstery shops, not exceeding ten (10) employees.
d. Arcades/Gamerooms. (5/00)
e. Pool Halls. (11/00)
f. Automobile, Truck and Truck semi trailer dealerships (new and used). Subject to conditions under Article X: Section 108 of this ordinance.
g. Micro-brewery and Nano Brewery (see definitions 60.48-a and 60.50-b and complies with this section h)
Wine Shop/Wine Bar - An establishment that offers various wines for sale by the glass, for on-premise consumption and by the bottle, for off-premise consumption.
-or-
Craft Beer Bottle Shop/Taproom - An establishment that offers various craft beers for sale by the glass, for on-premise consumption and by the bottle, for off-premise consumption.
1. Sales of mixed beverages for on-premise consumption prohibited.
2. Hours of operation for on-premise consumption of wine/craft beer limited to the following:
a. Monday through Thursday 11 am-11 pm
b. Friday and Saturday 11 am-12 Midnight
c. Sundays 11 am- 12pm
40
d. Extended Hours for Special Events: Standard ALE hours for a maximum of twenty-four (24) special events per calendar year. The establishment shall provide advance notice of special events. Examples of Special Events can include holidays, private parties and fundraisers for non-profits.
3. On-premise consumption prohibited outside the building, with the exception of outdoor seating areas located on the same property as the business. Outdoor seating areas shall be clearly defined and physically separated from adjacent properties, must contain a well defined landscaped, lighted, stone walkway, public spaces, and parking areas.
4. A landscaping buffer requirements must be included as part of the overall site plan of at least 2 foot with of annual shrubs and fencing where deem appropriate.
5. The outdoor venue can include small operational taproom/tap shack if the project meets or exceeds one (1) acre
6. Outdoor venue activities may include games, music venue. If music venue is within a 1,500 foot of a Town sponsored outdoor or private function then music activities are suspended until the Town뭩 activity ends.
7. Screened trash receptacle and recycling receptacle pad must be separate from the parking shall comply with section 109
8. Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements Article XI 110.1 & 110.2 Business Uses of this Ordinance. One space per six (6) fixed seats provided for patron use, plus one space for every two (2) employees
9. Must comply with all other Local, State and Federal laws Adopted 04/19/2018
III. Dimensional requirements:
a. No minimum lot size or setbacks; required, except when a C-B lot abuts a residential district:
1. Side yard setback: 15 ft.
Side yard abutting a street: 20 ft.
2. Rear yard setback: 15 ft.
b. Maximum height of buildings and structures: 50 ft.
IV. Off-Street Parking and Loading:
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as required in Article XI, Section 110 of this Ordinance.
V. Buffer/Screening Requirements:
Same as N-B District.
41
Section 80.11 H-B Highway Business District. The H-B Highway Business Districts are located on major thoroughfares and collector streets in the Hudson planning area. They are intended to provide for offices, personal services, and the retailing of durable and convenience goods for the community. Because these commercial uses are subject to public view and are important to the
economy of the community, they should have ample parking, controlled traffic movement and suitable landscaping.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in the C-B District
b. Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics, but excluding open kennels on the premises.
c. Assembly halls, coliseums, gymnasiums, and similar structures.
d. Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing prepared foods and miscellaneous food products.
e. Billboards, in accordance with Article IX, Section 94 and 95 of this Ordinance.
f. Boat works and sales.
g. Building supply and equipment sales.
h. Cold storage and freezer lockers.
i. Customary accessory uses and structures when located on the same lot as the main structure, excluding open storage.
j. Fabricating shops, for example, wood products, textiles including furniture and metal products, not to exceed 15 employees.
k. Funeral homes or mortuaries.
l. Greenhouses or horticultural nurseries.
m. Internet Sweepstakes Caf뭩/Electronic Gaming Establishments.
Subject to the following conditions:
1. Hours of operations shall be from 12pm to 2am
2. Parking must be provided at 1 space for every 4 computers/gaming machines.
42
n. Nursery schools and kindergartens, provided that at least 200 square feet of outdoor play area is provided for each child, provided further, that such area shall be enclosed by a sturdy fence at least five (5) feet in height.
o. Nursing homes.
p. Plumbing shops, but excluding open storage.
q. Printing, publishing and reproducing establishments.
r. Sign painting and fabricating shops.
s. Trucking terminals.
t. Tailor and dressmaking shops.
u. Tire recapping and retreading shops.
v. Wholesale and warehouse establishments except for the storage of uncured hides, explosives, oil products, gas storage, etc.
x. Food Trucks/Motorized, unmotorizedSECTION 80.10-I. Permitted Uses C-B, H-B, LI, HB Adopted 4/19/2018
II. Conditional Uses:
The following uses are permitted when authorized by the Hudson Board of Adjustment after said board holds a public hearing:
a. All conditional uses permitted in C-B.
b. Bowling alleys and skating rinks, miniature golf courses, riding stables, and other commercial recreational facilities.
c. Drive-in restaurants.
d. Drive-in Theatres, subject to the following:
(1) No part of the theatre screen, projection booth, or other building shall be located closer than 500 feet to any residential district nor closer than 50 feet of any property line or public right-of-way; and no parking space shall be located closer than 100 feet to any residential district;
43
(2) The theatre screen shall not face a major street or highway, and reservoir parking space off the street shall be provided for patrons awaiting admission in an amount of not less than thirty percent (30%) of the vehicular capacity of the theatre.
e. Wholesale storage of gasoline and oil products, including bottled gas and oxygen, provided the permit is obtained from the Bureau of Fire Prevention as required by the Fire Prevention Code.
f. Mixed uses, that is, buildings erected for both dwelling and business purposes, provided such buildings shall be furnished with side yards on each side of the building measuring not less than 8 feet in width, provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the street side of a corner lot.
g. Group Commercial Projects, subject to the provisions of Article X, Section 106 of this Ordinance.
h. Micro-brewery, Nano Brewery, Wine Shop/Wine Bar, Craft Beer Bottle Shop/Taproom same requriements in Central Business District. Section 80.10 II - Conditional Uses Adopted 4/19/2018
III. Dimensional requirements:
a. Minimum mean lot width: 100 ft.
b. Minimum front yard setback: 50 ft.
c. Minimum side yard setback: 15 ft.
Side yard abutting a street: 20 ft.
d. Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft.
e. Maximum height of buildings and structures: 50 ft.
f. Maximum permissible lot coverage by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area.
VI. Location of Accessory Structures:
Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located not less than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with
44
double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear. Any open storage is strictly prohibited. Accessory structures used for signs shall comply with Article IX, Section 94.9, of this Ordinance.
V. Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements:
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be provided as required in Article XI of this Ordinance.
NOTE: Off-street parking as required by this Ordinance may be permitted in required yards but shall not be closer than 10 feet from the front property line or any dedicated street or railroad right-of-way line.
VI. Buffer/Screening Requirements:
Same as C-B District.
Section 80.12 L-I Light Industrial District. This district provides a place for the location of industrial and other uses which would be inimical or incompatible with general business areas. It is intended to permit in this district any use which is not inherently obnoxious to urban areas because of noise, odor, smoke, light, vibration, dust or the use or storage of dangerous chemicals and/or materials.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. Any use permitted in the H-B district.
b. Any lawful retail, repair, or wholesaling use, not specifically referred to in this section.
c. Gasoline, oil or fuel storage above ground, provided permit is obtained from the Bureau of Fire Prevention as required by the Fire Prevention Code.
d. Mixing plants for concrete.
e. Stone crushing, cutting and polishing.
f. Storage of materials and equipment outdoors.
g. Hatcheries.
h. Manufacture, processing or fabrication of the following products:
45
aa. Animal feeds.
bb. Bedding, carpets, and pillows.
cc. Clothing, including hosiery.
dd. Electrical and electronic products.
ee. Foods and food products.
ff. Furniture industries.
gg. Glass.
hh. Household appliances.
ii. Ice.
jj. Leather goods, not in include processing or storage of raw hides.
kk. Machine tools.
ll. Metals and metal products.
mm. Paints.
nn. Paper products, not including the manufacturing of processing of paper.
oo. Plastics.
pp. Pottery, porcelain and vitreous china.
qq. Rubber products, not to include the processing or manufacture of rubber.
rr. Soap, detergent and washing compounds.
ss. Textiles.
tt. Wholesale storage of gasoline and oil products, including bottled gas and oxygen, provided the permit is obtained from the Bureau of Fire Prevention as required by the Fire Prevention Code.
i. Food Trucks/Motorized, unmotorizedSECTION 80.10-I. Permitted Uses C-B, H-B, LI, HB Adopted 4/19/2018
j. Micro-brewery, Nano Brewery, Wine Shop/Wine Bar, Craft Beer Bottle Shop/Taproom same requirements in Central Business District Adopted 4/19/2018
II. Conditional Uses:
The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the Hudson Board of Adjustment after said Board holds a public hearing:
a. Manufacturing uses not otherwise named herein which come within the spirit and intent of this Section.
b. Group Industrial Projects, subject to the provisions of Section 106 of this Ordinance.
III. Dimensional requirements:
a. Minimum lot area: one (1) acre
46
b. Minimum mean lot width: 200 ft.
c. Minimum front yard setback: 50 ft.
d. Minimum rear yard setback: 20 ft.
e. Minimum side yard setback for every principal building: 15 ft.
f. Maximum height of buildings and structures: 50 ft.
g. The total ground area covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total lot area.
IV. Location of Accessory Structures:
Accessory Buildings may be erected in any front or side yard, but must be at least 20 feet from any street or highway line or within 10 feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use shall be located in the rear yard provided it is located not less than 10 feet from the property line. In the case of a corner lot with reversed frontage or a lot with double frontage, no accessory building shall extend beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear. Accessory structures used as signs shall comply with Article IX, Section 94.9, of this Ordinance.
V. Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements:
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be provided as required in Article XI, of this Ordinance.
NOTE: Off-street parking as required by this Ordinance may be permitted in required yards but shall not be closer than 10 feet from the front property line or any dedicated street or railroad right-of-way line.
VI. Buffer/Screening Requirements:
Whenever any L-I district rear and/or side property line abuts upon a residential district or side of institutional use with no intervening street or highway or natural buffer, any buildings or parking area used for industrial purposes shall construct and maintain a fifteen (15) foot buffer strip and within a portion of the buffer strip there shall be planted a continuous screen of evergreen plants with an initial height of at least six (6) feet by natural growth within no later than a two (2) year period.
47
Section 80.13 H-I Heavy Industrial District. The Heavy Industrial District is designed to encourage the development of major manufacturing, processing, warehousing, and major research and testing operations. This district is designed to permit these types of developments which require access to major traffic arteries. This district is also designed to prohibit any use which would be inherently obnoxious to urban areas because of noise, odor, smoke, light, vibration, dust or the use or storage of dangerous chemicals and/or materials.
I. Permitted Uses:
a. Any use permitted in the L-I district, except those commercial uses listed in H-B.
b. Abrasives manufacture.
c. Asphalt products manufacture.
d. Bottling companies.
e. Brick and structural clay products manufacture.
f. Concrete mixing plants.
g. Electroplating.
h. Feed mills.
i. Food manufacture, packaging, and processing.
j. Foundries and forge plants.
k. Furniture industries.
l. Grain storage and processing.
m. Graphite products manufacture.
n. Gypsum manufacture.
o. Heavy machinery production.
p. Leather tanning or processing.
q. Linoleum manufacturing.
48
r. Machine shop.
s. Meat packing.
t. Metal reduction and refinement.
u. Metal stamping.
v. Mining operations.
x.. Food Trucks/Motorized, unmotorized SECTION 80.10-I. Permitted Uses C-B, H-B, LI, HB Adopted 4/19/2018
y. Micro-brewery, Nano Brewery, Wine Shop/Wine Bar, Craft Beer Bottle Shop/Taproom same requirements in Central Business District. Section 80.10 II - Conditional Uses Adopted 4/19/2018
II. Conditional Uses:
The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the Hudson Board of Commissioners after the said Board conducts a public hearing.
a. Manufacturing uses not otherwise named herein which come within the spirit and intent of this Section
b. Indoor Shooting Ranges and Indoor Weapons Training Facilities with the following conditions:
1. Indoor Shooting Range must be further than 200 feet from church owned property
2. Indoor Shooting Range must be further than 500 feet from school owned property
3. Business must not open before 7:00AM and close by 10:00PM.
The business is also not allowed to be open before noon (12pm) on Sunday and close by 10pm.
Permits may be authorized by this Section subject to a finding by the Board of Commissioners that:
1) The proposed use would not involve the manufacture, use in manufacture, storage on, in or above ground on the premises; any type of chemical, in any form, which due to its nature, is known to be hazardous to human health due to radiation or toxicity or known to be a carcinogen.
49
2) The proposed use must meet all dimensional, signage, buffer and parking requirements of this Section.
III. Dimensional Requirements:
Same as the L-I Industrial District.
IV. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements:
Same as the L-I Industrial District.
V. Buffer/Screening Requirements:
Same as the L-I Industrial District.
ARTICLE IX
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 90. Application. No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
Section 91. Reduction of Lot and Yard Areas Prohibited. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein, except for street widening. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance.
Section 92. Relationship of Building to Lot. Every building hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than one principal building and its customary accessory buildings on any lot, except in the case of a specifically designed complex of institutional, residential, or commercial buildings in an appropriate zoning district, i.e. school campus, cluster housing, P.U.D., shopping center, and so forth, as permitted by Section 105 and 106.
Section 93. Nonconforming Uses. After the effective date of this Ordinance, existing structures, or the uses of land or structures which would be prohibited under the regulations for the district in which it is located (if they existed on the adoption date of this Ordinance), shall be considered as nonconforming. Nonconforming structures or uses (as defined in Section 60.52 of this Ordinance) may be continued provided they conform to the following provisions:
50
93.1 Continuing Nonconforming Uses of Land.
93.11 Extensions of Use. Nonconforming uses or land shall not hereafter be enlarged or extended in any way.
93.12 Change of Use. Any nonconforming uses of land may be changed to a conforming use, or with the approval of the Board of Adjustment, to any use more in character with the uses permitted in this District.
93.13 Cessation of Use. All nonconforming uses of land involving minor structures such as junkyards, auto sales yards, signs, or any nonconforming uses similar to those enumerated, shall be eliminated within two years from the date of adoption of this Ordinance.
93.2 Continuing the Use of Nonconforming Buildings.
93.21 Extensions of Use. Nonconforming buildings and nonconforming uses of buildings shall not hereafter be enlarged.
93.22 Change of Use. The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance, and such building may be reconstructed or structurally altered and nonconforming use therein changed subject to the following regulations:
(a) The order of classification of uses from highest to lowest for the purpose of this section shall be as follows: residential district uses, business district uses, as permitted by this Ordinance.
(b) A nonconforming use may be changed to a use of higher classification but not to a use of lower classification, nor shall a nonconforming use be changed to another use of the same classification unless the new use shall be deemed by the Board of Adjustment, after public notice and hearing, to be less harmful to the surrounding neighborhood, from the standpoint of purposes of this Ordinance, than the existing nonconforming use.
(c) A nonconforming use may not be extended, but at the extension of a use to any portion of a building, which portion is at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance primarily or designed for such nonconforming use, shall not be deemed to be an extension of a nonconforming use.
(d) No building shall be enlarged, unless the use therein is changed to a conforming use, however, existing single family residential structures in
51
business or industrial districts may be enlarged, extended or structurally altered, provided that no additional dwelling units result therefrom. However, any enlargements, extensions or alterations shall comply with the dimensional requirements determined by the Board of Adjustment.
93.3 Rebuilding nonconforming Uses Following Damage or Destruction
A nonconforming use or building damaged by fire, explosion, tornado, earthquake, or similar uncontrollable cause may be rebuilt according to the following provisions.
93.31 Nonconforming site-built single-family, two-family, or multi-family residences, may be rebuilt or repaired, within one (1) year of its date of destruction, provided that the minimum dimensional requirements of the R-75 Residential Density District and all other requirements of this Ordinance are complied with;
93.32 Nonconforming manufactured homes may be repaired or replaced with the same or larger size provided that the following requirements are met:
(a) The manufactured home must meet the requirements of Section 97;
(b) The manufactured home is replaced within 180 days of its date of destruction;
(c) The dimensional requirements of the R-75 Residential High Density District and all other requirements of this Ordinance are complied with.
93.33 Nonconforming commercial or industrial structures may be rebuilt, provided, however, that the damage to the building not exceed seventy percent of its tax assessed value at the time of the damage, may be repaired or rebuilt within one year of the date of such damage, but not thereafter. Such determination shall be made by the Board of Adjustment.
93.34 Cessation of Use
If a nonconforming use is discontinued, any future use is discontinued, any future use of the buildings and premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. A reasonable interim, however between tenants or occupant shall not be construed to mean discontinuance.
If active operations are discontinued for a continuous period of 180 days with respect to a nonconforming use of a building, such nonconforming use shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a conforming use.
52
93.34 Continuing the Nonconforming Use of Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks.
93.41 Extensions of Use. Nonconforming Manufactured Homes on individual lots and Manufactured Home Parks existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue to their present existence, but shall not be allowed to expand, or increase a nonconforming use. The manufactured home may also be replaced if the property has been rezoned to allow individual manufactured homes or manufactured home parks.
Section 94 Sign Regulations.
94.01 Purpose and Intent.
It is the general purpose and intent of this section to prohibit signs of a commercial nature in districts in which commerce is barred; to limit signs in the commercial districts in relation to the intensity of the use of the district and its surroundings and to control the number, area, and location of signs in such a way as to support and complement the land use objectives set forth in the district regulations of this Ordinance. These regulations are designed, among other purposes, to stabilize and protect property values, maintain the visual attractiveness of the Town of Hudson and its environs, and promote public safety.
94.02 Definitions.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the context, the words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this section.
a) Sign. Any device that (i) is sufficiently visible to persons not located on the lot where such device is located to accomplish either of the objectives set forth in subdivision ii of this definition, and (ii) is designed to attract the attention of such persons or to communicate information to them.
b) Billboard. An off-premises sign owned by a person, corporation, or other entity that engages in the business of selling the advertising space on that sign.
c) Effective Date of This Section. The effective date of this section as originally adopted, or the effective date of an amendment to it if the amendment makes a sign nonconforming.
d) Electronic Message Board- Any sign that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is
53
electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes.
e) Freestanding Sign. A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or other structure whose principal function is something other than the support of a sign. A sign that stands without supporting elements, such as a "sandwich sign," is also a freestanding sign. If the message is removed from a structure that was originally designed and used as a freestanding sign, this structure shall still be considered a sign.
f) Internally Illuminated Signs. Signs where the source of the illumination is inside the sign and light emanates through the message of the sign, rather than being reflected off the surface of the sign from an external source. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, signs that consist of or contain tubes that (i) are filled with neon or some other gas that glows when an electric current passes through it and (ii) are intended to form or constitute all or part of the message of the sign, rather than merely providing illumination to other parts of the sign that contain the message, shall also be considered internally illuminated signs (amended 5/19/92)
g) Off-Premises Sign. A sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that exists or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. A sign that draws attention to a cause or advocates or proclaims a political, religious, or other noncommercial message shall also be an off-premises sign unless such sign is subject to 94.05(a)(5).
h) On-Premises Sign. A sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that exists or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided on the premises where the sign is located.
i) Portable Sign. Any sign designed or intended to be readily relocated or which is not permanently affixed to a structure or to the ground. This shall include signs on wheels, trailers, truck beds, A-frames, airborne signs, or any other device which is capable of, or intended, to be moved from one location to another.
j) Temporary Sign. A sign that (i) is used in connection with a circumstance, situation, or event that is designed, intended, or expected to take place, or to be completed within, a reasonably short or definite period after the erection of such sign, or (ii) is intended to remain on the location where it is erected or placed for a period of not more than 15 days. If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is
54
subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as temporary. (Ord. of 5/9/89)
94.03 Zoning Compliance Certificate Required.
a) Before any sign, except those specifically exempted as provided in Section 94.04 and 94.05, shall be constructed, erected, moved, enlarged, illuminated or substantially altered, a Zoning Compliance Certificate shall be obtained. (See Sections 121, 122 and 123.) Mere painting or changing or message of a sign shall not, in and of itself, be considered a substantial alteration.
b) If plans submitted for a Zoning Compliance Certificate or conditional-use permit include sign plans in sufficient detail that the permit-issuing authority can determine whether the proposed sign or signs comply with the provisions of this Section, then issuance of the requested zoning compliance certificate or conditional-use permit shall constitute approval of the proposed sign or signs.
c) Signs not approved as provided in Subsection (b) or exempted under the provisions referenced in Subsection (a) may be constructed, erected, moved, enlarged, illuminated or substantially altered only in accordance with a Zoning Compliance Certificate issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(1) Sign permit applications and sign permits shall be governed by the same provisions of this Ordinance applicable to Zoning Compliance Certificates.
(2) In the case of a lot occupied or intended to be occupied by multiple business enterprises (e.g., a shopping center), sign permits shall be issued in the name of the lot owner or his agent rather than in the name of the individual business enterprise requesting a particular sign. The Town may assist the owner by suggesting a formula whereby the maximum square footage of sign area allowed on the lot may be allocated equitably among all tenants, but the Town shall be responsible for enforcing only the provisions of this Chapter and not the provisions of any allocation formula, lease, or other private restriction.
94.04 Signs Excluded from Regulation.
The following signs are exempt from regulation under this section except for those stated in Section 94.14.
a) Non-illuminated signs not exceeding four square feet in area that are customarily associated with residential use and that are not of a commercial nature, such as (i) signs giving property identification names or numbers or names of occupants, (ii)
55
signs on mailboxes or newspaper tubes, and (iii) signs posted on private property relating to private parking or warning the public against trespassing or danger from animals.
b) Insignia of any government and historic markers erected by a governmental body.
c) Legal notices, identification and informational signs and traffic directional signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body.
d) Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights.
e) Signs directing and guiding traffic on private property but which bear no advertising matter and do not exceed four square feet in height.
f) Bulletin signs incidental to churches, provided they do not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and do not exceed six feet in height.
g) Signs proclaiming religious, political or other non-commercial messages (other than those regulated by Subsection 94.05(a)(5)) that do not exceed one per abutting street and 16 square feet in area and are not illuminated.
h) Temporary sign or banner erected for not more than 14 days announcing a noncommercial and civic or philanthropic event in any district. Such signs or banners shall not exceed 40 square feet, shall be limited to one per lot with the written permission of the owner and may be located in required yards. (Amended 6/16/92)
i) Each property/business may have the following flags: United States, North Carolina, local governmental jurisdictions, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States, religious, corporate or any other flags sanctioned by the local governing body and are subject to U.S. Congressional protocol and placement on a standard flag pole or staff not to exceed the height requirements of the zoning district. (Amended 6/16/92)
j) Temporary signs for the sale of Christmas trees shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and 6 feet in height. Only one such sign per temporary business shall be erected and shall be safely affixed to the ground or a permanent structure on the lot. A copy of the privilege license for the temporary business shall be kept at the business site. Such signs shall be removed within 7 days of the termination of sale activities. (Amended 5/19/92)
94.05 Certain Temporary Signs: Permit Exemptions and Additional Regulations.
56
a) The following temporary signs are permitted without a Zoning Compliance Certificate or conditional-use permit. However, such signs shall conform to the requirements set forth below in addition to all other applicable requirements of this section except those contained in Sections 94.08 (Total Sign Area and 94.09 (Number of Freestanding Signs).
1) Signs containing the message that the real estate on which the sign is located (including buildings) is for sale, lease, or rent together with information identifying the owner or agent. Such signs may not exceed 16 square feet in the R-20, R-15, RA-15, R-85, R-75, R-75A, R-MH, O-I, N-B zone and may not exceed 32 square feet in area in all other zones and shall be removed immediately after sale, lease, or rental. (Amended 6/16/92)
2) Construction site identification signs. Such signs may identify the project, the owner or developer, architect, engineer, contractor and subcontractors, funding sources, and may contain related information including but not limited to sale or leasing information. Not more than one such sign may be erected per site, and it may not exceed 32 square feet in area. Such signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within 10 days after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy.
3) Signs attached temporarily to the interior of a building window or glass door. Such signs, individually or collectively, may not cover more than 75 percent of the surface area of the transparent portion of the window or door to which they are attached.
4) Displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observance of holidays. Such signs shall be removed within 10 days following the holidays.
5) Signs erected in connection with elections or political campaigns. Such signs shall be removed within three days following the election or conclusion of the campaign. No such sign may exceed 16 square feet in surface area.
6) Temporary signs not covered in the foregoing categories, so long as such signs meet the following restrictions:
(a) Not more than one such sign may be located on any lot.
(b) No such sign may exceed four square feet in surface area.
(c) Such sign may not be displayed for longer than three consecutive days
57
nor more than 10 days out of any calendar year.
(Amended 6/16/92)
7) A temporary banner sign in the C-B, H-B, L-I, H-I district not covered in the foregoing categories, so long as such banners meet the following restrictions:
(a) Each business may have one such banner and must be attached to a permanent architectural feature not including any public utility fixture.
(b) No banner may exceed 40 square feet in surface area and shall be in good condition (not frayed or torn) as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(c) Other temporary signs not listed shall be regarded and treated in all respects as permanent signs, except that (as provided in Section 94.09) temporary signs shall not be included in calculating the total amount of permitted sign area.
(Amended 6/16/92)
8) Individual helium filled balloons, so long as they do not exceed 12 feet in height from ground level. In no case shall the balloons exceed a height of 12 feet. Balloons may not be clustered more than 3 together from the same anchor. Balloons shall be removed when they become deflated. (9/16/03)
b) The following temporary events and signs require a Zoning Compliance Certificate and the advertising devices shall conform to the requirements set forth below in addition to all other applicable requirements of this code with the exception of those contained in Sections 94.08 (Total Sign Area):
2) A temporary advertising permit for nonpermanent facilities and activities with a duration of 1 to 14 days for special promotional sales and grand openings. Advertising devices allowed are tents, balloons, gas-filled figures and other similar devices so long as the following is met:
(a) The purpose of this permit is to authorize advertising devices for a defined period of time and to coordinate health, traffic and other inspections necessary to the safe and healthful operation of the event.
(b) Application for a temporary event sign permit shall be made at least three (3) working days prior to the start of the advertising event.
58
(c) Requirements for permit issuance: A temporary advertising event permit shall not be issued until evidence is shown that the following requirements have been or will be complied with:
(d) A master advertising plan that includes the following:
(1) A site layout plan that includes placement of permanent buildings in addition to required parking for any permanent use or temporary use located in the event site; this primarily refers to tents.
(2) Specification for each advertising device in sufficient detail to determine the height and placement requirements of this Ordinance; of special concern is air-borne devices distracting motorists and interference with safe traffic patterns.
(e) Maximum number of permits: No more than four (4) temporary event permits may be issued for the same business in any one (1) calendar year.
(Amended 6/16/92)
94.06 Determining the Number of Signs
a) For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship elements, each element shall be considered a single sign.
b) A two-sided or multi-sided sign shall be regarded as one sign so long as:
1) With respect to a V-type sign, the two signs are at no point separated by a distance that exceeds five feet; and
2) With respect to a double-faced (back to back) sign, the distance between the backs of each face of the sign does not exceed three feet.
94.07 Computation of Sign Area.
a) The surface area of a sign shall be computed by including the entire area within a single, continuous, rectilinear perimeter of not more than eight straight lines, or a circle or an ellipse, enclosing the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part
59
of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the display itself.
b) If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all of the area, including that between sections or modules, shall be included in the computation of the sign area.
c) With respect to two-sided, multi-sided, or three-dimensional signs, the sign surface area shall be computed by including the total of all sides designed to attract attention or communicate information that can be seen at any one time by a person from one vantage point. Without otherwise limiting the generality of the foregoing:
1) The sign surface area of a double-faced, back to back sign shall be calculated by using the area of only one side of such sign, so long as the distance between the backs of such signs does not exceed three feet.
2) The sign surface area of a double-faced sign constructed in the form of a "V" shall be calculated by using the area of only one side of such sign (the larger side if there is a size difference), so long as the angle of the "V" does not exceed 30 degrees and at no point does the distance between the backs of such sides exceed five feet.
94.08 Total Sign Surface Area.
a) Unless otherwise provided in this section, the total surface area devoted to all signs on any lot shall not exceed the limitations set forth in this section, and all signs except temporary signs shall be included in this calculation.
b) Unless otherwise provided in this section, the maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot in any residential district (See Section 80.1-80.7) is four square feet.
c) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the maximum sign surface area on any lot in the Office and Institutional (O&I) or Neighborhood Business (N-B) Districts shall be determined by allowing one (1.0) square foot of sign surface area for each
linear foot of building frontage facing a public street. However, in no case shall the total sign surface area exceed 200 square feet. (Amended 11/21/95)
d) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot in the C-B districts shall be determined by either of the following methods, whichever is greater: (Amended 11/21/95)
1) There may not be more than 0.5 square feet of sign surface area per linear foot of lot street footage up to 200 feet of frontage, or 50 square feet,
60
whichever is greater. (Amended 5/19/92)
e) Subject to other provisions of this section, the maximum sign surface area on any lot in the H-B, L-I, H-I districts shall be determined by multiplying the number of linear feet of street frontage by 1.0 feet, or 3 square feet of sign surface area for each linear foot of building frontage facing a public street, whichever is greater. However, in no case shall the total sign surface area exceed 600 square feet.
f) If a lot has frontage on more than one street, then the total sign surface area permitted on that lot shall be the sum of the sign surface area allotments related to each street on which the lot has frontage. However, the total sign surface area that is oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot's total sign surface area allocation that is derived from frontage on that street.
g) The sign surface area of any sign located on a wall of a structure may not exceed 50 percent of the total surface area of the wall on which the sign is located.
94.09 Freestanding Sign Surface Area.
a) For purposes of this section, a side of a freestanding sign is any plane or flat surface included in the calculation of the total sign surface area as provided in Section 94.07. For example, wall signs typically have one side. Freestanding signs typically have two sides (back to back), although four-sided and other multi-sided signs are also common.
b) Subject to Subsection (c), a single side of a freestanding sign may not exceed .3 square feet of surface area for every linear foot of street frontage along the street toward which such sign is primarily oriented with the following restrictions:
1) If the frontage is less than 200 feet then the sign may not exceed 50 square feet.
2) If the frontage is between 200 and 400 feet then the sign may not exceed 75 square feet.
3) If the frontage is over 400 feet then the sign may not exceed 100 square feet.
4) If the lot is a corner lot allowing two signs under Section 94.10, then the development may elect to have one sign totaling 80% of the combined total of each sign, but not to exceed the development's total sign surface in Section 94.08. (b-Amended 10/21/97)
c) In the H-B, L-I, and H-I districts, a single side of a freestanding sign (on- and off-premises) may not exceed 0.75 square feet in surface area for every linear foot of street frontage along the street toward which such sign if primarily oriented. however, in no case may a single side of such sign exceed 300 square feet in surface
61
area.
d) With respect to freestanding signs that have no discernible sides, such as spheres or other shapes not composed of flat planes, no such freestanding sign may exceed the maximum total surface area allowed under subsections (b) or (c) for a single side of a freestanding sign.
94.10 Number of Freestanding Signs.
a) Except as authorized by this section , no development may have more than one freestanding sign.
b) If a development is located on a corner lot that has at least 100 feet of frontage on each of the two intersecting public streets, then the development may have one freestanding sign along each side of the development bordered by such streets.
c) If a development is located on a lot that is bordered by two public streets that do not intersect at the lot's boundaries (double front lot), then the development may have one freestanding sign on each side of the development bordered by such streets.
94.11 Subdivision and Multi-Family Development Entrance Signs.
a) At any entrance to a residential subdivision or multi-family development, there may be not more than two signs identifying such subdivision or development. A single side of any such sign may not exceed 16 square feet, nor may the total surface area of all such signs located at a single entrance exceed 32 square feet.
b) Signs for kindergartens, day nurseries, and nursing homes permitted in accordance with Article VIII of this Ordinance may erect not more than two signs identifying such development. A single side of any such sign may not exceed 16 square feet, nor
may the total surface area of all such signs located at a single entrance exceed 32 square feet.
94.12 Location and Height Requirements.
a) Freestanding signs shall not be located on any highway or railroad right-of-way.
1) Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs shall not be located less than 10 feet from any property line and 20 feet from any residential property line.
2) Spacing. Off-premises signs and billboards shall be located a minimum of 500 linear feet apart as measured along the centerline of the major
62
thoroughfare or freeway. Only one structure shall occur every 500 linear feet.
b) No sign may extend above any parapet or be placed upon any roof surface, except that for purposes of this section, roof surfaces constructed at an angle of 75 degrees or more from horizontal shall be regarded as wall space. This subsection shall not apply to displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observation of holidays on the roofs of residential structures.
c) No sign attached to a building may project more than 12 inches from the building wall.
d) No part of a freestanding sign may exceed a height, measured from ground level of 25 feet in the H-B, L-I, or H-I districts, and 20 feet in all other districts. This height shall be measured from ground level or road level whichever is higher and shall not in any case exceed the height requirement of the zoning district. (Amended 6/16/92, 10/21/97)
94.13 Sign Illumination and Signs Containing Lights.
a) Unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter, signs may be illuminated if such illumination is in accordance with this section.
b) No source of illumination on a sign, such as floodlights, spotlights, unshielded bulbs, etc., shall be directly visible from any public right-of-way, from any residential district, or from adjacent premises.
c) Except as herein provided, (i) internally illuminated signs are not permissible in any residential zoning district, and (ii) where permissible, internally illuminated freestanding signs may be illuminated during hours that the business or enterprise advertised by such sign is open for business or in operation.
This subsection shall not apply to the following types of signs:
1) Signs that constitute an integral part of a vending machine, telephone booth, device that indicates the time, date, or weather conditions, or similar device whose principal function is not to convey an advertising message.
2) Signs that do not exceed four square feet in area and that convey the message that a business enterprise is open or closed or that a place of lodging does or does not have a vacancy.
d) Subject to Subsection (f), illuminated tubings or strings of lights that outline property lines, sales areas, doors, windows or similar areas are prohibited. This does not include permanently attached neon tubings that outline the roofline of a building.
63
(Amended 5/19/92)
e) Electronic Message Boards shall be limited to light emitting diode (LED) or liquid crystal display (LCD) boards and shall not contain any scrolling, moving or animated display. The minimum time between any display change shall be three seconds. Electronic Message Boards shall not exceed 24 square feet in the Office and Institutional (O-I) and Central Business (CB) district and 32 square feet in the Highway Business (HB) district.
f) Subsections (d) and (e) do not apply to temporary signs erected in connection with the observance of holidays.
94.14 Miscellaneous Restrictions and Prohibitions.
a) No off-premises signs, outdoor advertising and/or billboards (except those exempted from regulation or from permit requirements under Sections 94.04 and 94.05) may be located in any district other than H-B, L-I, or H-I district.
b) No sign may be located so that it substantially interferes with the view necessary for motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from public streets or private roads. (Amended 5/19/92)
c) Signs that revolve or are animated or that utilize movement or apparent movement to attract the attention of the public are prohibited. Without limiting the foregoing, streamers, animated display boards, pennants, and propellers are prohibited, but signs that only move occasionally because of wind are not prohibited if their movement (i) is not a primary design feature of the sign, and (ii) is not intended to attract attention to the sign. The restriction of this subsection shall not apply to signs indicating the time, date, or weather conditions or signs permitted under a special advertising event under subsection 95.04b. (Amended 5/19/92)
d) No sign shall use such words as "stop", "slow", "caution", "danger", or similar admonitions which may be confused with traffic directional signals erected by governmental agencies.
e) No sign shall be erected so as, by its location, color, nature or message, to permit it to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signals or signs or so it would tend to be confused with the warning lights of an emergency or public safety vehicle.
f) Freestanding signs shall be securely fastened to the ground or to some other substantial supportive structure so that there is virtually no danger that either the sign or the supportive structure may be moved by the wind or other forces of nature and cause injury to persons or property.
64
g) No sign shall be erected, maintained, painted, or drawn on any utility pole, tree, rock or other natural feature.
h) No sign shall be permitted which uses a series of two or more signs placed in a line parallel to a street or highway right-of-way, or in a similar fashion, all carrying a single advertising message, part of which is contained on each sign.
i) Portable and roof-mounted signs are prohibited from location or use within the Town of Hudson and its extraterritorial planning jurisdiction.
94.15 Maintenance of Signs.
a) All signs and all components thereof, including without limitation, supports, braces, and anchors, shall be kept in state of good repair. With respect to freestanding signs, components (supporting structures, backs, etc.) not bearing a message shall be constructed of materials that blend with the natural environment or shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the natural environment.
b) If a sign other than a billboard advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned and shall, within 90 days after such abandonment, be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located, or other party having control over such sign.
c) If the message portion of a sign is removed, leaving only the supporting "shell" of a sign or the supporting braces, anchors, or similar components, the owner of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is located or other person having control over such sign, shall, within 90 days of the removal of the message portion of the sign, either replace the entire message portion of the sign or remove the remaining components of the sign. The subsection shall not be construed to alter the effect of Subsection 94.17(c), which prohibits the replacement of a non-conforming sign. Nor shall this subsection be construed to prevent the changing of the message of a sign.
d) The area within 10 feet in all directions of any part of a freestanding sign shall be kept clear of all debris and all undergrowth more than 12 inches in height.
94.16 Unlawful Cutting of Trees or Shrubs.
No person may, for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of any sign, damage, trim, destroy, or remove any trees, shrubs, or other vegetation located:
a) Within the right-of-way of any public street or road, unless the work is done pursuant
65
to the express written authorization of (the town or other agency having jurisdiction over the streets).
b) On property that is not under the ownership or control of the person doing or responsible for such work, unless the work is done pursuant to the express written authorization of the person owning the property where such trees or shrubs are located.
c) In any area where such trees or shrubs are required to remain under a permit issued under this ordinance.
94.17 Nonconforming Signs.
a) Subject to the remaining restrictions of this section, nonconforming signs that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this article may be continued provided they conform to the following provisions:
b) No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming sign. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, no nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in such a manner as to aggravate the nonconforming condition. Illumination may not be added to any nonconforming sign.
c) A nonconforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to bring the sign into complete conformity with this Section.
d) If damage to a nonconforming sign from any cause is less than fifty percent (50%) of either the original or replacement value, whichever is less, the sign may be rebuilt or repaired to its original condition in its original location and may continue to be displayed. (Amended 5/19/92)
e) The message of a nonconforming sign may be changed so long as this does not create any new nonconformities (for example, by creating an off-premises sign under circumstances where such a sign would not be allowed).
f) The Zoning Enforcement Officer, within one year of the effective date of this Section, shall make every reasonable effort to identify all the nonconforming signs within the Town's Planning Jurisdiction. He/She shall then contact the person responsible for each such sign (as well as the owner of the property where the nonconforming sign is located, if different from the former) and inform such person (i) that the sign is nonconforming, (ii) how it is nonconforming, (iii) what must be done to correct it and by what date, and (iv) the consequences of failure to make the necessary corrections. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall keep complete records
66
of all correspondence, communications, and other actions taken with respect to such nonconforming signs.
94.18 Amortization of Nonconforming Signs.
a) The following types of nonconforming signs or signs that are nonconforming in any of the following ways shall be altered to comply with the provisions of this Section or removed within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this Section.
1) Portable, temporary, or roof mounted signs.
2) Signs that are in violation of Subsection 94.13 or 94.14 (b), (c), or (d).
(Amended 5/19/92) Adopted on 5th day of May, 1989.
Section 96. Regulations Governing Manufactured Home Parks. The purpose of these Manufactured Home Park regulations is to provide an acceptable environment for the are in fact small communities of Manufactured Homes.
96.1 New Manufactured Home Parks may be located in any R-MH Residential-Manufactured Home District and as a conditional use in any RA-15 Residential-
Agricultural District, subject to a finding by the Board of Commissioners that the following conditions will be met:
96.2 Plans clearly indicating the developer's intention to comply with the provisions of this section be submitted to and approved by the Board of Commissioners. Such plans, drawn to a scale of no less than 1"=200', must show the area to be used for the proposed Manufactured Home park; the ownership and use of neighboring properties; and all proposed entrances, exits, driveways, walkways, off-street parking spaces, and buffer and screening plans; the location of Manufactured Home spaces, recreation areas and service buildings; the location of sanitary conveniences, including toilets, laundries, and refuse receptacles; the proposed plan of water supply, sewage disposal and electric street lighting; indications of how future expansions will be made, if applicable; in the case of irregular topographic features, existing contours and finished contours (by separate map or otherwise). Said map, maps and plans shall also clearly show the name of the proposed park, proposed street names, any other features of the park not herein mentioned. The Board of Commissioners may, prior to final approval of the proposed development, forward said plans to the Planning Board for its review and recommendations. The Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to impose such reasonable conditions and safeguards on the proposed development as it deems necessary for the protection of adjoining
67
properties and the public interest.
96.12 The lot area for a Manufactured Home Park shall be at least two acres. All acres to be included in said park shall be clearly shown on the plans required by Subsection 96.11.
96.13 Each Manufactured Home in the Manufactured Home Park shall occupy a designated space having at least 7,500 square feet, with a width of at least fifty (50) feet, exclusive of common driveways.
96.14 Each Manufactured Home space shall abut a driveway within the park; said driveways shall be graded and paved on a well compacted subbase to a continuous width of twenty-five (25) feet, exclusive of required parking spaces.
96.15 Two off-street driveway parking spaces with not less than four (4) inches of crushed stone or other suitable material on a well compacted subbase shall be provided for each Manufactured Home space. Required parking spaces may be included within the 7,500 square feet required for each Manufactured Home space.
96.16 At least 200 square feet of recreation space for each Manufactured Home space shall be reserved within each Manufactured Home Park as common recreation space for
the residents of the park. Such areas shall, along with the driveways and walkways, be adequately lighted for safety.
96.17 No Manufactured Homes or other structures within a Manufactured Home Park shall be closer to each other than twenty-five (25) feet, except that storage or other auxiliary structure for the exclusive use of the Manufactured Home may be closer to that Manufactured Home that twenty-five (25) feet.
96.18 No Manufactured Home shall be located closer than thirty (30) feet to the exterior boundary of the park, or a bounding street right-of-way. Buildings used for laundry or recreation purposes shall be located no closer than forty (40) feet to the exterior boundary of the park or the right-of-way of a bounding street.
96.19 Proposed water supply and waste disposal facilities for each Manufactured Home in the park shall be approved in writing by the Caldwell County Health Officer or his representative.
96.20 Manufactured homes shall be placed on site in conformance with the Criteria established in Section 97.
96.21 Along all side and rear property lines the developer shall maintain a fifteen (15) feet buffer strip and within a portion of the buffer strip, there shall be planted a
68
continuous screen of evergreen plants with an initial height of at least six (6) feet by natural growth within no later than a two (2) year period.
Section 97. Provisions for Individual Manufactured Homes. Manufactured Homes are only permitted on individual lots in the R-75A district and in the RA-15 District, subject to the following conditions:
97.01 The lost must be recorded as an individual lot.
97.02 If municipal utilities are not available, the well and/or septic tank must be approved by the Caldwell County Health Department.
97.03 All yard dimensional requirements for the respective district must be met.
97.04 The lot must front a public street and said street frontage will be considered the front of the lot.
97.05 A certificate of occupancy must be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer after these conditions and all other code requirements are met and before the unit can be occupied.
97.06 Manufactured Homes may be placed on undeveloped land for temporary purposes incidental to construction or development of property within the Town of Hudson Planning Area for a period not to exceed 180 days. Extensions may be grated for a period as may be determined by the Board of Commissioners, but no longer than construction shall continue.
Furthermore, no manufactured home shall be placed on land until construction commences nor when there is any existing structure of facility on the property which may be suitable or designed for the purpose for which the manufactured home is sought to be used. Manufactured homes may also be used as temporary living quarters in the event of a natural disaster such as fire, flooding, etc., which would render the former residence uninhabitable.
97.07 When a manufactured home, as a principal residence, is placed upon a "lot of record" (Reference Section 12.9 of Town Code) it shall be permitted as provided in the Town Code only to the extent and same as a house constructed to Minimum Standards and other applicable codes.
97.08 The manufactured home must be in full compliance with the Town of Hudson, NC Minimum Housing Standards. Proper anchoring shall be in compliance with NC State Building Codes as adopted by the Town by reference or amended by the Building Code Council from time to time.
69
97.09 The manufactured home to be placed shall be newer than eight (8) years of age. Proof of age of the home such as a bill of sale, title, or certified appraisal must be provided when the zoning permit is requested.
97.10 Exterior finishes shall be in good repair and in no instance shall the degree of reflectivity of the exterior siding, foundation skirting and roofing exceed that of gloss white paint.
97.11 A continuous foundation enclosure, unpierced except for required ventilation and access shall be installed in accordance with State Building Codes. The enclosure shall consist of brick, concrete or block. Wood, vinyl, or fabricated metal will be permitted for temporary use not to exceed a period of six (6) months upon approval of the Town Planner/Code Enforcement Officer for this purpose. Any wood framing for foundation skirting shall be constructed with treated lumber.
97.12 Permanent steps shall be constructed at all exterior doors as necessary and a permanent porch or patio measuring at least six (6) feet in width and eight (8) feet in length and shall be constructed at the front or main entrance to the manufactured
home. Steps constructed from loose stacked materials shall not be construed as properly installed.
97.13 The running lights shall be removed and the hitch shall either be removed or screened with shrubbery. Such shrubbery shall be of a height to ensure a total visual barrier of the towing apparatus within 180 days of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Such shrubbery shall be maintained in accordance with good husbandry practices.
97.14 The pitch of the roof of the manufactured home shall have a minimum rise of three (3) feet for each twelve (12) feet of horizontal run (3 feet and 12 feet) and the roof is finished with a type of shingled roof that is a Class 밄 roof or better in accordance with State Building Code.
97.15 All roof structures shall provide an eave projection of no less than six (6) inches which may include a gutter.
97.16 The manufactured home placement and all appearance criteria must be completed within 180 days of the date of application.
96.17 At least two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided.
97.18 All standards must be met prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
70
Section 98:
No manufactured home originally intended for residential purposes shall be permitted in any business district (1/00).
ARTICLE X
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
Section 100. Lot of Record.
Where the owner of a lot of official record in any residential district at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance or his successor in title does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot size requirements of this Ordinance, such a lot may be used as a residential building site provided, however, that the requirements of the district are complied with or a variance is obtained from the Board of Adjustment.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever two or more adjoining vacant lots of record are in single ownership at any time after the adoption of this Ordinance and such lots individually have less area or width than the minimum requirements of the district in which such lots are located, such lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots which meet the minimum requirements of this Ordinance for district in which such lots are located.
100.1 Unless otherwise listed in Section 100.2, Every lot to be built upon shall abut by at least 37.5 feet a public street and no dwelling shall be placed or built upon a lot which does not abut upon a public street by the same distance. (11-20-90)
Section 100.2 Provisions for Existing Landlocked Lots (3-16-04)
Existing landlocked lots within the residential zoning district, defined as a lot that does not abut a public street and therefore does not meet the requirements that the lot have a minimum frontage on a public street of thirty seven and one half (37 1/2) feet, may nevertheless be developed for one single family dwelling unit if the lot otherwise meets the zoning requirements of the zone in which the lot is located and provided that the lot has a recorded easement of ingress and egress to and from a public street constructed to NCDOT or Town of Hudson standards which is appurtenant to the lot and which meets the following requirements:
100.21 A private easement with a minimum continuous width of twenty-five (25) feet is acquired from intervening property owners;
100.22 An easement with a minimum continuous width of less than twenty-five (25) feet may be permitted only in situations where an easement with a minimum
71
continuous width of twenty-five (25) feet would create nonconformity with respect to this Ordinance;
100.23 The recorded documents creating the easement shall specify that public service, utility and emergency personnel and vehicles shall have freedom of ingress and egress from the landlocked property;
100.24 The recorded documents shall also specify that public utilities (water, sewer, electricity, telephone, cable, etc.) may be located within the easement;
100.25 The recorded documents shall include a maintenance agreement specifying the party responsible for maintaining the easement and its traveled surface;
100.26 The easement must have an all weather surface of gravel, concrete or asphalt with a minimum continuous width of ten (10) feet to ensure access of public service, utility, and emergency personnel and vehicles;
100.27 Subdivision of landlocked parcels will require a publicly dedicated street constructed to Town Standards and must meet all requirements of the Town's Subdivision Regulations.
Section 101. Front Yard for Dwellings.
The front yard requirements of this Ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or in part within 100 feet on either side of the proposed dwelling and on the same side of the street in the same block and use district as such lot is less than the minimum required front yard depth. In such case, the setback on such lots may
be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, or a distance of 10 feet from the street right-of-way, whichever is greater.
Section 102. Height Limitation.
a) The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers, television towers, masts, aerials and similar structures, except as otherwise noted in the vicinity of airports.
b) Communication towers, including but not limited to, radio, television and cellular transmission towers, masts, aerials and similar structures shall be permitted in Light Industrial (L-I) and Heavy Industrial (H-I) and any public property in any district as a special use upon approval by the Board of Commissioners and subject to a finding by the Board that all other requirements for permitted or special uses within the district will be met. Towers
72
must also meet the following requirements:
C. Monopole towers designed with a self-collapsing system may have setback requirements reduced upon approval from the Board of Commissioners.
1. Towers less than 50 feet in height shall have setbacks equal to the height of the proposed structure plus five (5) feet. Towers exceeding 50 feet in height shall increase the setbacks by one (1) foot for each four feet, or fraction thereof, of tower height in excess of 50 feet. The tower shall not exceed 200 feet.
2. The site must be large enough to contain, on-site, all ice-fall or debris from tower failure. If engineering specifications indicate that the minimum required setbacks are too small to contain debris from the proposed tower, the Town may require increased setbacks.
3. Suitable anti-climb fencing with a minimum height of six (6) feet and a landscaped planting screen shall be required and maintained around the structure and accessory attachments. Additionally, a continuous screen of evergreen plants - with an initial height of six (6) feet within a two-year period - must be planted and maintained. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extend possible.
4. Distance of any guy anchorage or similar device shall be at least thirty (30) feet from any property line.
5. The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any required license by any federal, state and local agency.
6. Application for the permit must include construction drawings showing the proposed method of installation, structural engineering analysis, and site plan depicting structures and plantings on the property and all adjacent properties.
7. The owner of such a structure shall assume complete liability in the case of personal property damage.
8. Communication towers shall be shared with other communication providers when feasible.
9. Towers shall in no way be used for advertising purposes.
10. At such time when, due to technological changes and/or advancements, the tower(s) no longer becomes necessary for telecommunications, the tower will be removed by the operating company.
73
Section 103. Visibility of Intersections.
On a corner lot in any residential district, no planting, structure, sign fence, wall or obstruction to vision more than three feet in height measured from the centerline of the street or road shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street or road right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting points on said street or road right-of-way line each of which is 35 feet distance from the point of intersection.
Section 104. Relationship of Building to Lot.
Every building hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than one principal building and its customary accessory buildings on any lot, except in the case of Conditional Use Permits issued for Planned Unit Developments in an appropriate zoning district.
Section 105. Planned Unit Development.
The planned unit development concept offers developers the possibility of more efficient and flexible methods for developing property, and provides residents of the project with larger open spaces for recreation and other activities properly related to residential uses. The Board of Adjustment may approve this form of development in the districts that allow it as a conditional use, provided:
105.1 Such project is an integrated plan designed for the primary purpose of residential use.
105.2 The site for the total project is at least 2 acres and at least 2 principal buildings are included in the plans.
105.3 That the total parcel of land is under single ownership or control, and there is reasonable assurance that the project can be successfully completed and maintained,
including care and maintenance of all common open space, recreation space, and other common land area.
105.4 The preliminary plan for the proposed planned unit development shall be submitted to the Hudson Board of Adjustment for its review. The procedure for approval of the preliminary plan(s) shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Town's Subdivision Regulations. The Board of Adjustment may request design
changes. Such changes may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions for additional utilities, drainage, landscaping, lighting, streets and access ways.
105.5 The applicant must resubmit the plan, within 60 days, to the Board of Adjustment if
74
changes were requested. If the plan is rejected by the Board of Adjustment, the applicant will not receive consideration of the same plan for a period of 12 months. The applicant can, however, appeal to Superior Court.
105.6 All principal buildings and accessory buildings or uses abutting the property lines of the project must meet the minimum yard requirements of the district where the project is located for all yards abutting said property lines. All height requirements shall be met for the district where the project is located.
105.7 The overall use of the area for buildings shall be no more than 25% of the total land area.
105.8 Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of two spaces per dwelling unit.
105.9 All streets and parking areas shall be constructed and paved according to the standards of the Town of Hudson.
105.10 The procedure for final approval of a planned unit development shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Town's subdivision regulations which will include the submission of a design plan to the Hudson Board of Adjustment showing how the requirements of Subsections 105.1 through 105.4 above will be met. Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act on the plan within 60 days following the date of resubmittal, shall constitute a final approval. An approved project must be started within 12 months after final approval and must be completed within a reasonable time. Such time shall be agreed upon between the Board of Adjustment and the applicant/developer.
Section 106. Provisions for Group Projects (Commercial and Industrial).
In the case of two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground at least two (2) acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots and which will not be subdivided, the application of the terms of this Ordinance may be varied by the Board of Adjustment in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood provided:
106.1 Such uses are limited to those permitted within the zoning district in which the project is located. In no case shall the Board of Adjustment authorize a use prohibited in the district in which the project is to be located.
106.2 The overall intensity of land use is no higher and the standard of open space is no lower than that permitted in the district in which the project is located.
106.3 The distance of every building from the nearest property line shall meet the front, rear
75
and side yard requirements of the district in which the project is located.
106.4 The building heights shall not exceed the height limits permitted in the district in which the project is located.
106.5 If the property lies within or abuts upon a residential district there shall be a buffer along the rear and/or side lines abutting the residential lots in conformance with Section 60.15 of this Ordinance.
106.6 All parking, loading and sign requirements are subject to the applicable provisions of the respective zoning districts and other sections of this Ordinance.
106.7 The procedure for approval of Group Projects shall be the same as required for Planned Unit Developments.
Section 107. Provisions for Satellite Dish Antennas.
Satellite Dish Antennas shall be considered an accessory structure and shall require a Zoning Compliance Certificate. They may be located in any district subject to the following conditions:
107.1 No designs or advertising shall be painted on the satellite dish antenna except the manufacturer's name, logo, or trademark provided it is a reasonable size that has been applied by the manufacturer.
107.2 Satellite dish antennas shall not locate or encroach upon existing right-of-ways or required setbacks.
107.3 On corner lots, satellite dish antennas shall not be located within the "sight distance."
107.4 For residential use, satellite dish antennas shall be permitted in the side and rear yards of the lot provided the location of the satellite dish antenna is in compliance with Sections 107.2 and 107.3 of this Ordinance.
107.5 For residential use, satellite dish antennas may be located in the front yard or on the roof of the main structure if the following conditions are met:
a) The property owner petitions the Board of Adjustment for a variance;
b) The petitioner must prove that he or she cannot get clear reception by locating the satellite dish antenna in the rear or side yards of his lot;
c) That the location of the satellite dish antenna will be in compliance with
76
Sections 107.2 and 107.3 of this Ordinance.
Section 108: Automobile Dealerships (5/03)
Automobile Dealerships are permitted as a conditional use in the Central and Highway Business districts. The Board of Adjustment may approve this type of business provided that:
108.1 Automobile Dealerships (New and Used)
May include boats, truck, and truck semi-trailer dealerships, but excludes the sale or storage of manufactured homes.
108.2 Automobile Dealerships must conform to all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance in regards to the particular zoning district where such business is located. Those include and are not limited to sign regulations, setbacks, and placement of accessory structures.
108.3 A site plan for the proposed Automobile Dealership shall be submitted to the Hudson Board of Adjustment for its review.
108.4 Minimum required lot area for passenger vehicles is 15,000 square feet.
Minimum required lot area for any combination of passenger vehicles, boats, transport tractor and trailers is 60,000 square feet.
108.5 All proposed parking areas must be paved, including those for customer parking
108.6 Automobiles for sale must be parked in the front yard, and may not extend beyond the rear side lot line.
108.7 Vegetative buffers will be required along all lot lines that abut residential districts.
108.8 Automobiles may not be located within 10 feet of any property line and or road right of way line, and may not be located within 20 feet of any property line abutting a residential district. Furthermore no automobiles may be placed within any public right of way.
108.9 If the Board of Adjustment deems necessary additional regulations may be required. Those may include but are not limited to extra buffering and or lighting.
Section 109: Trash Container and Dumpster Screen/Buffers:(5/03)
The large metal boxes commonly known as dumpsters are a type of trash container as such term is used herein. Such dumpsters are, however, referred to in this section by specific name for purposes of emphasis and clarity.
77
109.1 It is the intent of this section to provide for visual screens and or buffers between trash container and dumpster locations and all street rights-of-way and adjoining properties.
109.2 Trash containers and dumpsters shall not be located in the front yard of any property where practical and shall be screened from view on all sides, except for one opening not greater than 12 feet in width to allow for service access.
109.3 Screens and/or buffers intended to satisfy this requirement shall be in accordance with the criteria for screens/buffers as defined in Section 60.15 of this ordinance.
Section 109.5 Provisions for Sedimentation and Erosion Control
109.5 Contractors and/or Property owners are required to place gravel on all work site driveways and construction site and periodically check the condition of the gravel and replace as needed.
109.6 Contractors and/or Property owners are required to place bales of hay, straw or silt fencing to stop the threat of any dirt and/or mud run-off from any construction site (onto land of any adjoining property owner or into a stream or waterway) of less than (1) one acre in size or when deemed necessary by the Caldwell County Building Inspector. Site of more than (1) one acre must comply with the North Carolina Sedimentation Control Act.
109.7 The Caldwell County Building Inspector will make no inspections until these protective measures have been taken. After subsequent inspections, if the inspector determines that evidence if mud and silt run-off has occurred, no further inspections will be made until the appropriate measures have been taken to correct the problem and a stop work order will be issued.
109.8 WINERY-VINEYARDS Zoning District 뻉A-15, Site Standards: Wineries in the RA-15, ETJ of Hudson established after this date of ADOPTION 11/18/2019_shall be treated as a Conditional Use if they are wanting to establish events and food trucks as part of their operation. Existing wineries in the ETJ for Hudson are hereby considered non-conforming uses (unless they fully meet the adopted standards) and are not allowed additional expansions, including parking , and are subject to the requirements as stated in this text amendment for events, screening, hours of operations, food truck limitations, event limitations, limited amplification, and expanded parking. Adopted 11/19/2019
1. Facility must be operated in association with an existing vineyard (bona fide farm) located on the same property, or multiple adjoining properties in the same ownership. Vineyards with winery and tasting rooms that plan on conduction outdoor/indoor events established after the adoption of this amendment. Shall be treated as a Conditional Use. New wineries must have a minimum of eight (8) acres and must be located a
78
minimum of five hundred feet (500) from all residential structures. An exception will be provided for residential structures located on the vineyard/winery property. Adopted 11/19/2019
2. Facility must be located in such a manner that visual impact to adjoining properties used or zoned for residential or agricultural purposes is minimal. Adopted 11/19/2019
3. All structures, buildings storage areas, etc. (except fences or walls associated with the winery; must be set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100) feet from all property lines or street right-of-way. The Board of Adjustment may require greater setbacks on a case-by-case basis for large-scale wineries. Adopted 11/19/2019
4. Gift shops, wine tasting/sampling, and other related activities are permitted within or in conjunction with the winery itself. Adopted 11/19/2019
5. Food trucks are permitted limited to two (2) per event. Permits are required from the Town of Hudson뭩 Zoning Administrator. The property owner may obtain a single annual zoning permit as defined in section in the Zoning Ordinance for Food Trucks. Adopted 11/19/2019
6. Hours of operation including special events, Monday thru Sunday 11 am-8 pm. Adopted 11/19/2019
7. Lighting: Outdoor lights shall be so designed as to minimize light from directly hitting adjacent property or any public right-of-way. Adopted 11/19/2019
8. Buffer Strip Screening and Fencing (as defined in Section 60.15 Definitions): All parking and storage areas, as well as the wine tasting room itself, shall be screened from adjoining properties used or zoned for residential or agricultural purposes. Vineyards that are located on-site between such properties shall be considered as sufficient screening unless otherwise determined based on existing topography and natural vegetation that does not provide an existing visual barrier, selective screening may be required. Adopted 11/19/2019
9. Parking. Off-Street Parking, impervious surfaces: shall be provided sufficient for the occupancy limits of the tasting room and incidental outdoor seating areas and shall be in accordance to the provisions of the Hudson Zoning Ordinance Article XI Section 110. One parking space per every four (4) patrons, plus one space for every two (2) employees. To maintain the natural state of farming gravel or other similar material may be used for the designated parking areas. It is encouraged that areas remain covered in natural grass where possible. Impervious surfaces including gravel and building spaces may require review for stormwater compliance. Adopted 11/19/2019
10. Operation of the facility with events, outdoor events, noise, lighting, and parking shall not interfere with the comfort and repose of adjoining property owners. Outdoor Events to be held in conjunction with the winery/wine tasting room may occur no more than six (6) times per year on-siteThe event will be allowed during normal business hours not to exceed 8:00 pm. Limited outdoor amplification of sound or music will be permitted. Any live music that is performed outdoors shall be directed as such to minimize the negative effects on adjacent properties. Comply with the noise ordinance as established by Caldwell County. Two (2) food trucks/trailers may be allowed on-site to serve food at the event with the serving of food not to be conducted after 8:00 PM. Non-profit organizations providing food to raise money for their organization will
79
also be allowed. Nothing in this section may limit any events that are held within the interior of the winery/tasting room. Adopted 11/19/2019
11. All tanks, crushing and pressing equipment, processing equipment, etc. that is to be used/stored outside shall be at a designated crush/press pad located at the back/side of the winery out of view from the front of the property. Adopted 11/19/2019
12. Signs provided at the winery shall be in accordance with the Hudson Zoning Ordinance Article IX Section 94. Adopted 11/19/2019
ARTICLE XI
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section 110. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building, or at the time any principal building enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats, or floor area; or before conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another; permanent off-street parking space in the amount specified by this section. A parking space shall be determined as defined in Section 60.55 of this Ordinance. Such parking space may be provided in a parking garage or properly graded open space.
110.1 Certification of Minimum Parking Requirements. Each application for a zoning permit submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer as provided for in this Ordinance shall include information as to the means of entrance and exit to such space. This information shall be in sufficient detail to enable the Zoning Enforcement Officer to determine whether or not the requirements of this section are met.
110.2 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements. The following off-street parking space shall be required:
Residential and Related Uses Required Off-Street Parking
Any residential use consisting of Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit
one or more dwelling units
Residential apartment housing for elderly
55 and older certified and licensed parking ratio of no less than 1.5 spaces per unit Adopted 4/19/2018
Bars, taprooms, breweries and like uses one space per six (6) fixed seats provided for patron use, plus one space for every two (2) employees Adopted 4/19/2018
80
Manufactured and Modular Homes Two spaces for each modular or mobile home
Rooming and boarding houses One space for each two guest rooms, plus two
additional spaces for the owner or manager
Customary home occupations In addition to residential requirements, one parking space per 100 square feet devoted to the home occupation
Institutional, Public and Semipublic Uses
Churches and funeral homes One space for every four seats in the main chapel
Elementary schools, private schools and One space for each employee, plus one
daycare additional space for visitors
Hospitals One space for each four patient beds plus one space for every four staff and one space for each hospital vehicle
Libraries One space for every four seats provided for patron use
Medical offices and clinics Four spaces for each doctor practicing at the clinic, plus one space for each employee
Places of public assembly, including private One space for each four fixed seats provided for clubs and lodges, auditoriums, dance halls, patron use, plus one space for each 100 square
theatres, stadiums, gymnasiums, amusement feet of floor or ground area used for amusement
parks, community centers and all similar or assembly not including fixed seats
places of public assembly
Sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes, One space for each six patient beds, plus one
homes for the aged, and similar institutions space for each staff or visiting doctor plus one
space for each four employees
Business Uses
Hotels One space for each two rooms plus one additional space for each five employees
Motels, tourist homes, inns and tourist courts One space for each accommodation plus four additional spaces for employees
81
Offices: business, professional, public, One space for each 200 square feet of gross
including banks floor area
Restaurants One space for each three seating accommodations, plus one space for each two employees on shift of largest employment
Restaurants, Drive-In Parking space equal to five times the floor space in the main building
Retail business and consumer service outlets One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area
Service Stations and Car Washes Two spaces for each gas pump plus three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility
Shopping Centers One space for each 200 square feet or gross floor area
Wholesale and Industrial Uses
Wholesale and industrial operations One space for each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift
Winery/Vineyards (events/food trucks Parking. Off-Street Parking, impervious surfaces: shall be provided sufficient for the occupancy limits of the tasting room and incidental outdoor seating areas and shall be in accordance to the provisions of the Hudson Zoning Ordinance Article XI Section 110.
One parking space per every four (4) patrons, plus one space for every two (2) employees. To maintain the natural state of farming gravel or other similar material may be used for the designated parking areas. It is encouraged that areas remain covered in natural grass where possible. Impervious surfaces including gravel and building spaces may require review for stormwater compliance. Adopted 11/19/2019
110.3 Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space. Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry hereafter erected shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading
82
and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley, or if there is no alley available, then to a street. For the purposes of this section, an off-street loading space shall have a minimum dimension of 12 feet by 40 feet and overhead clearance of 14 feet in height above the alley or street grade.
Retail Operations One loading space for each 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
Wholesale and industrial operations One loading space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
Section 111. Multi-Family and Commercial Development Standards
(Adopted 12-16-08)
Review of Multi-Family and Commercial developments shall be the responsibility of the Town Planner. The Town Planner at his/her discretion may ask the Planning Board to participate in the review process and render any decision in regards to the standards listed from section 111.01 through 111.06. At no time may the Town Planner or Planning Board lessen the requirements of this Section.
111.01 Access Management and Pedestrian Facilities:
Access Management
a. All new driveway access shall be permitted in accordance with the current NCDOT 밣olicy on Street and Driveway Access to North Carolina Highways. Additional restrictions will apply as follows:
b. The minimum distance between the centerlines of driveways into commercial developments shall be at least 600 feet.
c. On lots that are developed for commercial and/or industrial use, stub outs will be required for interconnectivity to abutting lots or for future development of the remainder of the parcel.
d. No property shall have more than two (2) driveway access points. In situations where public safety may be affected, additional driveway access points may be permitted only after a Traffic Impact Analysis has been completed at the responsibility of the developer. NCDOT and/or the Town of Hudson may request that the study be completed. A certified professional engineer shall prepare the Traffic Impact Analysis. NCDOT and/or the Town Engineer shall make the final decision in regards to location and number of driveway access points.
83
Pedestrian Facilities:
a. Sidewalks are required along all major thoroughfares in multi-family and commercial developments within the Town of Hudson and its ETJ. Sidewalks may also be required along minor thoroughfares and collector streets if deemed necessary (connectivity to existing sidewalk system) by the Town Planner.
b. Connectivity with the Town뭩 greenway/trail system should be considered (where feasible) if the development is within 100 feet of the existing system.
Section 111.02 Landscaping of Parking Area
The landscaping requirements of this section shall apply to land, public and private, designated as multi-family, recreational, institutional, industrial and commercial land uses which are required to have twenty (20) or more parking spaces. All those multi-family, recreational, institutional, industrial and commercial land uses which are required to have ten (10) to nineteen (19) spaces must comply with the street yard requirements only. Certified and Licensed apartment complexes for the elderly (ages 55 and older) shall have a parking ratio of no less than 1.5 spaces per unit
111.03 Parking area landscaping requirements of this section are as follows:
a. Credit for using existing trees on site greater than or equal to those required by standards shall be two (2) trees for every one tree retained ( in accordance with Section 111.06 a)
b. When using an existing tree, the area under the dripline (maximum extension of branches) of the tree must remain undisturbed. This includes grading, fill, paving, etc.
c. If an existing tree dies, it must be replaced with two (2) trees during the next planting season.(in accordance with Section 111.06 c)
d. If any tree/shrub dies, replacement is required within the next planting season.
e. Landscaping shall be placed in a manner, which meets the intent of this Ordinance, and shall be maintained.
f. Any fraction of requirements shall be rounded to the next whole number.
(eg; in a street yard, if lot width is 149 feet or less then the number of required
84
trees shall be 1. If the lot is 150 then the number of required trees shall be 2 (rounded up to 200 feet)).
g. Landscaping shall not obstruct the view of motorists using any street, private driveway, parking aisles or the approach to any street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard.
111.04 Landscaping requirements for interior areas of parking areas:
(Interior areas are defined as the area within the property used for vehicular storage, parking and movement).
a. Landscaped planting areas are to be located within or adjacent to the parking area as tree islands, at the end or parking bays, inside medians, or between rows or cars.
b. There shall be one (1) tree for every twenty (20) parking spaces.
c. There shall be one (1) shrub for every ten (10) parking spaces. Shrubs must be eighteen (18) inches tall at planting and reach a minimum height of thirty (30) inches in three (3) years.
d. All trees and shrubs are to be planted within a landscaped planting area not less than one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet in area.
e. No vehicular parking space shall be farther than one hundred (100) feet from a planting area.
111.05 Landscaping requirements for street yards of parking areas:
(Street yards are defined as the area between the public right-of-way and interior area)
a. Street yards are required to be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width.
b. One (1) tree is required every one-hundred (100) feet along the street frontage.
c. Shrub beds (fifty (50) square feet minimum and a minimum of ten (10) shrubs per shrub bed) are required every fifty (50) feet along the street frontage. Berms may be used instead of shrubs with the following stipulations: 1) berms must be the required height of shrubs with no more than a 3:1 slope; 2) shorter shrubs may be used in combination with berms as long as the required total height is met; 3) berms must be capped or topped with groundcover vegetation; 4) berms shall be grassed; 5) berms must occupy sixty (60%) percent of the frontage area; 6) fences may be used in combination with berms as long as the fence is compatible in
85
materials and color to the building and is not more than forty (40%) percent of the required height.
111.06 Tree and shrub specifications:
a. Tree" as used herein means any tree, evergreen or deciduous, whose
mature height of its species can be expected to exceed fifteen (15) feet for a small tree and thirty-five (35) feet for a large tree (except in cases where this would require the planting of incompatible species with the surrounding environment, such as overhead utility lines, then acceptable species may be used). The tree, existing or planted, shall be at least eight (8) feet in height and six and one-quarter (6 1/4") inches in circumference (two (2) inches in diameter) measured at one-half (1/2') foot above grade for newly planted trees and measured at four (4) feet above grade for existing trees.
b. "Shrub" shall attain a minimum of thirty (30") inches in height with three (3) years of planting. All shrubs shall be a minimum of eighteen (18") inches tall when planted. All shrubs planted on berms may have lesser height provided the combined height of the berm and plantings after three (3) years is at least thirty (30") inches in height.
c. Tree Replacement Standards: Any tree that dies or is damaged due to weather or other factors must be replaced within the next planting season. Trees must be replaced at a 2 to 1 ratio if the existing damaged/dead tree exceeds a height of twelve (12) feet and is more than six and one-quarter (6 1/4") inches in circumference (two (2) inches in diameter) measured at four (4) feet above grade. Existing damaged/dead trees that that are less than the above listed requirements may be replaced at a 1 to 1 ratio.
86
ARTICLE XII
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 120. Zoning Enforcement Officer. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Enforcement Officer to enforce and administer the provisions of this Ordinance.
If the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation or its
If a ruling of the Zoning Enforcement Officer is questioned, the aggrieved party or parties may appeal such ruling to the Board of Adjustment.
Section 121. Zoning Compliance Certificate Required.
No building, sign or other structure shall be erected, moved, extended or enlarged, or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the Zoning Enforcement Officer has issued a Zoning Compliance Certificate for such work. Every person obtaining a Zoning Compliance Certificate hereunder shall pay a fee as provided in a schedule of zoning permit fees to be adopted by the governing body.
Section 122. Application for Zoning Compliance Certificate.
Each application to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for a Zoning Compliance Certificate shall be accompanied by plot plans in duplicate showing:
? The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon,
? The size of the building to be erected;
? The location of building on the lot;
? The location of existing structures on the lot, if any;
? The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate;
? The approximate setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots;
? The intended use of the property;
87
? Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed.
Once filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer, he/she shall have ten (10) working days to review such plats and plans before issuing an approval or denial for a Zoning Compliance Certificate.
Any Zoning Compliance certificate issued shall expire and be cancelled unless the work authorized it shall have begun within six (6) months of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one (1) year. Written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, including notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until another Zoning Compliance Certificate has been obtained.
Section 123. Zoning Certificate of Occupancy for New and Altered Structures.
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use, except for agriculture purposes, of any land, building or structure or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered or enlarged, wholly or partly, in its use or structure, until a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer stating that the building or structure and the proposed use complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. A Zoning Certificate of Occupancy shall be applied for co-incident with the application of a zoning permit and shall be issued within five (5) days after the erection or alteration of such building or structure or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and the North Carolina Building Code.
A temporary Zoning Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for a period not to exceed six (6) months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending completion, provided that such temporary permit may require such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the general public.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall maintain a record of all Zoning Certificates of Occupancy and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person. Failure to obtain a Zoning
Certificate of Occupancy shall be a violation of this Ordinance, and punishable under the terms of Section 124 of this Ordinance.
123.01 Complaints Regarding Violations. Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the cause and basis thereof shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this Ordinance.
Section 124. Remedies, Civil and Criminal Penalties.
88
124.01 Violation. In addition to those remedies provided in N.C. General Statues 14-4 and 160A-175, as amended and otherwise as law provided, whenever, by the provisions of this Ordinance, the performance of any act is required, or the performance of any act is prohibited, or whenever any regulation or limitation is imposed on the use of any land and water, or on the erection or removal or alteration of a structure, a failure to comply with such provisions shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
124.02 Liability. The owner, tenant, or occupant of any land or structure, a part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this Ordinance shall be held responsible for the violation and be subject to the penalties and remedies provided herein.
124.03 Procedures Upon Discovery of Violation. Upon the determination that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall send, within five (5) working days, a written notice by registered mail to the person(s) responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Additional written notices may be sent at the Zoning Enforcement Officer's discretion.
The final written notice, which may also be the initial notice, shall state the action the Zoning Enforcement Officer intends to take, if the violation is not corrected, and shall advise that the Zoning Enforcement Officer may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the remedies contained in Section 124.04 as well as the penalties in 124.06.
124.04 Civil Penalties. Violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty ($50.00) dollars *PER DAY, to be recovered by the Town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a period of seventy-two hours after being cited. Citation shall be in writing, signed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and shall be delivered or mailed to the offender either at his residence or at his place of business or at the place where the violation occurred.
124.05 Town Attorney May Prevent Violation. If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any structure or land is used in violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall inform the Town Attorney. In addition to other remedies, the Town Attorney may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
(124.04 Amended 7/18/95 - Effective date 7/19/95)
124.06 Criminal Penalties for Violation. Any person, firm, or corporation who violated the provisions of this Ordinance, shall upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not exceeding fifty ($50.00) dollars or imprisoned not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each day that a
89
violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense, provided that violation of this Ordinance be corrected within thirty (30) days after the notice of said violation has been given.
ARTICLE XIII
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 130. Establishment of Board of Adjustment.
A Board of Adjustment is hereby created as provided in Section 160A-388 of the General Statutes of North Carolina. Said Board shall consist of seven (7) members; five (5) members shall be residents of the Town of Hudson, and the other two (2) members shall be appointed to represent the Town's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction, as provided in Section 160A-362 of the General Statutes of North Carolina. The term of office of the members of the Board shall be for three years, excepting that the seven members first appointed shall serve respectively for terms of one year; two y ears; and three years; and thereafter members shall be appointed for terms of three years each. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. All members shall have equal rights and privileges in all matters. The Board of Adjustment shall also serve as the Planning Board.
The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Hudson may, in its discretion, appoint not more than two alternate members to serve on the Board of Adjustment in the absence, for any cause, of any regular member. Such alternate member or members shall be appointed on the same member as regular members and at the regular times for appointment. Such alternate member, while attending any regular or special meeting of the Board and serving in the absence of any regular member, shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of such regular member so absent.
Section 131. Jurisdiction and Decision of the Board of Adjustment.
Two members appointed to the Board by the Caldwell County Board of Commissioners as representatives of the area of extra-territorial jurisdiction shall be residents of such area and citizens of Caldwell County. Such members shall have equal voting rights, privileges, and duties with other members of the Board in all matters pertaining to the regulation of the incorporated area of Hudson and its extra-territorial jurisdiction. The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Enforcement Officer pertaining to the incorporated area of Hudson and to the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under the Zoning Ordinance or the effect any variation of such Ordinance in the area, of the incorporated area and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
For the purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on the board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered 'members of the board' for calculation of the requisite majority or supermajority if there are no qualified alternates available to take the
90
place of such members.
On all appeals, applications and other matters brought before the Board of Adjustment, said Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties, and shall decide the same within a reasonable time. The Board shall inform all parties involved of its decision in writing, stating the reasons therefore.
Section 132. Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from its members, each of whom shall serve for one year or until re-elected or until their successors are elected and qualify. The Board shall appoint a secretary who may be a municipal officer, an employee of the Town, or a member of the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall adopt rules and bylaws in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and or Article 19, Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The secretary shall not have a vote unless he is also a regular or alternate member of the Board.
Section 133.Hearings
All hearings of the board shall be open to the public. A notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the person or entity whose appeal, application, or request is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of the property that is the subject of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; to the owners of all parcels of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject of the hearing; and to any other persons entitled to receive notice as provided by the zoning ordinance. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the city may rely on the county tax listing to determine the owners of property entitled to mailed notice. The notice must be deposited in the mail at least 10 days, but not more than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing. Within that same time period, the city shall also prominently post a notice of the hearing on the site that is the subject of the hearing or on an adjacent street or highway right-of-way. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, an indication of such fact. The final disposition of appeals shall be made by recorded resolution indicating the reason of the board therefor, all which shall be a public record. No final action shall be taken on any matter unless a quorum is present. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the total members of the board.
Section 134. Appeals
91
The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals decisions of administrative officials charged with enforcement of the zoning ordinance and may hear appeals arising out of any other ordinance that regulates land use or development, pursuant to all of the following:
Any person who has standing under G.S. 160A-393(d) or the city may appeal a decision to the board of adjustment. An appeal is taken by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal.
The official who made the decision shall give written notice to the owner of the property that is the subject of the decision and to the party who sought the decision, if different from the owner. The written notice shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail.
The owner or other party shall have 30 days from receipt of the written notice within which to file an appeal. Any other person with standing to appeal shall have 30 days from receipt from any source of actual or constructive notice of the decision within which to file an appeal.
It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons with standing to appeal have constructive notice of the decision from the date a sign containing the words "Zoning Decision" or "Subdivision Decision" in letters at least six inches high and identifying the means to contact an official for information about the decision is prominently posted on the property that is the subject of the decision, provided the sign remains on the property for at least 10 days. Posting of signs is not the only form of constructive notice. Any such posting shall be the responsibility of the landowner or applicant. Verification of the posting shall be provided to the official who made the decision. Absent an ordinance provision to the contrary, posting of signs shall not be required.
The official who made the decision shall transmit to the board all documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. The official shall also provide a copy of the record to the appellant and to the owner of the property that is the subject of the appeal if the appellant is not the owner.
An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order stays enforcement of the action appealed from unless the official who made the decision certifies to the board of adjustment after notice of appeal has been filed that because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property or because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of the ordinance. In that case, enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with the official a request for an expedited
92
hearing of the appeal, and the board of adjustment shall meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after such a request is filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a permit or otherwise affirming that a proposed use of property is consistent with the ordinance shall not stay the further review of an application for permits or permissions to use such property; in these situations the appellant may request and the board may grant a stay of a final decision of permit applications or building permits affected by the issue being appealed.
The official who made the decision shall be present at the hearing as a witness. The appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated in the notice of appeal. If any party or the city would be unduly prejudiced by the presentation of matters not presented in the notice of appeal, the board shall continue the hearing. The board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any order, requirement, decision, or determination that ought to be made. The board shall have all the powers of the official who made the decision.
Section 135.Powers and duties of board.
The board shall have the powers enumerated below.
135.01 Oaths.  The chair of the board or any member acting as chair and the city clerk are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming before the board. Any person who, while under oath during a proceeding before the board of adjustment, willfully swears falsely is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
135.02 Subpoenas.  The board of adjustment through the chair, or in the chair뭩 absence anyone acting as chair, may subpoena witnesses and compels the production of evidence. To request issuance of a subpoena, persons with standing under G.S. 160A-393(d) may make a written request to the chair explaining why it is necessary for certain witnesses or evidence to be compelled. The chair shall issue requested subpoenas he or she determines to be relevant, reasonable in nature and scope, and not oppressive. The chair shall rule on any motion to quash or modify a subpoena. Decisions regarding subpoenas made by the chair may be appealed to the full board of adjustment. If a person fails or refuses to obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this subsection, the board of adjustment or the party seeking the subpoena may apply to the General Court of Justice for an order requiring that its subpoena be obeyed, and the court shall have jurisdiction to issue these orders after notice to all proper parties.
135.03 Decisions. - The board shall determine contested facts and make its decision within a reasonable time. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision shall be reduced to writing and
93
reflect the board뭩 determination of contested facts and their application to the applicable standards. The written decision shall be signed by the chair or other duly authorized member of the board. A quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing the written decision with the clerk to the board or such other office or official as the ordinance specifies. The decision of the board shall be delivered by personal deliver, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, property owner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy, prior ot the date the decision becomes effective. The person required to provide notice shall certify that proper notice has been made.
135.2 Variances.-
Any application for a variance shall be filed with the Town Clerk or Town Planner at least thirty (30) days prior to the date on which it is to be introduced to the Board of Adjustment. The Town Clerk or designated staff member shall be responsible for presenting the application to the Board of Adjustment. Each variance application shall be accompanied by a fee set annually by the Town Council to help defray the costs of advertising the public hearing required by Article 19, Chapter 160A-364 of the North Carolina General Statutes.
To vary any of the provisions of this ordinance. The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the board shall be necessary to grant a variance.
a. When unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of a zoning ordinance, the board of adjustment shall vary any of the provisions of the ordinance upon a showing of all the following:
b. Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.
c. The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance.
d. The hardship did not result from the actions taken by the applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing the property with knowledge that the circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be regarded as self-created hardship.
94
e. The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and substantial justice is achieved
No change in permitted uses may be authorized by variance.
f. Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance provided that the conditions are reasonable related to the variance.
g. Any other ordinance that regulates land use or development may provide for variances consistent with the provisions of this subsection.
h. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in said district. Said variance would constitute a use variance. Applications for use variances will not be accepted by the Town nor reviewed by the Board of Adjustment.
Section 136.Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning enforcement officer in the enforcement of this Ordinance. . A simple majority vote of the Board of Adjustment members is required to decide any appeal.
Section 137. Conditional Uses; Conditions Governing Application. To grant in particular cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, permits for conditional uses under the various use districts. A simple majority vote of the Board of Adjustment members is required to issue a conditional use permit.
The Board shall not grant a conditional use permit unless and until:
a. A written application for a conditional use permit is submitted indicating the section of this Ordinance under which the conditional use permit is sought.
b. A public hearing is held. Notice of this hearing shall be advertised in all local newspapers of general circulation in the area a reasonable amount of time prior to the public hearing. This legal notice shall describe the request and appear at least once weekly for two consecutive weeks. All property owners within 100 feet of the property in question shall be notified of this hearing by first class mail.
95
c. The Board of Adjustment finds that in the particular case in adjustment the use for which the conditional use permit is sought will not adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use, and will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or public improvements in the neighborhood. In granting such a permit, the Board of Adjustment may designate such conditions in connection therewith as will conform to the requirements and spirit of this Ordinance.
d. Compliance with Other Codes. Granting a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with all of the requirements of building codes or other ordinances.
e. Revocation. If at any time after a conditional use permit has been issued, the Board of Adjustment finds that the conditions imposed and agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a conditional use permit, the permit shall be terminated and the operation of such use discontinued. If a conditional use permit is terminated for any reason, it may be reinstated only after a public hearing is held.
f. Expiration. In any case where a conditional use permit has not been exercised within the time limit set by the Board of Adjustment, or within one year if no specific time limit has been set, then without further action the permit shall be null and void.
"Exercised" as set forth in this subsection shall mean that binding contracts for the construction of the main building shall have been let; or in the absence of contracts, that the main building is under construction to a substantial degree; or that prerequisite conditions involving substantial investment are contracted for, in substantial development, or completed (sewerage, drainage, etc.). When construction is not a part of the use, "exercised" shall mean that the use is in operation in compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit.
g. Careful record. A careful record of such application and plat, together
with a record of the action taken thereon, shall be kept in the office of the zoning enforcement officer.
Section 138. Decision of the Board of Adjustment
Exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify any order, decision or determination and to that end shall have the power of the official from whom the appeal is taken.
96
All decisions of the board are subject to review by the superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari pursuant to G.S. 160A-393. A petition for review shall be filed with the clerk of superior court no later than 30 days after the decision is effective or after a written copy thereof is given in accordance with subdivision (1) of this subsection. When first-class mail is used to deliver notice, three days shall be added to the time to file the petition.
Section 139. Duties of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Board of Adjustment, Courts and Town Council on Matters of Appeal.
It is the intention of this Ordinance that all questions arising in connection with the enforcement of this Ordinance shall be presented to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and that such question shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the Zoning Enforcement Officer and that from the decision of the Board of Adjustment recourse shall be had to courts as prescribed by law. It is further the intention of this Ordinance that the duties of the Hudson Board of Commissioners in connection with the Ordinance shall not include the hearing and passing upon disputed question that may arise in connection with the enforcement thereof. The duties of the Town Council in connection with this Ordinance shall be only the duty of considering and passing upon any proposed amendments or repeal of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XIV
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES
Section 140. Procedure for Amendments. A petition for an amendment to this Ordinance and to the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by the Town of Hudson, the Planning Board, any department or agency of the Town of Hudson, the owner of any property within the Town, or any interested citizen who can show just cause for an amendment. Applications submitted by individual property owners or interested citizens who are not acting in an official capacity for the Town of Hudson shall comply with the following procedural requirements.
140.1 Application Submission. Any application for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance shall be filed with the Town Manager at least twenty (20) days prior to the date on which it is to be introduced to the Planning Board. Each petition for an amendment shall be accompanied by a fee of sixty dollars ($100.00) to help defray the costs of advertising the public hearing required by Article 19 Chapter 160A-364 of the North Carolina General Statutes. If a public hearing is not held, said fee shall be refunded to the petitioner if advertisement has not been published and adjacent property owners have not yet been notified. Notice of the public hearing shall be made in accordance with Section 133 of this Ordinance.
Each application involving a change to the Official Zoning Map shall be signed, be in duplicate, and shall contain at least the following information;
97
? The applicant's name in full, applicant's address, address or description of the property to be rezoned.
? The applicant's interest in the property and the type of rezoning requested.
? If the proposed change would require a change in the Zoning Map, an accurate diagram of the of the property proposed for rezoning, showing:
(a) All property lines with dimensions, including north arrow;
(b) Adjoining streets with right-of-ways and paving widths;
(c) The location of all structures, existing and proposed, and the use of the land';
(d) Zoning classification of all abutting property owners;
(e) Names and addresses of all adjoining property owners.
? A statement regarding the changing conditions, if any, in the area or in the Town generally that make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
140.2 Planning Board Consideration. All proposed amendments to the Zoning Ordinance shall be submitted to the Hudson Planning Board for review and recommendation. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing to consider the proposed amendment. The Planning Board shall have thirty-one (31) days from the time the proposed amendment was first considered by the Planning Board to submit its report. If the Planning Board fails to submit a report within the above period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment.
The Planning Board shall in writing provide to the Town Board of Commissioners justification for each zoning map and text amendment.
140.3 Town Board of Commissioners Consideration. Before adopting or amending this Ordinance, the Hudson Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on it. Notice of the public hearing shall be in accordance with Section 133.03 of this
Ordinance. Any petition for an amendment to this Ordinance may be withdrawn at any time by written notice to the Town Clerk.
The Town Board of Commissioners shall in writing provide to the justification for each zoning map and text amendment.
98
Section 141. Protest Petition.
(a) Applicability. In the case of a qualified protest against a proposed map amendment, as defined in subsection (b), such amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of the town council. For purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on the town council and members who are excused from voting shall not be considered for calculation of the required three-fourths majority. Protest petitions shall not be applicable to any amendment which initially zones property added as a result of annexation or increased extra-territorial jurisdiction.
(b) Qualifying area. To qualify as a protest under this section, the petition must be signed by the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area included in the proposed change or five (5) percent of a one hundred (100)-foot wide buffer extending along the entire boundary of each discrete area proposed to be rezoned. A street right-of-way shall not be considered in computing the buffer unless that right-of-way is more than one hundred (100) feet wide. When less than an entire parcel land is proposed for rezoning, the buffer shall be measured from the property line of that parcel.
(c) Petition verification. No protest against any amendment shall be valid unless it is in the form of a written petition bearing the actual signatures of the required number of property owners and stating that the signers do protest the proposed amendment. The protest petition must be received town clerk at least two (2) normal working days before the date established for a public hearing on the proposed amendment. A person who has signed a protest petition may withdraw his or her name from the petition at any time prior to the vote on the proposed amendment.
Section 142. Procedure for Resubmission of a Proposed Amendment. Any proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance having complied with the requirements of Article XIV, Section 140 of this Ordinance and having been denied by the Board of Commissioners may be resubmitted to the Planning Board only after a waiting period of no less than one (1) year from the date of denial. A fee of $35.00 to help defray the costs of advertising the public hearing shall be paid to the Town Clerk and all requirements of Article XIV, Section 140 shall be complied with.
ARTICLE XV
LEGAL PROVISIONS
Section 150. Interpretation, Purpose and Conflict. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of building or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other Ordinance, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern, provided that nothing in the Ordinance shall be construed to amend or repeal any other existing Ordinance of the Town.
99
Section 151. Reenactment and Repeal of Existing Zoning Ordinance. This Ordinance in part carries forward by reenactment some of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of Hudson, adopted by the Board of Commissioners on February 10, 1970, as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to reenact and continue in force such existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued hereunder are preserved and may be enforced. All provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Hudson enacted on May 9, 1989, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are hereby repealed. All suits at law or in equity and/or all prosecutions resulting from the violation of any zoning Ordinance heretofore in effect, which are pending in any of the courts of this State or of the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of this Ordinance but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if this Ordinance had not been adopted; any and all violations of the existing Zoning Ordinance, prosecutions for which have not yet been instituted may be hereafter filed and prosecuted, and nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as to abandon, abate or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending, and/or which may heretofore have been instituted or prosecuted.
Section 152. Validity. Should any section or provisions of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not effect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Adopted this the 9th day of May, 1989.
Amended this the 16th day of September, 2003
Amended this the 21st day of February, 2006
Amended this the 16th day of December, 2008
Amended this the 19th day of July, 2011
Amended this the 16th day of October, 2012
Amended this the 18th day of March, 2014
Amended this the 21st day of June, 2015
Amended this the 22nd day of August, 2016
Amended this the 19th day of May, 2018
Amended this the 19th day of November, 2019
Janet Winkler, Mayor
ATTEST:
Tamra T. Swanson, Town Clerk

(
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
FOR
HUDSON, NORTH CAROLINA
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
I: TITLE
II: AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE
III: JURISDICTION AND PURPOSE
Section 30
Section 31
Jurisdiction
Purpose
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
IV: NO SERVICE OR PERMITS UNTIL FINAL PLAT APPROVED
V: LEGAL PROVISIONS
Section 50
Section 51
Section 52
Section 53
Section 54
Section 55
Penalties for Violation
Separability
Variances
Registration of Ordinance and Plats
Amendments
Abrogation
ARTICLE VI: DEFINITIONS
Section 60
Scction61
Section 62
Section 63
Section64
Subdivision
Minor Subdivision
Additional Definitions
Word Interpretation
Thoroughfare Plans
ARTICLE VII; PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW & APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION
PLATS
Section 70 General
Section 71 Minor Subdivision Approval Process
Section 7L10 Cluster Subdivisions
Section 72,01 Sketch Design Plan
Section 73 Proilrrlinary Plat
Section 74 Final Plat Approval Process
Section75 The Final Plat
Section 76 Review Procedure
(
(
ARTICLE vm:
Section 80
Section 81
INSTALLATION OF PERMANENT REFERENCE POINTS AND
IMPROVEMENTS
Permanent Reference Points
Design Standards and Required Improvements
ARTICLE IX: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS & MINIMUM STANDARDS OF
DESIGN
Section 90
Section 91
Section 92
Section 9'.l
Section 94
General Requirements
Design Standards
Lot Designs
Cluster Development and the Creation of Permanent Open Space
Through a Planned Unit Development
Hillside Subdivision
f' J
\.;
i _)
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
FOR
HUDSON, NORTH CAROLINA
An Ordinance establishing comprehensive subdivision regulations for the Town of
Hudson, North Carolina, and providing for the administration, enforcement and
amendment thereof.
ARTICLE I
TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance
for the Town of Hudson, North Carolina.
ARTICLE II
AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE
The Town Commissioners of the Town of Hudson, pursuant to the authority
conferred by Chapter 160A-371 through Section 160A-376 of the General Statutes of the
State of North Carolina, do hereby ordain and enact into law these Articles and Sections.
ARTICLE III
JURISDICTION AND PURPOSE
Section 30. Jurisdiction.
On and after the date of adoption, these regulations shall govern each and every
subdivision of land submitted for review within the Town of Hudson (hereinafter referred
to as the '"TOWN") and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as shown on the Town's ufficial
Zoning Map.
Section 31. Purpose.
An Ordinance establishing procedures and standards for the development and subdivision
of real estate and regulating the subdivision of land and for the surveying and platting
thereof, as adopted and prescribed in this Ordinance, as hereby found by the Town
Commissioners of Hudson to be necessary and appropriate in order to aid in promoting
the following:
1
a. The orderly development of the Town and safeguard conditions essential to public
health, safety and welfare;
b. To provide space for safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations within the
Town;
c. To promote the eventual elimination of unsafe and unsanitary conditions arising
from the overcrowding and concentration of population, improper planning, lack
of proper light, air and space, unsafe or unsanitary design and arrangements, lack
of sanitary facilities, and existences of conditions which endanger life or property
by fire or other causes;
d. To provide for suitable neighborhoods with adequate streets and utilities and
appropriate building sites;
e. To save unnecessary expenditures of public funds by reserving space for public
lands and buildings and by initial proper construction of streets and utilities;
f. To provide for economical and sufficient streets with adequate width and with
proper alignment and grade for the coordination of utilities, streets, and highways
within proposed subdivisions with existing or planned streets and highways and
other public facilities, and;
g. To provide proper land records for the convenience of the public and for better
identification and permanent location of real property boundaries.
ARTICLE IV
NO SERVICE OR PERMITS UNTIL FINAL PLAT APPROVED
No street shall be accepted and maintained by Town nor shall any street lighting, water,
or sewer be extended to or connected with any subdivision of land nor shall any permit be
issued by an administrative agent or department of the Town for the construction of any
building or other improvement requiring a permit, upon any land concerning which a plat
is required to be approved, unless and until the requirements set forth in this Ordinance
have been complied with.
ARTICLEV
LEGAL PROVISIONS
Section 50. Penalties for Violation.
After the effective date of this Ordinance, any person who, being the owner or agent of
. /1 the owner of any land located within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance thereafter
2
subdivides his land in violation of the Ordinance or transfers or sells land by reference to,
exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat
has been properly approved under such Ordinance and recorded in the office of the
appropriate Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The description by
metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of
selling or transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The Town,
through its attorney or other official designated by the council, may enjoin illegal
subdivision, transfer, or sale of land by action for injunction. Further, violators of this
Ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to fine and/or imprisonment as provided by
G.S.14-4.
Section 51. Separability.
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be decided by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 52. Variances.
52.01 Varying Minimum Standards.
These land subdivision regulations are adopted only as rmrumum requirements.
Developers are encouraged to go beyond the standards of these regulations. The
Planning Board and the Board of Commissioners may require standards above the
minimum contained herein whenever the public health, safety, and welfare justify such
increase. Furthermore, either Board may reduce or otherwise vary the requirements of
these regulations only when it encounters the situation described below. In granting such
variances, the Planning Board and Board of Commissioners may attach and require
whatever conditions it feels are necessary to secure the basic objectives of this Ordinance.
Any variance granted shall be noted in the official minutes of both the Planning Board
and the Board of Commissioners along with the reasons which justified the granting of
the variance.
52.02 Hardship Required.
The Planning Board and the Board of Commissioners may reduce or otherwise vary the
requirements of these regulations only when a definite hardship is created by strict
enforcement of the standards herein. The following conditions must be met before any
variance can be granted by either the Planning Board or the Board of Commissioners.
a. That a particular hardship to the subdivider would occur because of peculiar
physical surroundings or topographical conditions of the specific property
involved. A definite major hardship must be demonstrated and distinguished
from a minor inconvenience.
3
)
b. That the conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to
the property involved and are not generally applicable to other properties and
have not been created by any person having an interest in the property.
c. That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire for
financial gain.
d. That the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare,
or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the
property is located.
Section 53. Registration of Ordinance and Plats.
53.01 North Carolina General Statutes.
In accordance with Article 160A-373 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, the Town
shall file a copy of this Ordinance with the Register of Deeds of Caldwell County upon
adoption.
53.02 Register of Deeds.
The Register of Deeds shall not, after the effective date of this Ordinance, record a plat of
a subdivision of land lying within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance that has not been
approved in accordance with the provisions contained herein; nor shall the Clerk of
Superior Court order or direct the recording of a plat if the recording would be in conflict
with the provisions or intent of this Ordinance.
Section 54. Amendments.
The Board of Commissioners may from time to time amend the terms of this Ordinance,
but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall
have been submitted to the Planning Board for review and recommendation. The
Planning Board shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit its report. If the
Planning Board fails to submit a report within the specified time, it shall be deemed to
have approved the amendment.
Section 55. Abrogation.
It is not intended that this Ordinance repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any
existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, or
permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this Ordinance
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
4
(
ARTICLE VI
DEFINITIONS
Section 60. Subdivision.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term "subdivision" shall mean all division of a
tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the
purpose of sale, or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include
all division of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing street,
but the following shall not be included within this definition nor be subject to the
regulations established herein:
"EXEMPTIONS"
a. The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the
total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed
the standards of the Town as shown in its subdivision regulations;
b. The division of land into parcels greater than ten ( 10) acres where no street rightof-
way dedication is involved;
c. The public acquisition by purchase or strips of land for the widening or opening
of streets;
d. The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than
two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street right-of-way
dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the
standards of the Town, as shown in this Ordinance;
Section 61. Minor Subdivision.
For purposes of these regulations, a minor subdivision is defined as a subdivision:
a. Involving not more than five (5) lots fronting on an existing approved street; and
b. Not involving any new street or prospectively requiring any new street for access to
interior property; and
c. Not requiring extension of public sewage or water lines or creation of new drainage
easements through lots to serve property at the rear; and
d. Not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or of adjoining
property; and
e. Creating no new or residual parcels not conforming to the requirements of these
regulations.
5
}
(.........,
\
Section 62. Additional Definitions.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as
follows:
Access Corridors. A strip of land lying between the side lot boundary lines of lake or
river front lots offering access to lots at least one lot depth away from the waters edge.
Access Streets. A platted street designed for the purpose of giving access to adjacent
property owners.
Alley. A minor right-of-way privately or publicly owned, primarily for service access to
the back or side of properties.
Buffer. A buffer as required by certain sections of these Regulations shall be one of, or
equal to one of the following:
뷒 six-foot high wood, basket weave type fence;
뷒 six-foot high solid picket type fence with the pickets being placed facing the
adjoining property;
뷒 six-foot high chain link type fence with panel inserts;
뷒 six-foot high, open type fence with evergreen vegetation planted facing the
adjoining property and completely blocking the view from one area to another.
Building. The word "building" includes the word "structures".
Building Setback Line. A line parallel to the front property line in front of which no
structure shall be erected.
Clerk of Superior Court. Clerk of Superior Court of Caldwell County, North Carolina.
Cluster Subdivisions: The cluster subdivision concept offers developers the possibility
of more efficient and flexible methods for developing property, and provides residents of
the project with larger open spaces for recreation and other activities properly related to
residential uses.
Town Commissioners. The words ''Town Commissioners" shall mean the Board of
Commissioners of Hudson, North Carolina.
Dedication. A gift, by the owner, of his property to another party without consideration
being given for the transfer. Since a transfer of property is involved, the dedication is
made by written instrument and is completed with an acceptance.
Double Frontage Lot. A continuous (through) lot which is accessible from both streets
upon which it fronts.
6
()
( )1
Easement. A grant by the property owner of a strip of land for a specified purpose and
use by the public, a corporation, or persons.
Hillside Subdivision. Land proposed to be subdivided which has a slope of sixteen
percent (16%) or greater. That is, an average difference in elevation of at least sixteen
(16) feet in a horizontal distance of one hundred (100) feet. The average shall be
obtained from at least fifteen (15) measurements, each twenty (20) feet from the next.
Lot. A portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for
transfer of ownership or for development or both. This word may also include the words
"plot", "parcel", "tract", or "site".
Lot Front. A portion of the lot adjacent to the street. In the case of lots which abut a
stream, lake or pond; the lot front is considered to be the part of the lot which abuts the
water.
Official Maps or Plans. Any maps or plans endorsed by the Board of Commissioners as
a guide to the development of Hudson.
Ordinance. The word "Ordinance" or "Regulation" shall mean the Subdivision
Ordinance for Hudson, North Carolina.
Planned Unit Development. The planned unit development is a pennitted use designed
to provide for developments incorporating a single type or a variety of residential and
related uses which are planned and developed as a unit. Such development may consist
of individual lots or common building sites. Common land must be an element of the
plan related to effecting the long-term value of the entire development.
Planning Board. The words "Planning Board" shall mean the Planning Board of .
Hudson, North Carolina.
Plat. A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been subdivided
Private Driveway. A roadway serving two (2) or fewer lots, building sites, or other
divisions of land and not intended to be public ingress or egress.
Private Streets. A street intended to be for private ingress or egress, or to serve a large
development under one ownership; such as in a large industrial park or with a planned
unit development. May also serve "Family Subdivisions" as identified in Section 71.07 of
this ordinance.
Recreation Area or Park. An area of land or combination of land and water resources
that is developed for active and/or passive recreation pursuant with various manmade
features that accommodates such activities.
7
) Reservation. A reservation of land does not involve any transfer of property rights. It
simply constitutes an obligation to keep property free from development for a stated
period of time.
Single-tier Lot. A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a railroad, a physical
barrier, or another type of land use and to which access from the rear is usually
prohibited.
Staff Planner. The words "Staff Planner" shall mean the planner for Hudson, North
Carolina, or his designated agent.
Streets. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic. The
following classifications shall apply:
Arterials. This thoroughfare category includes those streets and highways which
carry large volumes of traffic at moderate speeds through and within Hudson.
These thoroughfares provide access to major commercial, industrial and public
traffic generators.
Maior Collector Streets. As the name indicates, traffic from local streets is
collected by these thoroughfares and carried to arterial streets. While also
serving as connectors between arterials, these streets perform an additional
function of providing access to abutting properties. Smaller volumes of traffic are
carried on these streets and speeds are lower.
Local Streets. The local street system compromises all facilities not in one of the
higher systems. It serves primarily to provide direct access to abutting land and
access to higher order system.
Cul-de-sac. A short local street having but one end open to traffic and the other
end being permanently terminated and a vehicular tum-around provided.
Subdivider. Any person, firm or corporation who subdivides or develops any land
deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
Section 63. Word Interpretation.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words shall be interpreted as follows:
 The word "may" is permissive.
 The words "shall" and ''will" are mandatory.
 The present tense includes the future tense and the future tense includes the
present tense.
 The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
8
<) Section 64. Thoroughfare Plans
Where a proposed subdivision includes any part of a thoroughfare which has been
designated as such upon the officially adopted Thoroughfare Plan of either the Town of
Hudson or Caldwell County, such part of such thoroughfare shall be platted by the
subdivider in the location and manner shown of the Thoroughfare Plan.
ARTICLE VII
PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION
PLATS
Section 70. General.
No final plat of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of Hudson as established in Article
ill of this Ordinance shall be recorded by the Register of Deeds of Caldwell County until
it has been approved by the Board of Commissioners as provided herein. To secure such
approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall generally follow the procedures established
in this Section.
Section 71. Minor Subdivision Approval Process.
If the land to be subdivided meets the requirements of a minor subdivision as defined in
Article VI, Section 62, of this Ordinance, the subdivider will not have to follow the same
procedures as for a general subdivision. The review process for minor subdivisions shall
be adequate to protect the public interest, but should also provide minimum delay and
expense to the subdivider. A preliminary plat is not required. The developer may go
from sketch plan to a final plat with the approval of the Staff Planner. However, the
following minor plat approval process may be used only where the subdivision includes
all contiguous land under the ownership of the sponsor.
71.01 Sketch Plan Required.
A preliminary plat shall not be required for approval for minor subdivisions. Instead, a
sketch design plan shall first be submitted to the Staff Planner for approval and shall
depict or contain the following information:
a. A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to
neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads and waterways.
b. The boundaries of the tract to be subdivided.
c. The total acreage to be subdivided.
d. The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision and adjoining it.
9
() e. The lines of existing streets and easements.
f. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and/or developer.
g. The zoning classification of the tract and adjacent properties.
71.02 Review Procedure.
The Staff Planner shall review the sketch design plan for the general compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance and shall advise the subdivider or his authorized agent of
the regulations pertaining to the proposed subdivision and the procedures to be followed
in the preparation and submission of the final plat.
71.03 Approval of Sketch Plat by Staff Planner.
The Staff Planner, after determining that all requirements of this Ordinance have been
met on the sketch map, shall submit copies to the County Health Department, Erosion
Control Section, Soil and Water Conservation District and Inspection Division for their
comments and reports. The sketch plan shall be approved and the subdivider shall be
advised that the final plat may be prepared as long as it conforms to the sketch plat. This
) review shall in no way be construed as constituting an official approval for recording.
71.04 Dispute of Findings of Staff Planner.
In the event that the subdivider disagrees with any findings of the Staff Planner
concerning approval of a sketch plan of a minor subdivision, the matter shall be taken to
the Planning Board for Decision. No final plat shall be prepared until the Planning Board
has acted on the disputed sketch plan.
71.05 Disposition of Coples.
~ Seven copies of the sketch plan shall be retained as part of the files of the Planning
Board, with the original drawing being returned to the subdivider or his authorized agent.
71.06 Final Plat Approval of Minor Subdivision.
In order not to cause any unnecessary expense to the developer and to the administrative
departments of the Town, the Planning Board Town Planner shall have the responsibility
for approving minor subdivisions. A final plat shall be submitted to the Staff Planner at
least twenty (20) days prior to the next regular meeting of the Planning Board. The final
plat for minor subdivisions shall be complete and show all information required for a
final plat for general subdivisions as prescribed by this Ordinance. The recording of a
(" minor subdivision plat shall be the same as for a general subdivision as provided in this
10
Ordinance. If a minor subdivision plat is disapproved, the Planning Board shall specify
the reasons for such action in writing. One (1) copy of such reasons shall be given to the
subdivider. If a minor subdivision plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make the
recommended changes as requested and submit a revised minor plat, or appeal the
decision to the Board of Commissioners.
71.07 Family Subdivision: Shall meet the minimum requirements of the Subdivision
Ordinance except as follows:
1. A subdivision where lots are to be conveyed to members of the owners' lineal
family for the purpose of building a residence fort the new owner (family member).
Lineal family shall include only direct lineal descendants (children, grandchildren, great
grandchildren and so on), direct lineal ascendants (father, mother, grandfather
grandmother, and so on) and their spouses (including widowed spouses). Lots can be
conveyed as a gift, as settlement of the property owner's estate or for nominal
consideration. This ordinance is intended to facilitate the subdivision of the family
homestead.
2. The plat must state that this is a "Family Subdivision". No more than 7 lots
may be created under this section and a plat must be submitted to the Hudson Board of
Commissioners for final approval. The plat will go through the major subdivision review
process. ,
3. All lots created by a Family Subdivision shall abut a ~~~~>coot right-ofway
that conveys an easement on the property to be subdivided extending to a publicly
maintained road. Access to a publicly maintained street or highway is required. A private
street must be constructed within the right-of-way. The private street is required to have a
ten (10') foot minimum pavement width that abuts all newly subdivided parcels, or have
pavement length of at least thirty (30') feet and ten (10') foot pavement width when
accessing the private street from a publicly maintained road. The remaining portion of the
private street must have at least an eighteen (18') foot wide gravel drive of at least four
( 4") inches of gravel.
4. All property owners abutting the private street must have a signed and recorded
right of way that is recorded with the Register of Deeds. Each property owner must sign
and have recorded with the Register of Deeds a private street maintenance agreement.
There must be a statement on the final plat and deed stating that neither the Town of
Hudson nor the State Department of Transportation is responsible for maintenance of the
private street.
5. After approval of a maximum of 7 lots in a Family Subdivision, additional lots
shall not be subdivided unless the private street serving the Family Subdivision is
improved to meet the Town of Hudson's or State Department of Transportation's street
design standards.
11
)
);
Section 71.10: Cluster Subdivisions:
The cluster subdivision concept offers developers the possibility of more efficient
and flexible methods for developing property, and provides residents of the project with
larger open spaces for recreation and other activities properly related to residential uses.
71.11 Such subdivision would permit single family homes in the R-SF
zoning district. Exclusive of manufactured homes.
71.12 Such project is an integrated plan designed for the primary purpose
of residential use.
71.13 The site for the total project must be at least 3 acres divided into a
minimum of 6 single-family lots.
71.14 Common space is to be provided at not less than 10% of the total
project area, exclusive of the buffer area. Common spaces are to be
arranged and designed so as to provide accessibility to all residents
and to create an aesthetic environment. The topography of
proposed open space shall be suitable for recreational uses.
71.15 That the total parcel of land is under single ownership or control,
and all requirements of this section must be met before final
approval is given. A homeowners association must be established
to maintain all common space, recreation space and other common
land. The homeowners association shall provide for a levy against
all property with in the development for maintenance of all
common area. The homeowners agreement must be submitted to
the Planning Board and Board of Commissioners, and be approved
by the Town Attorney before final approval is given.
71.16 A public street or buffer shall be provided for on all lots that abut
property lines outside the subdivision. Such buffer shall not be less
than 15 feet in width and shall be approved by the Planning Board
and Board of Commissioners. All common space and buffer area
shall become property of the Homeowners' Association.
72.01 Sketch Design Plan.
If the land to be subdivided contains more than ten (10) acres, the subdivider shall submit
a sketch plan prior to submitting a preliminary plat. Smaller subdivisions may be
12
r) submitted in sketch plan form if the developer wishes. Sketch plans shall conform to the
following requirements:
72.02 Number of Copies and Graphic Media.
A minimum of two (2) copies of a sketch design plan shall be submitted. No specific
graphic media must be employed.
72.03 Size of Plan and Scale.
No specific size requirements apply to a sketch design plan; it is suggested that the
requirements applicable to preliminary and final plats be utilized. (See Section 75.04)
72.04 Administrative Fees.
No administrative fees are charged in connection with the submission of sketch design
plans.
72.05 Certification Required.
No certifications must be provided in connection with the submission of sketch design
plans.
( ); 72.06 Contents Required.
The sketch design plan shall depict or contain the following information:
a. A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to
neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads, and waterways;
b. The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be subdivided;
c. The total acreage to be subdivided;
d. The existing and proposed uses of land within the subdivision and adjoining it;
e. The proposed street and lot layout;
f. The name, addresses, and telephone number of the owner's;
g. Street and lots of adjacent developed or platted properties;
h. The zoning classification(s) of the tract and of adjacent properties.
72.07 Review Procedure.
13
)
The Staff Planner shall review the sketch design plan for general compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance and any other applicable Ordinances and shall advise the
subdivider or his authorized agent of the procedures to be followed in the preparation and
submission of the preliminary and final plats. This review shall in no way be construed
as constituting an official action of approval for recording of the subdivision by the
Planning Board or the Board of Commissioners as required by this Ordinance.
~ Dispute of Findings of the Planning Division.
In the event that the subdivider disagrees with any findings of the Staff Planner
concerning approval of a sketch plan, the matter shall be taken to the Planning Board for
a decision. No final plat shall be prepared until the Planning Board has acted on the
disputed sketch plan.
72.09 텱isposition of Copies.
One copy shall be retained as a part of the files of the Planning Board with the other copy
being returned to the subdivider or his authorized agent.
Section 73. Preliminary Plat.
After approval of the sketch plan, the preliminary plat can then be prepared and shall be
submitted to the Planning Board at least twenty (20) days prior to a regular meeting of the
Planning Board, for every subdivision of land which is located within the territorial
jurisdiction established by Article ill, Section 30, hereof unless it meets the requirements
of a minor plat.
73.01 Number of Copies and Graphic Media.
Eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted; no specific graphic media
must be employed. Three (3) copies shall be disposed of as provided under Paragraph
73.07; five (5) copies shall be distributed for review as provided in Paragraph 73.06.
73.02 Size of Plat and Scale.
No specific size requirements apply to preliminary plats. Preliminary plats shall be
prepared at a scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet or greater.
(Reference to Section 75.04)
73.03 Administrative Fees.
14
l( ))
When submitting the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall pay a filing and inspection fee
of fifty cents ($.50) per Jot in the subdivision, or twenty-five dollars ($25) whichever is
greater to the Town Clerk of Hudson. The fee once paid will not be refundable.
73.04 Certifications Required.
No certifications must be shown on the drawing in connection with the submission of
preliminary plats. However, plans for proposed utilities shall be approved by appropriate
Town, County and State agencies.
73.05 Contents Required.
The preliminary plat shall depict or contain the following information' plats not
illustrating or containing the following data shall be returned by the Staff Planner to the
subdivider or his authorized agent for completion and resubmission:
a. The proposed name of the subdivision;
b. A sketch vicinity map showing the relationship between the proposed subdivision
and the surrounding area;
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
The boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to be subdivided, distinctly, and
accurately represented, with all bearings and distances shown;
Street line and grade profile;
Scale denoted both graphically and numerically;
North arrow and declination;
The plans for proposed sediment control programs, utility layouts, including
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water distribution lines, natural gas, telephone and
electric service, illustrating connections to existing systems. Plans for water
supply and/or sewage disposal and sediment control must receive approval by the
appropriate County and State authorities, including the Caldwell County Health
Department, and Office of Water and Air Resources and Com. Dev. Utility plans
must show line sizes, the location of fire hydrants, blow-offs, manholes, pumps,
force mains, and gate valves, and shall include profiles based upon mean sea level
datum for sanitary sewers and storm sewers; these plans may be submitted
separate from the preliminary plat but are due on the same date as the preliminary
plat.
h. Utility layout calculations including storm sewer, sanitary sewer and water
distribution.
i. Proposed street names;
15
)
1~
\.
j. Zoning classification of proposed subdivision and adjacent property;
k. Street design information including vertical and horizontal curvatures;
I. Proposed location and size of parks, school sites, or other recreational or open
spaces, if any, and their future ownership (dedication for public use to
governmental body from owners to duly constituted homeowners or community
association, or for tenants, but remaining in subdividers ownership);
m. Site calculations, including:
1. acreage in total tract to be subdivided,
2. acreage in parks and other nonresidential use,
3. total number of parcels created,
4. linear feet in streets,
5. delineate drainage area onsite and offsite.
n. Proposed ininimum building setback lines;
o. The names of owners of adjoining properties and any adjoining subdivisions of
record (or proposed and under review);
p. Any proposed riding trails, natural buffers, pedestrian, bicycle or other rights-ofway,
utility or other easements, their location, width, and purposes;
q. Proposed streets, existing and platted streets on adjoining properties and in the
proposed subdivision, rights-of-way, pavement widths, grades, typical street cross
sections. If any street is proposed to intersect with a State maintained road, the
plat shall be accompanied by an application for driveway approval as required by
the Department of Transportation, Division of Highway's Manual on Driveway
Regulations.
r. Water courses, railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains, both on the land to be
subdivided and on the land immediately adjoining corporate limits, township
boundaries, and county lines;
s. Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers, and approximate dimensions;
t. Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes, streams or stream
beds, and any other natural features affecting the site;
u. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a copy of any proposed deed
restrictions or similar covenants (mandatory when private recreation areas are
established).
73.06 Review Procedure
16
( ')
tr. ).! '!
The Planning Board shall review and take action on each preliminary plat within thirty
(30) days after submission. First considerations shall be at the next regular! y scheduled
meeting of the Planning Board that follows at least twenty (20) days after the plat is
submitted. Before taking action on the plat, the Staff Planner shall refer copies of the plat
and any accompanying material of those public officials and agencies concerned with
new development, including but not limited to the County Health Director, the Town
Building Inspection Dept, the District Engineer of the North Carolina State Highway
Commission, and the County Soil Conservation Service.
73.07 Disposition of Copies.
If the plat is approved, approval shall be noted on at least three (3) copies of the plat by
the Staff Planner who shall retain one (1) copy for public examination, one copy shall be
returned to the subdivider, and one copy shall be retained for Planning Board files.
If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the Planning Board shall specify the reasons for
such action in writing. One (1) copy of such reasons shall be retained by the Staff
Planner and one (1) copy shall be given to the subdivider. If the preliminary plat is
disapproved, the subdivider may make the recommended changes and submit a revised
preliminary plat, or appeal the decision to the Board of Comissioners.
Section 74. Final Plat Approval Process.
74.01 Improvements Installation.
Upon the approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Board, the subdivider may
proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and the installation or arrangement for
required improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the
requirements of this Ordinance.
Prior to approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have installed improvements or
guarantees in lieu of improvements, as specified in this Ordinance.
74.02 Performance Guarantees.
In lieu .of prior construction of the improvements required by this Ordinance, the Town
Manager may, for the purpose of approving a final plat, accept a guarantee from the
subdivider that such improvements will be carried out according to the Town's
specifications at the subdivider' s expense provided the guarantee is acceptable to the
Town Attorney. Such guarantee shall be in accordance with the Hudson Subdivision
Policies concerning Performance Guarantees. Such guarantee shall be in an amount of
not less than 100% of the estimated cost of the construction of the required
improvements. This amount shall be determined by the Town Engineer. Performance
guarantees shall run for a period of one (1) year and may be renewed once for a period of
one (1) year upon written approval from the Planning Board.
17
/) \ . 74.03 Defects Guarantee.
The Planning Board and Board of Commissioners shall require a letter guaranteeing
utility taps, curbs, gutters, street pavement, sidewalks, drainage facilities, water and
sewer lines, and other improvements against defects for one year.
74.04 Maintenance Guarantee.
The Planning Board shall secure from all subdividers a letter in which states who shall
maintain any street improvements located thereon, and any ditch which has been installed
in connection with the installation of such improvements.
74.05 Final Plat Review Contingent Upon Execution of Guarantees.
No final plat will be accepted for review by the Planning Board or Board of
Commissioners unless accompanied by written notice by the Staff Planner
acknowledging compliance with this Ordinance requiring guarantees in lieu of
improvements, and the required maintenance letters.
Section 75. The Final Plat.
The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time; such portion shall conform to all
requirements of this Ordinance.
No final plat shall be approved unless and until the subdivider shall have installed, in that
area represented on the final plat, all improvements required by this Ordinance (or shall
have guaranteed their installation as provided for in subsection 74.02 of this Ordinance
and all permanent reference points described in Article vm of this Ordinance.)
75.01 Plat Submitted.
The subdivider shall submit fiye (5) seven (7)copies of the final plat, so marked, to the
Staff Planner not less than twenty (20) days prior to the Planning Board meeting, at
which time it will be considered for approval; further, the plat shall be submitted not
more than twelve (12) months after the date on which the preliminary plat was approved,
otherwise a written extension of this time limit may be granted by the Planning Board on
or before the one-year anniversary of the approval.
75.02 Plat Prepared.
The final plat shall be prepared by a surveyor or professional engineer licensed and
registered to practice in the State of North Carolina. The final plat shall substantially
18
} conform to the preliminary plat as it was approved. The final plat shall conform to the
provisions of Section 47-30 of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
75.03 Number of Copies and Graphic Media.
Fh톏 (5) Seven (7) copies of the final plat shall be submitted not less than twenty (20)
days prior to the Planning Board meeting; one (1) additional copy shall be drawn in ink
on linen or film suitable for reproduction; and shall bear all the required certifications set
forth in Section 75.06 of this Ordinance. The reproducible drawing shall be given to the
Staff Planner not later than the date of the Planning Board meeting in which approval is
requested.
75.04 Size of Plat and Scale.
Final plats shall have an outside size of not more than eighteen (18) inches by twentyfour
(24) inches nor less than eight and one-half (8 ~) inches by eleven (11) inches,
including one and one-half (1 ~) inch border for binding on the left margin and one-half
(1/2) inch border on each of the other sides. Where size of land areas or suitable scale to
assure legibility require, maps may be placed on two or more sheets with appropriate
match lines. Final plats shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred
(200) feet, or greater.
75.05 Certification Required.
The following signed and notarized certificates shall appear on the reproducible copy of
the final plat which is submitted to the Planning Board by the subdivider:
a. Certification of Ownership and Dedication
I hereby certify that I am/we are the owner of the property shown and described
hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdic.tion of Hudson and that I/we
hereby adopt this plan of subdivision setback lines, and dedicate all sanitary
sewer, water lines and streets to Hudson.
Date Owner(s)
Owner(s)
19
)
!; )\ 't '}
b. Certification of Approval of Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Systems
I hereby certify that the water supply and sewage disposal systems installed, or
proposed for installation in Subdivision meet
all public health requirements of Hudson.
Date County Health Officer or his
Authorized Representative
(Certification not required for subdivisions which are connected, or will be connected, to
existing publicly owned and operated water supply and sewage disposal systems.)
c. Certificate of Survey and Accuracy
I, , certify that this was (drawn by me) (drawn
under my supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey
made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book __ Page
__ , etc.) (other); that the error of closure as calculated by latitudes and
departures is 1: __ : that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken
lines plotted from information found in Book __ Page __ . That this map
was prepared in accordance with G.S. 74-30 as amended. Witness my hand and
seal this __ day of , A.D., 19_.
Registered Surveyor or Professional
Llcense or Registration Number
d. Certificate or Approval of the Design and Installation of Utilities. and Other
Required Improvements
I hereby certify that all required improvements have been installed in an
acceptable manner and according to the Hudson Specifications and standards in
the Subdivision or that guarantees of the installation of
the required improvements in an amount and manner satisfactory to Hudson and
has been received, and that the filing fee for this plat, in the amount of $ __
has been paid.
Hudson Town Manager
20
('
e. Certificate of Approval of the design and installation of public streets:
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
DIVISION OF HIGHWAYS
SUBDIVISION ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS CERTIFICATION
DATE:
Disclosure Statement for the Responsibility for Constructing and Maintaining
Private Streets. This statement shall be placed on the final plat and deed and signed by
the subdivider or agent before final approval can be granted.
All roads in this subdivision are hereby declared private and shall not be
maintained by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. The
maintenance of all streets and roads in this subdivision shall be the responsibility
of and, it shall be the responsibility of
------------ to bring the roads up to the standards of the
North Carolina Department of Transportation Secondary Roads Council before
any private streets or roads on this plat are included, at any time after the approval
of this plat, into the North Carolina State Maintained Road System.
Subdivider or Agent
~ Contents Required.
The final plat shall depict or contain the following information plats not illustrating or
containing the following data shall be returned by the Staff Planner to the subdivider or
his authorized agent for completion and resubmission.
a. The name of the subdivision;
b. The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings, and the location of intersecting boundary lines of adjoining
lines;
c. Scale denoted both graphically and numerically;
d. Street names;
e. The location, purpose and dimensions of areas to be used for purposes other than
residential;
21
)
l(Ji
; !"'"""' \
f. The names of owners of adjoining properties and any adjoining subdivisions of
record (or proposed and under review);
g. The location and dimensions of all rights-of-way, utility or other easements,
riding trails, natural buffers, pedestrian or bicycle paths and areas to be dedicated
to public use with the purpose of each stated;
h. Right-of-way lines and pavement widths of all streets and the location and width
of all adjacent streets and easements;
i. Property lines, buildings or other structures, water courses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, storm drains, and both on the land to be subdivided and on the land
immediately adjoining;
j. Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground
every straight or curved boundary line, street line, lot line, right-of-way line,
easement line, and setback line; including dimension bearings, or deflection
angles, radii, central angles, and tangent distances for the centerline of curbed
streets and curbed property lines that are not the boundary or curbed streets. All
dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and angles to the
nearest minute;
k. The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers, and control
points;
1. The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision and the lots
numbered consecutively throughout each block;
m. The deed restrictions or any other similar covenants proposed for the subdivision,
if any.
n. The date of the survey and plat preparation;
o. North arrow and declination;
p. All certifications as required by Article VII, Section 75.05.
q. The names(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the owner(s), registered
surveyor(s), land planner(s), architect(s), landscape architect(s), and professional
engineer(s) responsible for the subdivision and the registration number(s) and
seal(s) of the professional engineer(s) and registered surveyor(s).
r. Any other information considered by either the subdivider or the Planning Board
to be pertinent to the review of the final plat.
22
()
'. ,, ' ( J)
Section 76. Review Procedure.
Final plats shall be reviewed according to the following procedure:
76.01 Planning Board Review.
The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove the final plat within thirty (30) days of
its first consideration.
During its review of the final plat, the Planning Board may appoint any engineer or
surveyor to confirm the accuracy of the final plat. If substantial errors are found, the
costs shall be charged to the subdivider and the plat shall not be approved until such
errors have been corrected.
If the Planning Board approves the final plat, such approval shall be indicated on each
copy of the plat by the following signed certificate:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY THE PLANNING BOARD
The Hudson Planning Board hereby approves the final plat for the
____________ Subdivision.
Date Chairman or Agent, Hudson
Planning Board
If the Planning Board disapproved the final plat, the Staff Planner shall state in writing its
reasons for such action, specifying the provisions of this Ordinance with which the plat
does not comply. One copy of this statement shall be transmitted to the subdivider within
fifteen (15) days of disapproval; one copy shall be retained by the Planning Board as a
part of its proceedings. If the final plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make such
changes as will bring the plat into compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and
resubmit same for reconsideration by the Planning Board.
If the Planning Board fails to approve or disapprove the final plat within forty-five (45)
days after the submission date, as previously defined in Paragraph 76.01, such failure
shall be deemed to be approval and shall constitute grounds for the subdivider to apply
for final approval by the Board of Commissioners.
76.02 Board of Commissioners Review.
23
)
\ J)
The Board of Commissioners shall review the final plat with the requirements of the
Planning Board and shall approve or disapprove the plat at their next regularly scheduled
meeting.
If the Board of Commissioners approves the final plat, such approval shall be shown on
each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate.
76.03 Certificate of Approval for Recording.
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply
with the Subdivision Ordinance for Hudson, North Carolina, and that this plat has been
approved by the Board of Commissioners for recording in the office of the Register of
Deeds of Caldwell County.
Date Clerk
Board of Commissioners
If the final plat is disapproved by the Board of Commissioners, the reasons for such
disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provision(s) of this Ordinance with
which the final plat does not comply. One (I) copy of such reasons shall be retained by
the Board of Commissioners as a part of its proceedings, one (I) copy shall be
transmitted to the Staff Planner, and one (I) copy shall be transmitted to the subdivider.
If the final plat is disapproved the subdivider may make such changes as will bring the
final plat into compliance with this Ordinance and resubmit same for reconsideration by
the Planning Board.
76.04 Disposition of Copies.
If the final plat is approved by the Board of Commissioners, two (2) copies of the plat
shall be returned to the subdivider. The reproducible tracing and two (2) prints shall be
filed with the Register of Deeds. One (I) print shall be retained by the Planning Board.
76.05 Resubdivision Procedures.
24
() For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedures, rules, and regulations
shall apply as prescribed herein for an original subdivision. Lot sizes may, however, be
varied on an approved plan after recording, provided that:
(A) no lot or tract of land shall be created or sold that is smaller than the size shown on
the approved plan;
(B) drainage, easements, or rights-of-way shall not be changed;
(C) street alignment and block sizes shall not be changed;
(D) the property line between the back of the lots shall not be changed;
(E) the rear portion of lots shall not be subdivided from the front parts; and
(F) the character of the area shall be maintained.
ARTICLE VIII
INSTALLATION OF PERMANENT REFERENCE POINTS
AND IMPROVEMENTS
Section 80. Permanent Reference Points.
Prior to the approval of the final plat, permanent reference points shall have been placed
in accordance with the following requirements:
a. Subdivision Corner Tie: At least one corner of the subdivision shall be
designated by course and distance (tie) from a readily discernible reference
marker. If a corner is within two thousand (2,000) feet of a U.S. Coast and
Geodetic Station or N.C. Grid System coordinated monument, or Town of
Hudson coordinated system, then this comer shall be marked with a monument so
designated by computed X & Y coordinates which shall appear on the map with a
statement identifying this station or monument to an accuracy of 1: 10000. When
such a monument or station is not available, the tie shall be made to some
pertinent and physical object or structure that could not be destroyed.
b. Monuments: Within each block of a subdivision at least two (2) monuments
designed and designated as control corners shall be installed. The surveyor shall
employ additional monuments if and when required. All monuments shall be
constructed of concrete and shall be at least four ( 4) inches in diameter or square
and not less than three (3) feet in length. Each monument shall have imbedded in
its top or attached by a suitable means, a metal plat of noncorrosive material and
marked plainly with the point, the surveyor's registration number, the month and
the year it was installed, and the word "monument" or "control comer''.
Monuments shall be set at least thirty (30) inches in the ground with at least six
(6) inches exposed above the ground unless this requirement is impractical.
c. Property Markers: A steel or wrought iron pipe or the equivalent not less than
three-fourths (3/4) inches in diameter and at least thirty (30) inches in length shall
25
) be set at all comers, except those located by monuments. A marker shall also be
set at a point of curve, point of intersection, property comer, point of tangency
and reference point unless a monument is placed at said points. Additional
markers shall be placed where necessary.
80.01 Private Utilities.
Nonmunicipal water supply systems serving ten (10) or more connections are
classified as public water supplies by State law, and plans and specifications must be
approved by the Sanitary Engineering Division of the State Board of Health.
Plans and specifications for water supply systems serving from two (2) to nine (9)
connections, inclusive, must be approved by the County Health Department.
Plans for nonmunicipal public and community sewer systems must be approved
by the Division of Stream Sanitation and Hydrology of the North Carolina Department of
Water and Air Resources.
Individual water supplies should be located, constructed and operated in
accordance with State Board of Health Bulletin No. 476, "Protection of Private Water
Supplies."
Individual sewage disposal systems must be installed and maintained in
accordance with the State Board of Health "Rules and Regulations Governing the
Disposal of Sewage from Any Residence, Place of Business or Place of Public Assembly
in North Carolina" and the regulations of the Caldwell County Health Department. State
Board of Health Bulletin No. 519 "Residential Sewage Disposal Plants" contains helpful
information.
~ Public Sites and Open Spaces.
In subdividing property, due consideration should be given by the subdivider and the
Planning Board to the designation of suitable sites for parks, schools, and other uses.
Such provision should be indicated on the sketch plan in order that it may be determined
when and in what manner such areas will be required.
80.03 Access to Parks. Schools. Etc.
Streets shall be designed or walkways dedicated to assure convenient access to adjacent
parks, playgrounds, schools and other places of public assembly. Dedicated walkways
shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width.
80.04 Restrictions on the Subdivision for Residential Purposes of Land Subject to
Flooding.
26
'./.) 1 Lots that are subject to flooding shall not be established in subdivisions for the purpose of
(J)
creating residential building sites except as herein provided. These areas can be obtained
from Caldwell County Planning Department, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Soil and
Water Conservation District (SWCD), or the U.S. Geological Survey. Where the
developer proposes to provide a levee or raise the floor elevations above the flood levee,
an engineering report shall accompany the subdivision application.
a. If there is any water course of any type running through or within one hundred
and fifty (150) feet of the property proposed subdividing, the prospective
subdivider shall furnish reasonable evidence to the Planning Board that residential
lots within the subdivision will not be flooded.
b. No proposed residential building lot shown that is wholly subject to flooding shall
be approved.
Section 81. Design Standards and Required Improvements.
Streets requirements for subdivisions shall meet the current Minimum Construction
Standards of North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of Highways.
ARTICLE IX
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND
MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN
Section 90. General Requirements.
90.01 Conformity to Existing Maps or Plans.
The location and width of all proposed streets shall be inconformity with official plans an
maps of the Town of Hudson and with existing or amended plans of the Planning Board.
90.02 Continuation of Existing Roads.
The proposed road layout shall be coordinated with the existing road system of the
surrounding area where possible, existing principal roads shall be extended.
90.03 Access to Adjacent Properties.
27
}
Where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, it is desirable to provide access to an
adjoining property, proposed roads shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of
such property and a temporary turnaround shall be provided.
90.04 Private Streets.
PriYate streets may lie allev,.ed in 81IadivisieAs, fJfS"'iaed they meet eertain standRfds as
Sf!eeified in this OrdinRAee fer maintaining f!H'tate streets.
90.05 Reserve Strips.
There shall be no reserve strips platted in any subdivision unless the developer can show
gciod cause for such to the Planning Board.
90.06 Large Tracts and Parcels.
Where land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels
shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future roads and logical further
subdivision. 
1 )'J All lots shall front upon a public or private street.
.2l!:illi Alleys.
Alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots used for other than residential purposes.
Alleys are prohibited in residential blocks unless such are approved by the Planning
Board. All dead-end alleys shall be provided with a turnaround.
90.09 Contour Map.
A contour map shall be provided if requested by the Staff Planner. The contour interval
required will depend upon topographic and drainage characteristics and shall be specified
by the Town Engineer.
90.10 Street Names.
Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with others existing and named, shall
bear the assigned name of the existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed
streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, irrespective of the use
of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc.
Section 91. Design Standards.
28
_)
' ( )!
The following design standards shall be considered minimum requirements:
91.01 Streets.
The design standards which shall apply to streets are as follows:
a. Right-of-way Widths. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be in
accordance with the major street plan shall be not less than the following:
1. Major Arterials ............................................................... 90 feet
2. Collector Streets .............................................................. 60 feet
3. Local or Minor (Residential) Streets ....................................... 50 feet
4. Marginal Access Streets ..................................................... 50 feet
5. Cul-de-sacs (Turnarounds) ................................................ 100 feet
6. Alleys .......................................................................... 20 feet
b. Pavement Widths. (With curb and gutter) Pavement widths back to back of curb
shall be not less than the following:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Major Arterials ............................................................... 44 feet
Collector Streets .............................................................. 34 feet
Local or Minor (Residential) Streets ....................................... 26 feet
Marginal Access Streets ..................................................... 26 feet
Cul-de-sacs (Turnarounds) .................................................. 80 feet
Without Curb and Gutter: Where curb and gutter are not provided, the paving
widths shall not be less than the following:
1. Collector Streets .............................................................. 24 feet
2. Local or Minor (Residential) Streets ....................................... 20 feet
3. Marginal Access Streets ..................................................... 20 feet
4. Cul-de-sacs (Turnarounds) .................................................. 80 feet
c. Grades. Street grades shall be as follows:
d.
1. Street grades shall be not more than twelve percent (12%) nor less than
one-half of one percent.
2. Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed five percent (5%) for a
distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet from the centerline of said
intersection.
Horizontal Curves. Where a centerline deflection angle of more than ten
degrees (10 ) occurs, a circular curve shall be introduced, having a centerline
radius of not less than the following:
29
r
1.
2.
3.
Major Arterials .............................................................. 300 feet
Collector Streets ............................................................ 200 feet
Minor Streets ............................................................... .100 feet
e. Vertical Curves. All vertical curves shall have such length as necessary to
provide safe sight distance.
f. Tangents. A tangent of not less than one hundred (100) feet in length shall be
provided between curves.
g. Intersections. Streets shall be laid out as follows:
1. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street
shall intersect at less than seventy-five (75) degrees.
2. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet shall be avoided.
3. Intersections with a major street or highway shall be at least eight hundred
(800) feet apart. This requirement can be waived by the Planning Board if
such requirement would prevent a property owner fronting on a major
street or thoroughfare from having access to such facility.
4. The dedication of half streets at the perimeter of a new subdivision is
prohibited. If circumstances render this impractical, adequate provision
for the concurrent dedication of the remaining half of the street must be
furnished by the subdivider. Where there exists a half street in an
adjoining subdivision, the remaining half shall be provided by the
proposed development.
h. Alleys. All alleys shall be constructed in accordance with Town specifications
and standards and shall meet the following requirements;
1. Right-of-way width .......................................................... 20 feet
2. Minimum centerline radius when deflection angle of more than 10 degrees
occurs .......................................................................... 35 feet
3. Property line radius at alley intersections ................................. 15 feet
91.02 Blocks.
The maximum and minimum length and width of blocks shall be as follows:
30
)
1,-.,.,
' lJ
a, Length - Block lengths shall not exceed sixteen hundred (1,600) feet nor be less
than four hundred (400) feet. Where deemed necessary by the Planning Board, a
pedestrian crosswalk of at least ten (10) feet easement in width may be required,
b, Widths - Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum
depth, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topographic
conditions, in which case a single tier of lots may be approved,
Section 92. Lot Designs.
The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall reflect due consideration for topography and
drainage. Lots shall conform to the requirements of this Ordinance and, in addition, shall
conform to the following provisions:
92.02 Arrangement.
Every lot must front for at least thirty-five (35) feet on a public or private street. Insofar
as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straightlines or radial to curbed street
lines.
92.03 Lake Frontage Lots.
Lake frontage lots shall have a minimum width as sold of one hundred (100) feet at the
front building line. All other lots within four hundred and sixty ( 460) feet of the official
pond level of the lakes within Caldwell County shall have a minimum width as sold of
one hundred (100) feet at the front building line.
a All lots are required to meet the minimum standards set forth in the Hudson
Zoning Ordinance. And
b. A lot consisting of forty thousand ( 40,000) square feet may be required by the
County Health Department if undue topographical conditions exist on the site or if
percolation tests and subsoil investigation indicate a need for such.
c. Lots served by a septic tank system and located on a watershed of a Class I or II
reservoir or on the watershed of a portion of Class A-II stream extended from a
Class I reservoir to a downstream intake to a water purification plant shall contain
at least forty thousand ( 40,000) square feet in area suitable for septic tank system
location an operation. The location and extent of these watersheds is determined
by the North Carolina State Board of Health, Department of Human Resources.
92.05 Width.
31
a. All lots are required to meet the minimum standards set forth in the Hudson
Zoning Ordinance.
92.06 Depth.
All lots shall have a minimum mean depth of not less than one hundred and ten (llO)
feet. Single-tier lots shall have a mean depth of at least on hundred and twenty-five (125)
feet. Greater lot depth is required when:
a. A lot is served by public or community water but not public or community sewer.
In such case, the mean lot depth shall be not less than one hundred and twenty
(120) feet.
b. A lot is not served by public or community water or public or community sewer.
In such case, the mean lot depth shall be not less than one hundred and fifty (150)
feet.
92.07 Orientation of Lot Lines.
Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
i  )1 92.08 Building Setback Lines.
a. All lots are required to meet the minimum standards set forth in the Hudson
Zoning Ordinance. -
92.09 Easements.
Utility and other easements shall be provided as follows:
a. Utility and drainage easements centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided
where necessary and shall be at least ten (10) feet in width; or width if required
for the installation and maintenance of the facility.
b. Crosswalk easements of ten (10) feet in width shall be provided when such area is
required by the Planning Board.
c. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or
stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further
width or construction or both, as will be adequate for the purposes. Parallel
streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
(~ 92.10 Buffer Strips.
32
(/ ) . It is required that a buffer be provided adjacent to a railroad, a limited access highway,
and commercial or industrial developments.
92.11 Storm Water Drainage.
a. Where curb and gutters are constructed, they shall be in accordance with the
standards of the North Carolina Department of Transportation's "Guidelines for
Curb Cuts and Ramps for Handicapped Persons."
b. No surface water shall be channeled or directed into a sanitary sewer.
c. Where feasible, the subdivider shall connect to an existing storm drainage system
or stream.
d. Where an existing storm drainage system cannot feasibly be extended to the
subdivision, a surface drainage system shall be designed to protect the proposed
development from water damage.
e. Surface drainage courses shall have side slopes of at least three (3) feet or
horizontal distance for each one (1) foot of vertical distance, and courses shall be
of sufficient size to accommodate the drainage area without flooding. The
minimum grade along the bottom of a surface drainage course shall be a vertical
fall of at least one (1) foot in each two hundred (200) feet of horizontal distance.
f. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel, or
stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of such water course, and such further
width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purposes. Parallel
streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
g. Where storm sewers, drains and structures are installed, they shall be of a size and
type, and location as required by the Town of Hudson Public Works Department.
The minimum size of storm drains shall be fifteen inches in diameter. The design
frequency for storm sewer collectors shall be at a ten ( 10) year flood level with
cross street frequency at a twenty-five (25) year storm level. Storm drains
carrying water from street right-of-way shall be placed along Jot lines where
feasible and shall extend for a distance of thirty-five (35') feet minimum back of
the building line. All off-street storm drains or extensions shall be installed
initially by the subdivider or the responsibilities thereafter shall be transferred to
the purchaser through the instrument of property transfer, which responsibility
shall be clearly indicated on the final plat.
h. Cross pipes under streets shall be constructed of N.C. Department of
Transportation approved plastic, reinforced concrete, or asphalt coated corrugated
metal.
33
()
( ).i
.,,
i. Culverts shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be
sufficient length to permit full with roadway and the required slopes. The size
openings to be provided shall be determined by the Department of Public Works,
but in no case shall be built less than fifteen inches (15"). Cross drains shall be
built on straight line and grade shall be laid on a firm base, but not on rock. Pipes
shall be laid with the spigot pointing in the direction of the flow and with the ends
filled and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth uniform invert. They shall
be placed at a sufficient depth below the road bed to avoid dangerous pressure of
impact, and in no case shall the top of the pipe be less than one foot (l ')below the
road bed and shall be constructed of N.C. Department of Transportation approved
plastic, reinforced concrete, or asphalt coated corrugated metal.
Section 93. Cluster Development and the Creation of Permanent Open Space
Through a Planned Unit Development.
93.01 Purpose.
The purpose of providing for the clustering of development and the resultant open space
are to offer recreation at or near each home, to improve the appearance of the area
through preservation of green space, to counter the undesirable effects of urban
congestion and monotony, and to encourage group participation in community activities
by all ages on a local "block" or neighborhood basis in order to build community and
personal stability and security. Local parks, recreation areas, and other spaces in a
planned neighborhood pattern are intended to conserve areas of natural beauty, to
encourage cooperative relationships between neighbors, and to help promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
The purpose of this Section is to provide permissive voluntary alternative subdivision
procedure for single family use; or governed by the minimum lot size requirements of
this Subdivision Ordinance (see Section 92). This is to be accomplished by permitting
the density of dwelling units contemplated by the minimum lot size requirements to be
maintained on an overall basis when applied to specific tracts of land, and thereby
provide for desirable an proper open space.
93.02 Development Procedure.
93.02.01 Varied Lot Sizes. The developer of a subdivision may, subject to
requirements of this section, vary the lot size within a subdivision from those sizes
required in this Subdivision Ordinance (Section 92) by complying with the procedures set
forth in this Section.
93.02.02 Maximum Number of Lots. The maximum number of lots that may be
approved shall be computed by subtracting from the total area of the site, the area in
easements, flood plains, and any other area that is not developable; and then, subtracting
34
C) from the remainder a fixed percentage of twenty-five (25%) percent of the remainder for
street right-of-way purposes.
93.02.03 Minimum Lot Sizes. Under this development procedure, no lot shall be
reduced in area by more than fifty percent (50%) of the required minimum lot area of this
Subdivision Ordinance (Section 92) and in no case shall the individual lot size be less
than eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
93.02.04 Common Land Areas. Common land for open space or recreational use
created by this procedure shall be set aside for the following land uses only:
a. Private recreational facilities, such as golf courses or swimming pools.
Swimming pools constructed for group developments, i.e. apartments, planned
unit developments, etc., which are to be shared by many families in common shall
meet the minimum standards of the North Carolina Division of Human Services.
b. Historic building sites or historical sites, parks, and parkway areas, playgrounds,
extensive areas with tree cover, areas having natural features worthy of scenic
preservation.
c. Access, sanitary and utility service uses.
93.02.05 Preliminary Planned Unit Development Plans. The owner or owners of
any parcel of land may submit to the Town Planning Board a preliminary plan for the use
and development of all the tract of land. If the Planning Board approves the plan, the
preliminary plan together with the recommendations of the Planning Board shall be
accompanied by a report, to be submitted with the final plan, stating the reasons for
approval of the application and specific evidence and facts showing that the preliminary
plan meets the following conditions:
a. Adjacent Properties. That property adjacent to the area included in the plan will
not be adversely affected. That the plan is consistent with the intent and purpose
of this Ordinance to promote public health, safety, and general welfare.
b. Residential Portion of Final Plans. That the area per family contained in the
residential portion of the site shown on the plan, exclusive of that which is
occupied by streets, easements, flood plains, or other terrain features which render
land unusable for development purposes, shall not be less than the individual lot
area required for in this Subdivision Ordinance (See Section 92). It being
understood that upon submission and approval of a final plan by the Town
Planning Board for any portion of the site shown on the preliminary plan, building
permits and certificates of occupancy may be issued even though the size of
individual lots resulting from the plan do not conform in all respects to this
Subdivision Ordinance. (See Section 92.)
35
r)
( )J
'11 . ,.
c. Final Plans. Final plan approval procedure shall be as prescribed in Section 93. of
this Ordinance with the exception that the following open land utilization
documents shall be approved and executed prior to final approval:
l. Warranty Deed Required. All open space whose acreage shall be utilized
as common land as hereinabove provided, shall be conveyed in fee simple title by
warranty deed from the subdivider to trustee, who shall be provided for trust
indenture for each subdivision authorized under this Development Procedure, for
the benefit, use and enjoyment of the lot owners, present and future, of said
subdivisions for a term of years certain, which term shall be for at least a period
of twenty-five (25) years, after which period of time fee simple title shall be
vested in said owner as tenants in common. The warranty deeds and subsection
shall have attached thereto a written legal opinion prepared and signed by an
attorney licensed to practice law by the State of North Carolina; said opinion shall
set forth the attorney's legal opinion as to the legal form and effect of said deeds
and indentures. The said deeds and indentures shall be approved by the Planning
Board and the Board of Town Commissioners and shall be filed with the Register
of Deeds simultaneously with the recording of the final plat of subdivision. The
final plat shall be submitted and approved for in this Ordinance.
2. Tenants in Common. The intent and purpose of the foregoing subsection
is to provide, as a condition for final approval of a voluntary alternate subdivision
development, that the common land shall be set aside for the benefit, use and
enjoyment of the subdivision lot owners, present and future, for a period of at
least twenty-five (25) years and to further provide that thereafter the said lands
shall be held in common by said lot owners as tenants in common.
Section 94. Hillside Subdivision.
This section termed ''Hillside Subdivisions" shall apply only to that development which
occurs in the subdivision of land along private streets and furthermore the development
must comply with the provisions herein referred to in Section 94, "Hillside
Subdivisions."
94.01 Street Design.
94.01.01 Widths. The private street shall have a right-of-way of not less than sixty
(60) feet except that a right-of-way of fifty (50) feet will be permitted if a reduced width
is essentially unavoidable and is approved by the Planning Board.
94.01.02 Cul-De-Sacs. The required turnaround on a deadend private street in a
hillside subdivision shall have a roadway diameter of not less than fifty (50) feet an a
right-of-way diameter of not less than sixty (60) feet. If the street length does not exceed
three hundred (300) feet and if construction difficulties will not permit a turnaround, the
use of a "Y" or "T" or other turning space of a design such as will allow a vehicle with a
36
t J1
wheel base of at least twenty (20) feet to complete a turning movement with a maximum
of one backing movement, may be pennitted if approved by the Planning Board.
94.01.03 Grading. Grading will not be required for the full right-of-way in hillside
subdivisions if the Planning Board detennines that full grading will prevent convenient
access to adjoining property or will destroy the natural beauty of the site by excessive cut
and fill, however, where slope extends beyond right-of-way add slope easement where
needed. Easement to extend ten (10) feet beyond top of cut where cut exceeds fifteen
(15) feet.
94.01.04 Street Grades. In hillside land subdivisions, maximum private street
grades pennitted shall be twenty percent (20%) unless the Planning Board detennines
that a steeper grade is essentially unavoidable and would not create excessive danger.
94.02 Street Improvements for Hillside Subdivisions.
94.02.01 Pavement Widths Where Required. Pavement widths shall not be less
than twenty (20) feet except for designated interior streets or where the average cross
slope is sixteen percent (16%) or greater, pavement widths may be reduced with Planning
Board approval as follows:
a.
b.
Where the average cross slope is between sixteen percent (16%) and forty percent
(40% ), minimum pavement width may be reduced to eighteen (18) feet.
Where the average cross slope is greater than forty percent ( 40% ), approval of the
district engineer of the State of Highway Commission shall be secured prior to
any road construction. Evidence of such approval shall be shown on the
preliminary plat.
c. Where pavement width is reduced, on-street parking shall not be pennitted.
94.03.01 General Requirements. Where the requirements stated in this Article of
the Subdivision Ordinance are in contradiction with other Articles or with the Zoning
Ordinance, the more stringent requirements shall apply.
94.03.02 Sixteen-Twentv-Five Percent Cross Slope. When the average cross slope
is between sixteen and twenty-five percent (16-25% ), design requirements for lot are as
follows:
a. The average minimum lot area for the entire subdivided area will be twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet. No less than eighty percent (80%) of the lots shall
have a minimum area of twelve thousand, seven hundred (12,700) square feet,
and no lot shall have an area of less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
37
\. _,J
z .. )_1
b. Minimum lot frontage will be seventy (70) feet except a minimum frontage of
forty-five (45) may be permitted at the end of a cul-de-sac.
c. Minimum average lot width will be seventy (70) feet.
94.03.03 Twenty-Six -Forty Percent Cross Slope. When the average cross slope is
between twenty-six and forty percent (26-40), design requirements for lots are as follows:
a. The average minimum lot area for the entire subdivided area will be twenty-five
thousand (25,000) square feet. Not less than eighty percent (80%) of the lots shall
have a minimum area of twenty-eight thousand (28,000) square feet and no lot
shall have an area of less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
b. Minimum lot frontage will be one hundred (100) feet, except a minimum frontage
of fifty (50) feet may be permitted at the end of the cul-de-sac.
94.03.04 Cross Slope Greater than Forty Percent. When the average cross slope is
greater than forty percent ( 40% ), design requirements for lots are as follows:
a. The average minimum lot area for the entire subdivided area will be one (1) acre.
b.
NQt less than eighty percent (80%) of the lots shall have a minimum area of fortyeight
thousand ( 48,000) square feet and no lot shall have an area less than twentyfive
thousand (25,000) square feet.
Minimum lot frontage of sixty (60) feet may be permitted at the end of a cul-desac.
c. Minimum average lot width will be one hundred thirty (130) feet.
94.03.05 Panhandle Lots. The Planning Board may approve panhandle lots in the
exceptional cases where it is impractical to serve an isolated lot by a public street. The
frontage of the panhandle lot shall have a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet
providing an access strip between two (2) regular lots to the isolated building site. The
area of such strip shall be excluded in computing the lot area and width, and the length of
said strip shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet.
94.03.06 Residential Building Setback Lines. Within the Town of Hudson the
residential building setback lines for hillside subdivisions shall conform to the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, if applicable, or to the provisions of this
ordinance as set out in Article vm, Section 92.08.
38

(
TOWN OF HUDSON
NORTH CAROLINA
Phase II Stormwater Ordinance
1
Phase II Stormwater Ordinance
(
SECTION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
101 Title
102 Authority
103 Findings
104 Purpose
105 Applicability and Jurisdiction
106 Interpretation
107 Design Manual
108 Relationship to Other Laws, Regulations and Private Agreements
109 Severability
110 Effective Date and Transitional Provisions
SECTION 2: ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
201 Review and Decision-Making Entities
202 Review Procedures
203 Applications for Approval
204 Approvals
205 Appeals
SECTION 3: STANDARDS
301 General Standards
302 Development Standards for Low-Density Projects
303 Development standards for High-Density Projects
304 Standards for Stormwater Control Measures
305 Dedication of BMPS, Facilities & Improvements
306 Variances
307 Additional standards for special situations
308 Onsite wastewater
SECTION 4: MAINTENANCE
401 General Standards for Maintenance
402 Operation and Maintenance Agreement
403 Inspection Program
404 Performance Security for Installation and Maintenance
405 Notice to owners
406 Records of Installation and Maintenance Activities
407 Nuisance
408 Maintenance Easement
SECTION 5: ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS
501 General
502 Remedies and Penalties
503 Procedures
SECTION 6: DEFINITIONS
2
(
601 Terms Defined
SECTION 7: ILLICIT DISCHARGES
701 Title And Purpose
702 Authority
703 Definitions
704 Illicit Discharges And Connections
705 Right Of Entry/Powers And Authority For Inspection
706 Enforcement
3
SECTION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
101 TITLE
This ordinance shall be officially known as "The Phase II Stormwater Ordinance." It is
referred to herein as "this ordinance."
102 AUTHORITY
The Town of Hudson is authorized to adopt this ordinance pursuant to North Carolina
law, including but not limited to Article 14, Section 5 of the Constitution of North
Carolina; Town of Hudson; North Carolina General Statutes 143-214.7 and rules
promulgated by the Environmental Management Commission thereunder; Session Law
2004-163; Chapter 160A, ㎣ 174, 185.
103 FINDINGS
It is hereby determined that:
Development and redevelopment alter the hydro logic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, soil erosion, stream channel
erosion, non point and point source pollution, and sediment transport and deposition, as
well as reducing groundwater recharge;
These changes in storm water runoff contribute to increased quantities of water-borne
pollutants and alterations in hydrology that are harmful to public health and safety as
well as to the natural environment; and
These effects can be managed and minimized by applying proper design and wellplanned
controls to manage stormwater runoff from development sites.
Further, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 ("Clean Water Act") and
federal Phase II Stormwater Rules promulgated under it, as well as rules of the North
Carolina Environmental Management Commission promulgated in response to federal
Phase II requirements, compel certain urbanized areas, including this jurisdiction, to
adopt minimum stormwater controls such as those included in this ordinance.
Therefore, the Town of Hudson establishes this set of water quality and quantity
regulations to meet the requirements of state and federal law regarding control of
stormwater runoff and discharge.
104 PURPOSE
(A) General
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public
health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum
requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased postdevelopment
stormwater runoff and nonpoint and point source pollution
associated with new development and redevelopment [as well as illicit
4
(
discharges into municipal stormwater systems]. It has been determined that
proper management of construction-related and post-development stormwater
runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure;
safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare; and protect water and
aquatic resources.
(B) Specific
This ordinance seeks to meet its general purpose through the following specific
objectives and means:
1. Establishing decision-making processes for development that protect the
integrity of watersheds and preserve the health of water resources;
2. Requiring that new development and redevelopment maintain the predevelopment
hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly
as practicable for the applicable design storm to reduce flooding,
streambank erosion, nonpoint and point source pollution and increases in
stream temperature, and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and
aquatic habitats;
3. Establishing minimum post-development stormwater management
standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater
runoff quantity and quality;
4. Establishing design and review criteria for the construction, function, and
use of structural stormwater BMPs that may be used to meet the minimum
post-development stormwater management standards;
5. Encouraging the use of better management and site des1gn practices,
such as the use of vegetated conveyances for stormwater and the
preservation of greenspace, riparian buffers and other conservation areas to
the maximum extent practicable;
6. Establishing provisions for the long-term responsibility for and
maintenance of structural and nonstructural stormwater BMPs to ensure
that they continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately,
and pose no threat to public safety;
7. Establishing administrative procedures for the submission, review,
approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, for the
inspection of approved projects, and to assure appropriate long-term
maintenance.
8. Coordinating site design plans that include open space and natural areas
with the Town of Hudson,
5
9. Controlling illicit discharges into the municipal separate stormwater
system.
105 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION
(A) General
Beginning with and subsequent to its effective date, this ordinance shall be
applicable to all development and redevelopment, including, but not limited to,
site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless
exempt pursuant to Subsection (B) of this Section, Exemptions.
(B) Exemptions
Development that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre and does not exceed
20,000 square feet or impervious area and does not include disturbances within
a stream buffer, filling or excavation in excess of 1,000 cubic yards or filling and
excavation that would impact an adjoining parcel through alteration or drainage
paths, ponding or water or velocity of stormwater flow is not part of a larger
common plan of development or sale is exempt from the provisions of this
ordinance.
Redevelopment that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre and does not have
a net increase in impervious area and is not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale is exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.
Development and redevelopment that disturb less than one acre are not exempt
if such activities are part of a larger common pion of development or sale, even
though multiple, separate or distinct activities take place at different times on
different schedules.1
Activities that are exempt from permit requirements of Section 404 of the
federal Clean Water Act as specified in 40 CFR 232 (primarily, ongoing farming
and forestry activities) are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.
(C) No Development or Redevelopment Until Compliance and Permit
No development or redevelopment shall occur except in compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance or unless exempted. No development for which a
permit is required pursuant to this ordinance shall occur except in compliance
with the provisions, conditions, and limitations of the permit.
(D) Map
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply within the areas designated on the
map titled "Phase II Stormwater Map ofTown of Hudson, North Carolina" ("the
Stormwater Map"), which is adopted simultaneously herewith. The Stormwater
(
(
6
(
(
Map and all explanatory matter contained thereon accompanies and is hereby
made a part of this ordinance.
The Stormwater Map shall be kept on file by the Stormwater Administrator and
shall be updated to take into account changes in the land area covered by this
ordinance and the geographic location of all structural BMPs permitted under
this ordinance. In the event of a dispute, the applicability of this ordinance to a
particular area of land or BMP shall be determined by reference to the North
Carolina Statutes, the North Carolina Administrative Code, and local zoning and
jurisdictional boundary ordinances.
106 INTERPRETATION
(A) Meaning and Intent
All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this ordinance shall
be construed according to the general and specific purposes set forth in Section
104, Purpose. If a different or more specific meaning is given for a term defined
elsewhere in Town of Hudson Code of Ordinances, the meaning and application
of the term in this ordinance shall control for purposes of application of this
ordinance.
(B) Text Controls in Event of Conflict
In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this ordinance
and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall
control.
(C) Authority for Interpretation
The Stormwater Administrator has authority to determine the interpretation of
this ordinance. Any person may request an interpretation by submitting a
written request to the Stormwater Administrator, who shall respond in writing
within 30 days. The Stormwater Administrator shall keep on file a record of all
written interpretations of this ordinance.
(D) References to Statutes, Regulations, and Documents
(E)
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation,
manual (including the Design Manual), or document, it shall be construed as a
reference to the most recent edition of such that has been finalized and
published with due provision for notice and comment, unless otherwise
specifically stated.
Computation of Time
The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first
day and -including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a
Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the Town of Hudson, the deadline or
required date of action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or
7
holiday observed by the Town of Hudson. References to days are calendar days
unless otherwise stated.
(F) Delegation of Authority
Any act authorized by this Ordinance to be carried out by the Stormwater
Administrator of Town of Hudson may be carried out by his or her designee.
(G) Usage
(1) Mandatory and Discretionary Terms
The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory in nature, establishing
an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The words
lfmay11 and /(should" are permissive in nature.
(2) Conjunctions
Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, conjunctions shall be
interpreted as follows: The word "and" indicates that all connected items,
conditions, provisions and events apply. The word "or" indicates that one or
more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply.
(3) Tense, Plurals, and Gender
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in
the singular number include the plural number and the plural number
includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage
clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine gender include the
feminine gender, and vice versa.
(H) Measurement and Computation
Lot area refers to the amount of horizontal land area contained inside the lot
lines of a lot or site.
107 DESIGN MANUAL
(A) Reference to Design Manual
The Stormwater Administrator shall use the policy, criteria, and information,
톓ncluding technical specifications and standards, in the Design Manual as the
basis for decisions about stormwater permits and about the design,
implementation and performance of structural and non-structural stormwater
BMPs.
The Design Manual includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment
practices, including specific design criteria for each stormwater practice.
Stormwater treatment practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained
8
in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the
minimum water quality performance standards of the Phase II laws.
(B) Relationship of Design Manual to Other Laws and Regulations
If the specifications or guidelines of the Design Manual are more restrictive or
apply a higher standard than other laws or regulations, that fact shall not
prevent application of the specifications or guidelines in the Design Manual.
(C) Changes to Standards and Specifications
If the standards, specifications, guidelines, policies, criteria, or other information
in the Design Manual are amended subsequent to the submittal of an
application for approval pursuant to this ordinance but prior to approval, the
new information shall control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application
and in implementing this ordinance with regard to the application.
108 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND PRIVATE AGREEMENTS
(A) Conflict of Laws
This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law. Where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human or environmental health, safety, and welfare
shall control.
(B) Private Agreements
This ordinance is not intended to revoke or repeal any easement, covenant, or
other private agreement. However, where the regulations of this ordinance are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such an
easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the requirements of this
ordinance shall govern. Nothing in this ordinance shall modify or repeal any
private covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or restriction shall not
legitimize any failure to comply with this ordinance. In no case shall Town of
Hudson be obligated to enforce the provisions of any easements, covenants, or
agreements between private parties.
109 SEVERABILITY
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this ordinance.
9
110 EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
(A) Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect on November 19, 2019.
(B) Final Approvals, Complete Applications
All development and redevelopment projects for which complete and full
applications were submitted and approved by the Town of Hudson prior to the
effective date of this ordinance and which remain valid, unexpired, unrevoked
and not otherwise terminated at the time of development or redevelopment
shall be exempt from complying with all provisions of this ordinance dealing
with the control and/or management of post-construction runoff, but shall be
required to comply with all other applicable provisions, including but not limited
to illicit discharge provisions.
A phased development plan shall be deemed approved prior to the effective
date of this ordinance if it has been approved by all necessary government
units, it remains valid, unexpired, unrevoked and not otherwise terminated, and
it shows:
1. For ~he initial or first phase of development, the type and intensity of use for
a specific parcel or parcels, including at a minimum, the boundaries of the
project and a subdivision plan that has been approved.
2. For any subsequent phase of development, sufficient detail so that
implementation of the requirements of this ordinance to that phase of
development would require a material change in that phase of the plan.
(C) Violations Continue
Any violation of provisions existing on the effective date of this ordinance shall
continue to be a violation under this ordinance and be subject to penalties and
enforcement under this ordinance unless the use, development, construction, or
other activity complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
10
(
SECTION 2: ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
201 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING ENTITIES
(A) Stormwater Administrator
(1) Designation
A Stormwater Administrator shall be designated by the Town Council to
administer and enforce this ordinance.
(2) Powers and Duties
In addition to the powers and duties that may be conferred by other
provisions of the Town Code of Ordinances and other laws, the Storm water
Administrator shall have the following powers and duties under this
ordinance:
a. To review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
applications for approval of plans pursuant to this ordinance.
b. To make determinations and render interpretations of this
ordinance.
c. To establish application requirements and schedules for submittal
and review of applications and appeals, to review and make
recommendations to the Town Council on applications for
development or redevelopment approvals.
d. To enforce the provisions of this ordinance in accordance with its
enforcement provisions.
e. To maintain records, maps, forms and other official materials as
relate to the adoption, amendment, enforcement, and
administration of this ordinance.
f. To provide expertise and technical assistance to the Town Council,
upon request.
g. To designate appropriate other person(s) who shall carry out the
powers and duties of the Stormwater Administrator.
h. To take any other action necessary to administer the provisions of
this ordinance.
11
202 REVIEW PROCEDURES
(A) Permit Required; Must Apply for Permit
A stormwater permit is required for all development and redevelopment unless
exempt pursuant to this ordinance. A permit may only be issued subsequent to
a properly submitted and reviewed permit application, pursuant to this section.
(B) Effect of Permit
A stormwater permit shall govern the design, installation, and construction of
stormwater management and control practices on the site, including structural
BMPs and elements of site design for stormwater management other than
structural BMPs.
The permit is intended to provide a mechanism for the review, approval, and
inspection of the approach to be used for the management and control of
storm water for the development or redevelopment site consistent with the
requirements of this ordinance, whether the approach consists of structural
BMPs or other techniques such as low-impact or low-density design. The permit
does not continue in existence indefinitely after the completion of the project;
rather, compliance after project construction is assured by the maintenance
provisions of this ordinance.
(C) Authority to File Applications
All applications required pursuant to this Code shall be submitted to the
Stormwater Administrator by the land owner or the land owner's duly
authorized agent.
(D) Establishment of Application Requirements, Schedule, and Fees
(1) Application Contents and Form
The Stormwater Administrator [Stormwater Advisory Board] shall establish
requirements for the content and form of all applications and shall amend
and update those requirements from time to time. At a minimum, the
stormwater permit application shall describe in detail how postdevelopment
stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed, the design
of all storm water facilities and practices, and how the proposed project will
meet the requirements of this ordinance.
(2) Submission Schedule
The Stormwater Administrator shall establish a submission schedule for
applications. The schedule shall establish deadlines by which complete
applications must be submitted for the purpose of ensuring-that there is
adequate time to review applications, and that the various stages in the
review process are accommodated.
12
(3) Permit Review Fees
The Town Council shall establish permit review fees, as well as, policies
regarding refund of any fees upon withdrawal of an application, and may
amend and update the fees and policies from time to time.
(4) Administrative Manual
For applications required under this Code, the Stormwater Administrator
shall compile the application requirements, submission schedule, fee
schedule, a copy of this ordinance, and information on how and where to
obtain the Design Manual in an Administrative Manual, which shall be made
available to the public.
(E) Submittal of Complete Application
Applications shall be submitted to the Stormwater Administrator pursuant to
the application submittal schedule in the form established by the Stormwater
Administrator, along with the appropriate fee established pursuant to this
section.
An application shall be considered as timely submitted only when it contains all
elements of a complete application pursuant to this ordinance, along with the
appropriate fee. If the Storm water Administrator finds that an application is
incomplete, the applicant shall be notified of the deficient elements and shall be
provided with an opportunity to submit a complete application. However, the
submittal of an incomplete application shall not suffice to meet a deadline
contained in the submission schedule established above.
(F) Review
Within 30 working days after a complete application is submitted, the
Stormwater Administrator shall review the application and determine whether
the application complies with the standards of this ordinance.
(1) Approval
If the Storm water Administrator finds that the application complies with the
standards of this ordinance, the Stormwater Administrator shall approve
the application. The Stormwater Administrator may impose conditions of
approval as needed to ensure compliance with this ordinance. The
conditions shall be included as part of the approval.
(2) Fails to Comply
If the Stormwater Administrator finds that the application fails to comply
with the standards of this ordinance, the Stormwater Administrator shall
13
notify the applicant and shall indicate how the application fails to comply.
The applicant shall have an opportunity to submit a revised application.
(3) Revision and Subsequent Review
A complete revised application shall be reviewed by the Stormwater
Administrator within 15 working days after its re-submittal and shall be
approved, approved with conditions or disapproved.
If a revised application is not re-submitted within thirty {30) calendar days
from the date the applicant was notified, the application shall be considered
withdrawn, and a new submittal for the same or substantially the same
project shall be required along with the appropriate fee for a new submittal.
One re-submittal of a revised application may be submitted without
payment of an additional permit review fee. Any re-submittal after the first
re-submittal shall be accompanied by a permit review fee additional fee, as
established pursuant to this ordinance.
203 APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL
(A) Concept Plan and Consultation Meeting
Before a stormwater management permit application is deemed complete, the
Stormwater Administrator or developer may request a consultation on a
concept plan for the post-construction stormwater management system to be
utilized in the proposed development project. This consultation meeting should
take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step
in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the postconstruction
stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed
project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential
approaches to stormwater management designs before formal site design
engineering is commenced. Local watershed plans and other relevant resource
protection plans should be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan.
To accomplish this goal, the following information should be included in the
concept plan, which should be submitted in advance of the meeting:
(1) Existing Conditions/ Proposed Site Plans
Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at
a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent
streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (if available);
boundaries of existing predominant vegetation; proposed limits of clearing
and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking
areas and other impervious surfaces.
14
(
(
(2) Natural Resources Inventory
A written or graphic inventory of natural resources at the site and
surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover,
geologic features, topography, wetlands, and native vegetative areas on the
site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature
protection and conservation areas such as lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream
buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic
setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally
sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for
development and stormwater management.
(3) Stormwater Management System Concept Plan
A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development
stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and
location of proposed structural stormwater controls; low-impact design
elements; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as
grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of
floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and
downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of any
proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
(B) Stormwater Management Permit Application
(C)
The stormwater management permit application shall detail how postdevelopment
stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed and how the
proposed project will meet the requirements of this ordinance, including
Section 3, Standards. All such plans shall be prepared by a qualified registered
North Carolina professional engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or landscape
architect, and the engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or landscape architect shall
perform services only in their area of competence, and shall verify that the
design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meets the
submittal requirements for complete applications, that the designs and plans
are sufficient to comply with applicable standards and policies found in the
Design Manual, and that the designs and plans ensure compliance with this
ordinance.
The submittal shall include all of the information required in the submittal
checklist established by the Stormwater Administrator. Incomplete submittals
shall be treated pursuant to Section 2-202(0).
As-Built Plans and Final Approval
Upon completion of a "project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be
granted, the applicant shall certify that the completed project is in accordance
with the approved stormwater management plans and designs, and shall submit
15
actual "as built" plans for all stormwater management facilities or practices
after final construction is completed.
The plans shall show the final design specifications for all stormwater
management facilities and practices and the field location, size, depth, and
planted vegetation of all measures, controls, and devices, as installed. The
designer of the stormwater management measures and plans shall certify,
under seal, that the as-built stormwater measures, controls, and devices are in
compliance with the approved stormwater management plans and designs and
with the requirements of this ordinance. A final inspection and approval by the
Stormwater Administrator shall occur before the release of any performance
securities.
(D) Other Permits
No certificate of compliance or occupancy shall be issued by the Caldwell
County Building Inspectors without final as-built plans and a final inspection and
approval by the Stormwater Administrator, except where multiple units are
served by the stormwater practice or facilities, in which case the Caldwell
County Building Inspections Department may elect to withhold a percentage of
permits or certificates of occupancy until as-built plans are submitted and final
inspection and approval has occurred.
204 APPROVALS
(A) Effect of Approval
Approval authorizes the applicant to go forward with only the specific plans and
activities authorized in the permit. The approval shall not be construed to
exempt the applicant from obtaining other applicable approvals from local,
state, and federal authorities.
(B) Time Limit/Expiration
An approved plan shall become null and void ifthe applicant fails to make
substantial progress on the site within one year after the date of approval. The
Stormwater Administrator may grant a single, one-year extension of this time
limit, for good cause shown, upon receiving a written request from the applicant
before the expiration of the approved plan.
In granting an extension, the Stormwater Administrator may require compliance
with standards adopted since the original application was submitted unless
there has been substantial reliance on the original permit and the change in
standards would infringe the applicant's vested rights.
16
205 APPEALS
(A) Right of Appeal
Any aggrieved person affected by any decision, order, requirement, or
determination relating to the interpretation or application of this ordinance
made by the Stormwater Administrator, may file an appeal to the Board of
Adjustment within 30 days.
(B) Filing of Appeal and Procedures
Appeals shall be taken within the specified time period by filing a notice of
appeal and specifying the grounds for appeal on forms provided by Town of
Hudson. The Stormwater Administrator shall transmit to the Board of
Adjustment all documents constituting the record on which the decision
appealed from was taken.
The hearing conducted by the Board of Adjustment shall be conducted in the
nature of a quasi-judicial proceeding with all findings of fact supported by
competent, material evidence.
(C) Review by Superior Court
Every decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to Superior Court
review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Petition for review by the
Superior Court shall be filed with the Clerk of Superior Court within thirty (30)
days after the latter of the following:
(1) The decision of the Board of Adjustment is filed; or
(2) A written copy of the decision is delivered to every aggrieved party who has
filed a written request for such copy with the Chair of the Board of Adjustment
at the time of its hearing of the case.
17
SECTION 3: STANDARDS
301 GENERALSTANDARDS
All development and redevelopment to which this ordinance applies shall comply with
the standards of this section.
302 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOW-DENSITY PROJECTS
Low-density projects shall comply with each of the following standards:
(A) Storm water runoff from the development shall be transported from the
development by vegetated conveyances to the maximum extent
practicable.
(B) Stream buffers shall be maintained on all sides of perennial and
intermittent surface waters. The size of the buffer for perennial surface
waters shall be an undisturbed width of 30 feet, plus a vegetated
setback of 20 feet Buffers for intermittent surface waters shall be an
undisturbed width of 30 feet. The buffer width is measured
perpendicularly from the top of the stream bank. A perennial or
intermittent surface water shall be deemed present ifthe feature is
approximately shown on either the most recent version of the soil
survey map prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of
the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) or the most recent
version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle topographic maps
prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS). An exception to
this requirement may be allowed when surface waters are not present
in accordance with the provisions of lSA NCAC 2B .0233 (3) (a) or
similar site-specific determination made using Division-approved
methodology.
(C) The approval of the stormwater permit shall require an enforceable
restriction on property usage that runs with the land, such as a recorded
deed restriction or protective covenants, to ensure that future
development and redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the
approved project plans.
303 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR HIGH-DENSITY PROJECTS
High-density projects shall implement stormwater control measures that comply with
each of the following standards:
(A) The measures shall control and treat runoff from the first inch of rain,
runoff volume drawdown time shall be a minimum of 48 hours, but not
more than 120 hours.
18
( (B) All structural stormwater treatment systems used to meet these
requirements shall be designed to have a minimum of 85% average
annual removal for Total Suspended Solids (TSS);
(C) General engineering design criteria for all projects shall be in
accordance with 15A NCAC 2H .1008(c), as explained in the Design
Manual;
[D) Stream buffers shall be maintained on all sides of perennial and
intermittent surface waters. The size of the buffer for perennial surface
waters shall be an undisturbed width of 30 feet, plus a vegetated
setback of 20 feet. Buffers for intermittent surface waters shall be an
undisturbed width of 30 feet. The buffer width is measured .
perpendicularly from the top of the stream bank. A surface water shall
be deemed present if the feature is approximately shown on either the
most recent version of the soil survey map prepared by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) or the most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5
minute) quadrangle topographic maps prepared by the United States
Geologic Survey (USGS). An exception to this requirement may be
allowed when surface waters are not present in accordance with the
provisions of 15A NCAC 2B .0233 (3) (a) or similar site-specific
determination made using Division-approved methodology.
(E) On-site verification of intermittent and perennial streams by a qualified
professional is required for all development exceeding a cumulative 5
acres and 24 percent impervious coverage, or any commercial
development.
(F) The approval of the stormwater permit shall require an enforceable
restriction on property usage that runs with the land, such as recorded
deed restrictions or protective covenants, to ensure that future
development and redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the
approved project plans,
304 STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES
(A) Evaluation According to Contents of Design Manual
All stormwater control measures and storm water treatment practices (also
referred to as Best Management Practices, or BMPs) required under this
ordinance shall be evaluated by the Stormwater Administrator according to the
policies, criteria, and information, including technical specifications and
standards and the specific design criteria for each stormwater practice, in the
Design Manual. The Stormwater Administrator shall determine whether
proposed BMPs will be adequate to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
19
(B) Determination of Adequacy; Presumptions and Alternatives
Stormwater treatment practices that are designed, af\G constructed, and
maintained in accordance with the criteria and specifications in the Design
Manual will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality and quantity
performance standards of this ordinance. Whenever an applicant proposes to
utilize a practice or practices not designed and constructed in accordance with
the criteria and specifications in the Design Manual, the applicant shall have the
burden of demonstrating that the practice(s) will satisfy the minimum water
quality and quantity performance standards of this ordinance. The Storm water
Administrator may require the applicant to provide the documentation,
calculations, and examples necessary for the Stormwater Administrator to
determine whether such an affirmative showing is made.
(C) Separation from Seasonal High Water Table
For BMPs that require a separation from the seasonal high-water table, the
separation shall be provided by at least 12 inches of naturally occurring soil
above the seasonal high-water table.
305 DEDICATION OF BMPS, FACILITIES & IMPROVEMENTS
The Town of Hudson may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements
of this ordinance and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by
easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
306 VARIANCES
(A) Any person may petition the Town of Hudson for a variance granting permission to
use the person's land in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. To qualify for
a variance, the petitioner must show all of the following:
(1) Unnecessary hardships would result from strict application of this ordinance.
(2) The hardships result from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such
as the location, size, or topography of the property.
(3) The hardships did not result from actions taken by the petitioner.
(4) The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of
this ordinance; will secure public safety and welfare; and will preserve
substantial justice.
(B} The Town of Hudson may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions and
safeguards upon any variance it grants.
(C) Statutory exceptions
20
(
(
Notwithstanding subdivision (A) of this section, exceptions from the 30-foot landward
location of built-upon area requirement as well as the deed restrictions and protective
covenants requirements shall be granted in any of the following instances:
(1) When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a road crossing, railroad
crossing, bridge, airport facility, or utility crossing as long as it is located,
designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance, provide
maximum nutrient removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation, have
the least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality to
the maximum extent practicable through the use of BMPs.
(2) When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a stormwater management
facility; a stormwater management pond; or a utility, including, but not limited
to, water, sewer, or gas construction and maintenance corridor, as long as it is
located 15 feet landward of all perennial and intermittent surface waters and as
long as it is located, designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize
disturbance, provide maximum nutrient removal, protect against erosion and
sedimentation, have the least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and
protect water quality to the maximum extent practicable through the use of
BMPs.
(3) A lack of practical alternatives may be shown by demonstrating that,
considering the potential for a reduction in size, configuration, or density of the
proposed activity and all alternative designs, the basic project purpose cannot
be practically accomplished in a manner which would avoid or result in less
adverse impact to surface waters.
307 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL SITUATIONS
(A) Pet waste
(1) Restrictions on Pet Waste
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to take it off
the owner's own property limits without the means to properly remove and
dispose of the dog's feces from any public or private property.
(b) It is the responsibility of a dog's owner or custodian to clean up the
dog's feces from any public or private property outside of the dog's owner's
own property limits. Such property includes, but is not limited to, parks,
rights-of-way, paths, and public access areas.
(c) "Means to properly remove and dispose of feces" shall consist of having
on or near one's person a device such as a plastic bag, or other suitable
plastic or paper container, that can be used to clean up and contain dog
waste until it can be disposed of in an appropriate container. Such a device
must be produced and shown, upon request, to anyone authorized to
enforce these ordinances.
21
(d) This provision shall not apply to handicapped persons assisted by
trained guide or assistance dogs.
(e) "Public nuisance" is defined to include "a dog which deposits feces on
public property or on private property without the consent of the owner or
person in lawful possession of the private property, and the person owning,
possessing, harboring or having the care, charge, control or custody of the
dog fails to remove the feces so deposited. Provided, however, this
definition shall not apply to any dog assisting a handicapped person.
308 ONSITE WASTEWATER
(A) Operation and Maintenance Requirements
New and replaced onsite systems for domestic wastewater installed after
the effective date of this ordinance shall be subject to the same
requirements for operation and maintenance as structural BMPs for
stormwater, including, at a minimum, annual inspection reports and a
recorded operation and maintenance agreement, pursuant to Section 4 of
this ordinance.
(B) Standards for Operation and Maintenance
Onsite systems for domestic wastewater covered by this ordinance shall
be operated and maintained so as to avoid adverse effects on surface
water and groundwater, including eutrophication of surface water and
microbial or nitrate contamination of groundwater. Septic tank residuals
shall be pumped whenever necessary to assure the proper operation of
the system to meet these standards, and the septage shall be reused or
disposed of in a manner that does not present significant risks to human
health, surface water or groundwater.
22
(
1.
SECTION 4: MAINTENANCE
401 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE
(A) Function of BMPs As Intended
The owner of each structural BMP installed pursuant to this ordinance shall
maintain and operate it so as to preserve and continue its function in controlling
stormwater quality and quantity at the degree or amount of function for which
the structural BMP was designed.
(B) Annual Maintenance Inspection and Report
The person responsible for maintenance of any structural BMP installed
pursuant to this ordinance shall submit to the Stormwater Administrator an
톓nspection report from one of the following persons performing services only in
their area of competence: a qualified registered North Carolina professional
engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, soil scientist, aquatic biologist, or
person certified by the North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service for
storm water treatment practice inspection and maintenance. The inspection
report shall contain all of the following:
(1) The name and address of the land owner;
(2) The recorded book and page number of the lot of each structural BMP;
(3) A statement that an inspection was made of all structural BMPs;
(4) The date the inspection was made;
(5) A statement that all inspected structural BMPs are performing properly
and are in compliance with the terms and conditions of the approved
maintenance agreement required by this ordinance; and
(6) The original signature and seal of the engineer, surveyor, or landscape
architect.
All inspection reports shall be on forms supplied by the Stormwater
Administrator. An original inspection report shall be provided to the Stormwater
Administrator beginning one year from the date of as-built certification and
each year thereafter on or before the date of the as-built certification.
402 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
(A) In General
Prior to the conveyance or transfer of any lot or building site to be served by a
structural BMP pursuant to this ordinance, and prior to issuance of any permit
for development or redevelopment_requiring a structural BMP pursuant to this
23
(B)
ordinance, the applicant or owner of the site must execute an operation and
maintenance agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the
site, portions of the site, and lots or parcels served by the structural BMP. Until
the transference of all property, sites, or lots served by the structural BMP, the
original owner or applicant shall have primary responsibility for carrying out the
provisions of the maintenance agreement.
The operation and maintenance agreement shall require the owner or owners to
maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the structural BMP, and shall
state the terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance for the structural
BMP. In addition, it shall grant to Town of Hudson a right of entry in the event
that the Stormwater Administrator has reason to believe it has become
necessary to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair, or reconstruct the structural
BMP; however, in no case shall the right of entry, of itself, confer an obligation
on Town of Hudson to assume responsibility for the structural BMP.
The operation and maintenance agreement must be approved by the
Stormwater Administrator prior to plan approval, and it shall be referenced on
the final plat and shall be recorded with the county Register of Deeds upon final
plat approval.2 A copy of the recorded maintenance agreement shall be given to
the Stormwater Administrator within fourteen (14) days following its
recordation.
Special Requirement for Homeowners' and Other Associations
For all structural BMPs required pursuant to this ordinance and that are to be or
are owned and maintained by a homeowners' association, property owners'
association, or similar entity, the required operation and maintenance
agreement shall include all of the following provisions:
(1) Acknowledgment that the association shall continuously operate and
maintain the stormwater control and management facilities.
(2) Establishment of an escrow account, which can be spent solely for
sediment removal, structural, biological or vegetative replacement,
major repair, or reconstruction of the structural BMPs. If structural
BMPs are not performing adequately or as intended or are not properly
maintained, the Town of Hudson, in its sole discretion, may remedy the
situation, and in such instances the Town of Hudson shall be fully
reimbursed from the escrow account. Escrowed funds may be spent by
the association for sediment removal, structural, biological or vegetative
replacement, major repair, and reconstruction of the structural BMPs,
provided that the Town of Hudson shall first consent to the
expenditure.
24
(
(3) Both developer contribution and annual sinking funds shall fund the
escrow account. Prior to plat recordation or issuance of construction
permits, whichever shall first occur, the developer shall pay into the
escrow account an amount equal to fifteen (15) per cent of the initial
construction cost of the structural BMPs. Two-thirds (2/3) of the total
amount of sinking fund budget shall be deposited into the escrow
account within the first five (5) years and the full amount shall be
deposited within ten (10) years following initial construction of the
structural BMPs. Funds shall be deposited each year into the escrow
account. A portion of the annual assessments of the association shall
include an allocation into the escrow account. Any funds drawn down
from the escrow account shall be replaced in accordance with the
schedule of anticipated work used to create the sinking fund budget.
(4) The percent of developer contribution and lengths of time to fund the
escrow account may be varied by the Town of Hudson depending on the
design and materials of the storm water control and management
facility.
(5) Granting to the Town of Hudson a right of entry to inspect, monitor,
maintain, repair, and reconstruct structural BMPs.
(6) Allowing the Town of Hudson to recover from the association and its
member's any and all costs the Town of Hudson expends to maintain or
repair the structural BMPs or to correct any operational deficiencies.
Failure to pay the Town of Hudson all of its expended costs, after fortyfive
days written notice, shall constitute a breach of the agreement. In
case of a deficiency, the Town of Hudson shall thereafter be entitled to
bring an action against the association and its members to pay, or
foreclose upon the lien hereby authorized by the agreement against the
property, or both (Interest, collection costs, and attorney fees shall be
added to the recovery).
(7) A statement that this agreement shall not obligate the Town of Hudson
to maintain or repair any structural BMPs, and the Town of Hudson shall
not be liable to any person for the condition or operation of structural
BMPs.
(8) A statement that this agreement shall not in any way diminish, limit, or
restrict the right of the Town of Hudson to enforce any of its ordinances
as authorized by law.
(9) A provision indemnifying and holding harmless the Town of Hudson for
any costs and injuries arising from or related to the structural BMP,
unless the Town of Hudson has agreed in writing to assume the
maintenance responsibility for the BMP and has accepted dedication of
any and all rights necessary to carry out that maintenance.
25
403 INSPECTION PROGRAM
Inspections and 톓nspection programs by Town of Hudson may be conducted or
established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine
inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other
notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are
not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges,
surface water, groundwater, and material or water in BMPs; and evaluating the
condition of BMPs.
If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit such inspection, the
Stormwater Administrator shall proceed to obtain an administrative search
warrant pursuant to G.S. 15-27.2 or its successor. No person shall obstruct,
hamper or interfere with the Stormwater Administrator while carrying out his or
her official duties.
404 PERFORMANCE SECURITY FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE
(A) May Be Required
The Town of Hudson may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a
performance security or bond with surety or other acceptable legal
arrangement prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the
structural BMPs are
(1) Installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater
management plan, and/or
(2) Maintained by the owner as required by the operation and maintenance
agreement.
(B) Amount
(1) Installation
The amount of an installation performance security shall be the total
estimated construction cost of the BMPs approved under the permit, plus
25%.
(2) Maintenance
The amount of a maintenance performance security shall be the present
value of an annuity of perpetual duration based on a reasonable estimate of
the annual cost of inspection, operation and maintenance of the BMPs
approved under the permit, at a discount rate that reflects the jurisdiction's
cost of borrowing minus a reasonable estimate of long-term inflation.
26
(
(C) Uses of Performance Security
(1) Forfeiture Provisions
The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure, after
proper notice, to complete work within the time specified, or to initiate or
maintain any actions which may be required of the applicant or owner in
accordance with this ordinance, approvals issued pursuant to this
ordinance, or an operation and maintenance agreement established
pursuant to this ordinance.
(2) Default
Upon default of the owner to construct, maintain, repair and, if necessary,
reconstruct any structural BMP in accordance with the applicable permit or
operation and maintenance agreement, the Stormwater Administrator shall
obtain and use all or any portion of the security to make necessary
improvements based on an engineering estimate. Such expenditure of funds
shall only be made after requesting the owner to comply with the permit or
maintenance agreement. In the event of a default triggering the use of
installation performance security, the Town of Hudson shall not return any
of the unused deposited cash funds or other security, which shall be
retained for maintenance.
(3) Costs in Excess of Performance Security
If Town of Hudson takes action upon such failure by the applicant or owner,
the Town of Hudson may collect from the applicant or owner_ the difference
between the amount of the reasonable cost of such action and the amount
of the security held, in addition to any other penalties or damages due.
(4) Refund
Within sixty days of the final approval, the installation performance security
shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated, except any amount
attributable to the cost (plus 25%) of landscaping installation and ongoing
maintenance associated with the BMPs covered by the security. Any such
landscaping shall be inspected one (1) year after installation with
replacement for compliance with the approved plans and specifications and,
if in compliance, the portion of the financial security attributable to
landscaping shall be released.
405 NOTICE TO OWNERS
(A) Deed Recordation and Indications On Plat
The applicable operations and maintenance agreement, conservation easement,
or dedication and acceptance into public maintenance (whichever is applicable)
pertaining to every structural BMP shall be referenced on the final plat and shall
27
be recorded with the county Register of Deeds upon final plat approval. If no
subdivision plat is recorded for the site, then the operations and maintenance
agreement, conservation easement, or dedication and acceptance into public
maintenance, whichever is applicable shall be recorded with the county Register
of Deeds so as to appear in the chain of title of all subsequent purchasers under
generally accepted searching principles.
(B) Signage
Where appropriate in the determination of the Stormwater Administrator to
assure compliance with this ordinance, structural BMPs shall be posted with a
conspicuous sign stating who is responsible for required maintenance and
annual inspection. The sign shall be maintained so as to remain visible and
legible.
406 RECORDS OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES
The owner of each structural BMP shall keep records of inspections, maintenance, and
repairs for at least five years from the date of creation of the record and shall submit
the same upon reasonable request to the Stormwater Administrator.
407 NUISANCE
The owner of each stormwater BMP, whether structural or non-structural BMP, shall
maintain it so as not to create or result in a nuisance condition.
408 MAINTENANCE EASEMENT
Every structural BMP installed pursuant to this ordinance shall be made accessible for
adequate maintenance and repair by a maintenance easement. The easement shall be
recorded and its terms shall specify who may make use of the easement and for what
purposes.
28
(
(
SECTION 5: ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS
501 GENERAL
(A) Authority to Enforce
The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by the Stormwater
Administrator, his or her designee, or any authorized agent of Town of Hudson.
Whenever this section refers to the Stormwater Administrator, it includes his or
her designee as well as any authorized agent of Town of Hudson.
(B) Violation Unlawful
Any failure to comply with an applicable requirement, prohibition, standard, or
limitation imposed by this ordinance, or the terms or conditions of any permit
or other development or redevelopment approval or authorization granted
pursuant to this ordinance, is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this
ordinance.
(C) Each Day a Separate Offense
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation or offense.
(D) Responsible Persons/Entities
Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters (whether actively or
passively), or fails to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or maintain any
structure, BMP, practice, or condition in violation of this ordinance shall be
subject to the remedies, penalties, and/or enforcement actions in accordance
with this section. Persons subject to the remedies and penalties set forth herein
may include any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or
any other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or
maintains a condition that results in or constitutes a violation of this ordinance,
orfails to take appropriate action, so that a violation of this ordinance results or
persists; or an owner, any tenant or occupant, or any other person, who has
control over, or responsibility for, the use or development of the property on
which the violation occurs.
For the purposes of this article, responsible person(s) shall include but not be
limited to:
(1) Person Maintaining Condition Resulting In or Constituting Violation
An architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or any other
person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a
condition that constitutes a violation of this ordinance, or fails to take
appropriate action, so that a violation of this ordinance results or persists.
29
{2) Responsibility For Land or Use of Land
The owner of the land on which the violation occurs, any tenant or occupant
of the property, any person who is responsible for stormwater controls or
practices pursuant to a private agreement or public document, or any
person, who has control over, or responsibility for, the use, development or
redevelopment of the property.
502 REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
The remedies and penalties provided for violations of this ordinance, whether civil or
criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided by law, and
may be exercised in any order.
{A) Remedies
(1) Withholding of Certificate of Occupancy
The Stormwater Administrator or other authorized agent may refuse to
issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements
constructed or being constructed on the site and served by the stormwater
practices in question until the applicant or other responsible person has
taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has
otherwise cured the violations described therein.
(2) Disapproval of Subsequent Permits and Development Approvals
As long as a violation of this ordinance continues and remains uncorrected,
the Stormwater Administrator or other authorized agent may withhold, and
the Town of Hudson Planning Board may disapprove, any request for permit
or development approval or authorization provided for by this ordinance or
the zoning, subdivision, and/or building regulations, as appropriate for the
land on which the violation occurs.
(3) Injunction, Abatements, etc.
The Storm water Administrator, with the written authorization of the Town
Administrator, may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction
for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement to correct
a violation of this ordinance. Any person violating this ordinance shall be
subject to the full range of equitable remedies provided in the General
Statutes or at common law.
(4) Correction as Public Health Nuisance, Costs as Lien, etc.
If the violation is deemed dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or
public safety and is within the geographic limits prescribed by North
Carol'lna G.S.  160A-193, the Stormwater Administrator, with the written
30
(
(
( authorization of the Town Administrator, may cause the violation to be
corrected and the costs to be assessed as a lien against the property.
(5) Stop Work Order
The Stormwater Administrator may issue a stop work order to the person(s)
violating this ordinance. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the
person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation
or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein. The
stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the person to
take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations.
(B) Civil Penalties
Violation of this ordinance may subject the violator to a civil penalty to be
recovered in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the violator does not pay the
penalty within 30 days after notice of the violation is issued by the Stormwater
Administrator. Civil penalties may be assessed up to the full amount of penalty
to which Town of Hudson is subject for violations of its Phase II Stormwater
permit, or if no Phase 11 Stormwater permit exists for the jurisdiction, civil
penalties may be assessed up to the full amount allowed by law.
(C) Criminal Penalties
Vio'lation of this ordinance may be enforced as a misdemeanor subject to the
maximum fine permissible under North Carolina law.
503 PROCEDURES
(A) Initiation/Complaint
Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall state fully the
alleged violation and the basis thereof, and shall be filed with the Stormwater
Administrator, who shall record the complaint. The complaint shall be
investigated promptly by the Stormwater Administrator.
(B) Inspection
The Stormwater Administrator shall have the authority, upon presentation of
proper credentials, to enter and inspect any land, building, structure, or
premises to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
(C) Notice of Violation and Order to Correct
When the Stormwater Administrator finds that any building, structure, or land is
in violation of this ordinance, the Stormwater Administrator shall notify, in
writing, the property owner or other person violating this ordinance. The
notification shall indicate the nature of the violation, contain the address or
other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring, order the
31
necessary action to abate the violation, and give a deadline for correcting the
violation. If civil penalties are to be assessed, the notice of violation shall also
contain a statement of the civil penalties to be assessed, the time of their
accrual, and the time within which they must be paid or be subject to collection
as a debt.
The Stormwater Administrator may deliver the notice of violation and
correction order personally, by the law enforcement or code enforcement
personnel, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by any
means authorized for the service of documents by Rule 4 of the North Carolina
Rules of Civil Procedure.
If a violation is not corrected within a reasonable period of time, as provided in
the notification, the Stormwater Administrator may take appropriate action
under this ordinance to correct and abate the violation and to ensure
compliance with this ordinance.
(D) Extension of Time
A person who receives a notice of violation and correction order, or the owner
of the land on which the violation occurs, may submit to the Storm water
Administrator a written request for an extension of time for correction of the
violation. On determining that the request includes enough information to show
that the violation cannot be corrected within the specified time limit for reasons
beyond the control of the person requesting the extension, the Stormwater
Administrator may extend the time limit as is reasonably necessary to allow
timely correction of the violation, up to, but not exceeding 30 days. The
Stormwater Administrator may grant 15-day extensions in addition to the
foregoing extension if the violation cannot be corrected within the permitted
time due to circumstances beyond the control of the person violating this
ordinance. The Stormwater Administrator may grant an extension only by
written notice of extension. The notice of extension shall state the date prior to
which correction must be made, after which the violator will be subject to the
penalties described in the notice of violation and correction order.
(E) Enforcement After Time to Correct
After the time has expired to correct a violation, including any extension(s) if
authorized by the Stormwater Administrator, the Stormwater Administrator
shall determine if the violation is corrected. If the violation is not corrected, the
Stormwater Administrator may act to impose one or more of the remedies and
penalties authorized by this ordinance.
(F) Emergency Enforcement
If delay in correcting a violation would seriously threaten the effective
enforcement of this ordinance or pose an immediate danger to the public
health, safety, or welfare, then the Stormwater Administrator may order the
immediate cessation of a violation. Any person so ordered shall cease any
32
(
(
violation immediately. The Stormwater Administrator may seek immediate
enforcement, without prior written notice, through any remedy or penalty
authorized by this article.
33
SECTION 6: DEFINITIONS
601 TERMS DEFINED
When used in this Ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the meaning set
forth in this section, unless other provisions of this Ordinance specifically indicate
otherwise.
Built-upon area (BUA}
That portion of a development project that is covered by impervious or partially
impervious surface including, but not limited to, buildings; pavement and gravel areas
such as roads, parking lots, and paths; and recreation facilities such as tennis courts.
"Built-upon area" does not include a wooden slatted deck, the water area of a
swimming pool, or pervious or partially pervious paving material to the extent that the
paving material absorbs water or allows water to infiltrate through the paving material.
Deportment
The North Carolina Department of Environment Quality.
Design Manual
The stormwater design manual approved for use in Phase II jurisdictions by the
Department and certified by this jurisdiction for the proper implementation of the
requirements of the federal Phase II stormwater program. All references herein to the
Design Manual are to the latest published edition or revision.
Development
Any land-disturbing activity that increases the amount of built-upon area or that
otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil.
Division
The Division of Energy, Mineral and Land Resources in the Department.
High-density project
Any project that exceeds the low-density threshold for dwelling units per acre or builtupon
area.
Larger common pion of development or sale
Any area where multiple separate and distinct construction or land-disturbing activities
will occur under one plan. A plan is any announcement or piece of documentation
(including but not limited to a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement,
loan application, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design) or
physical demarcation (including but not limited to boundary signs, lot stakes, or
surveyor markings} indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.
Low-density project
For a project that is not located within one-half mile of and draining to Shellfish
Resource Waters: the project is a low -density project if it has no more than two
dwelling units per acre or twenty-four percent built-upon area (BUA} for all residential
and non-residential development.
34
(
(
A project with an overall density at or below the relevant low-density threshold, but
containing areas with a density greater than the overall project density, may be
considered low density as long as the project meets or exceeds the post-construction
model practices for low-density projects and locates the higher density in upland areas
and away from surface waters and drainage ways to the maximum extent practicable.
1-year, 24-hour storm
The surface runoff resulting from a 24-hour rainfall of an intensity expected to be
equaled or exceeded, on average, once in 12 months and with a duration of 24 hours.
Owner
The legal or beneficial owner of land, including but not limited to a mortgagee or
vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or long-term or commercial lessee, or
any other person or entity holding proprietary rights in the property or having legal
power of management and control of the property. "Owner" shall include long-term
commercial tenants; management entities, such as those charged with or engaged in
the management of properties for profit; and every person or entity having joint
ownership of the property. A secured lender not in possession of the property does not
constitute an owner, unless the secured lender is included within the meaning of
"owner" under another description in this definition, such as a management entity.
Redevelopment
Any development on previously-developed land, other than a rebuilding activity that
results in no net increase in built-upon area and provides equal or greater stormwater
control than the previous development.
Structural BMP
A physical device designed to trap, settle out, or filter pollutants from stormwater
runoff; to alter or reduce stormwater runoff velocity, amount, tim'ing, or other
characteristics; to approximate the pre-development hydrology on a developed site; or
to achieve any combination of these goals. Structural BMP includes physical practices
such as constructed wetlands, vegetative practices, filter strips, grassed swales, and
other methods installed or created on real property. "Structural BMP" is synonymous
with "structural practice," "stormwater control facility," "stormwater control practice,"
11stormwater treatment practice,'1 "stormwater management practice," "stormwater
control measures," "structural stormwater treatment systems," and similar terms used
in this ordinance.
Substantial progress
For the purposes of determining whether sufficient progress has been made on an
approved plan, one or more of the following construction activities toward the
completion of a site or subdivision plan shall occur: obtaining a grading permit and
conducting grading activity on a continuous basis and not discontinued for more than
thirty (30) days; or installation and approval of on-site infrastructure; or obtaining a
building permit for the construction and approval of a building foundation. "Substantial
progress" for purposes of determining whether an approved plan is null and void is not
necessarily the same as "substantial expenditures" used for determining vested rights
pursuant to applicable law.
35
SECTION 7: ILLICIT DISCHARGES
701 TITLE AND PURPOSE
(A) Title
This ordinance shall be officially known as "The Phase II Stormwater Illicit Discharge
Detection and Elimination Ordinance." It is referred to herein as "this ordinance."
(B) Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of the Town Hudson through the regulation of non-storm water discharges
to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal
and state law. This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply
with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are:
(1) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) by Stormwater discharges by any user
(2) To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal separate storm
sewer system
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance
702 AUTHORITY
The Town of Hudson is authorized to adopt this ordinance pursuant to North Carolina
law, including but not limited to Article 14, Section 5 of the Constitution of North
Carolina; North Carolina General Statutes 143-214.7 and rules promulgated by the
Environmental Management Commission thereunder; Session Law 2004-163; Chapter
160A  174, 185.
703 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this section, the following shall mean:
Best Management Practices (BMPs)
schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices,
pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or
indirectly to Stormwater, receiving waters, or Stormwater conveyance systems BMPs
also include treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
36
(
(
Clean Water Act
The federal Water Pollution Control Act {33 U.S. C. 5 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
Hazardous Materials
Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of
its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may
cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Jllegal Discharge
Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system.
Jllicit Connections
An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal
discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances
which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and
wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement agency
or,
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the
storm drain system, which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
Industrial Activity
Activities subject to NP DES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)
(14).
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)
Pursuant to 40 CFR 122.26{b)(8) means a conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems. municipal streets catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, manmade channels, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and
detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and
other drainage structures or storm drains):
(i) Owned or operated by a town, city, county, district, association, or other public body
(created by or pursuant to State law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage,
industrial wastes, Stormwater, or other wastes, that discharges to waters of the United
States or waters of the State.
(ii) Designed or used for collecting or conveying Stormwater;
(iii) Which is not a combined sewer; and
37
(iv) Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW), as defined in 40
CFR 122.2
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES} Storm Water
Discharge Permit
A permit issued by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources, Division of Water Quality* that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the State, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
area-wide basis.
Non-Storm water Discharge
Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
Person
Means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other
entity recognized by law and acting either as the owner or as the owner's agent.
Pollutant
Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not
limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or
other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same
may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Premises
Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved
including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Storm Water
Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
A document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be
implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Stormwater,
Stormwater Conveyance Systems, and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent
Practicable.
Wastewater
Means water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from
a facility.
*Ultimately the federal Environmental Protection Agency regulates the NPDES permit, but it has
been delegated to the state for any non-tribal lands within North Carolina
38
(
(
704 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS
(A) Illicit Discharges
No person shall cause or allow the discharge, emission, disposal, pouring, or pumping
directly or indirectly to any Stormwater conveyance, the waters of the State, or upon
the land in manner and amount that the substance is likely to reach a Stormwater
conveyance or the waters of the State, any liquid, solid, gas, or other substance, other
than Stormwater; provided that non-Stormwater discharges associated with the
following activities are allowed and provided that they do not significantly impact water
quality:
(1) Water line flushing,
(2) Landscape irrigation,
(3) Diverted stream flows,
(4) Rising ground waters,
(5) Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)),
(6) Uncontaminated pumped ground water,
(7) Discharges from potable water sources,
(8) Foundation drains,
(9) Flows from emergency firefighting,
(10) Air conditioning condensation,
(11) Irrigation water,
(12) Springs,
(13) Water from crawl space pumps,
(14) Footing drains,
(15) Lawn watering,
(16) Individual residential car washing - Designated vehicle wash areas at multi-family
residential complexes are not allowed if they connect, directly or indirectly, to the
Stormwater System or surface waters. Charity Vehicle Washing performed by the same
organization or at the same location on a routine basis (more than one time in a thirtyday
period) is not allowed under this article.
(17) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,
39
(18) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges - "Salt Water" swimming pools cannot be
directly discharged into the storm drain due to the salinity, bromoform/bromine
concentration, and chlorine generated.
(19) Street wash water, and
(20) Other non-Stormwater discharges for which a valid NPDES discharge permit has
been approved and issued by the State of North Carolina, and if any such discharges to
the municipal separate storm, The Town of Hudson shall authorize sewer system.
(21) Removal of Stormwater System blockages with Unmodified Potable Water.
Prohibited substances include but are not limited to oil, anti-freeze, chemicals, animal
waste, paints, garbage, and litter.
(B) Illicit Connections
(1) Connections to a Stormwater conveyance or Stormwater conveyance system that
allows the discharge of non-Stormwater, other than the exclusions described in section
(a) above, are unlawful. Including but not limited to: prohibited washing machines or
sanitary sewers, wash water from commercial vehicle washing or steam cleaning, and
wastewater from septic systems.
(2) Where such connections exist in violation of this section and said connections were
made prior to the adoption of this provision or any other ordinance prohibiting such
connections, the property owner or the person using said connection shall remove the
connection within one year following the effective date of this ordinance, However, the
one-year grace period shall not apply to connections which may result in the discharge
of hazardous materials or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health
and safety, or are likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal
property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat.
(3) Where it is determined that said connection:
i. May result in the discharge of hazardous materials or may pose an immediate
threat to health and safety, or is likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real
or personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat, or
ii. Was made in violation of any applicable regulation or ordinance, other than this
section:
The Stormwater Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer shall designate the time within
which the connection shall be removed - in setting the time limit for compliance the
Stormwater Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer shall take into consideration:
i. The quantify and complexity of the work,
iii. The consequences of delay,
iv. The potential harm to the environment, to the public health, and to public and
private property, and
v. The cost of remedying the damage.
40
(C) Spills
Spills or leaks of polluting substances released, discharged to, or having the potential to
be released or discharged to the Stormwater conveyance system, shall be contained,
controlled, collected, and properly disposed of. All affected areas shall be restored to
their pre-existing condition.
Persons in control of the polluting substances immediately prior to their release or
discharge, and persons owning the property on which the substances were released or
discharged, shall immediately notify the Hudson Fire Department of the release or
discharge, as well as making any required notifications under state and federal law,
Notification shall not relieve any person of any expenses related to the restoration, loss
damage, or any other liability which may be incurred as a result of said spill or leak, nor
shall such notification relieve any person from other liability which may be imposed by
State or other law.
(D) Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit; Proof of compliance
with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Town of Hudson prior to
the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
705 RIGHT OF ENTRY/POWERS AND AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION
(A) Authority to Inspect and Monitor
The Stormwater Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer, bearing proper identification,
may enter public or private properties at all reasonable times to inspect, investigate, or
monitor activities and conditions subject to this article. Persons occupying premises to
be inspected shall allow the Stormwater Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer ready
access at all times to all parts of the premises to perform inspection, monitoring,
records examination, copying, photography, video recording or other duties.
Stormwater Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer shall have the right to set up on the
Person's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a Person has security
measures in force that would require identification and clearance before entry into the
premises, the Person shall make arrangements with security personnel so that, upon
presentation of identificat'1on, personnel from Stormwater Administrator/ Illicit
Discharge Officer will be permitted to enter and perform their specific responsibilities
without delay. Denial of Stormwater Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer access to the
Person's premises or portions thereof shall be a violation of this article. Denial of access
may also occur if a Person fails to provide, without unreasonable delay, such facilities,
equipment, or devices as are reasonably necessary to permit Stormwater Administrator/
Illicit Discharge Officer personnel to perform their duties in a safe manner.
Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access. Any delay of more than five
minutes may be considered unreasonable.
41
(B) Search Warrants
To the extent permitted by law, Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer may seek the
issuance of a search warrant to determine compliance with this article.
(C)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(D)
Confidential Information
To the extent permitted by applicable law and except as otherwise
provided in this section, information and data on a Person obtained
from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring
programs and inspections shall be available to the public or other
government agencies without restriction, unless the Person specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer, that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the Person. Any
such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data.
To the extent permitted by applicable law, when requested by a Person
furnishing a report, the portions of a report that might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by
the public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this article provided, however, that such
portions of a report shall be available for use by the State or any State
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
Person furnishing the report.
Documents that are not public records and the information set forth
therein may be withheld and released only as provided by applicable
law.
Obstruction
No person shall obstruct, hamper, or interfere with Administrator/ Illicit Discharge
Officer while carrying out official duties. Upon presentation of credentials by
Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer, necessary arrangements shall be made to allow
immediate access onto premises or into an area protected by security measures. Any
obstruction to the safe and easy access to property, a facility or enclosure on property,
or to monitoring devices shall immediately be removed. Unreasonable delays in
providing safe and reasonable access or removing obstructions shall be a violation of
th is article.
42
(
706 ENFORCEMENT
{A) Notice of Violation
Whenever the Stormwater Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the Storm water
Administrator/ Illicit Discharge Officer may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring analyses, and reporting,
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges,
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist,
(4) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property,
and
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs, and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the
notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be
completed. Said notice shall further adv'1se that, should the violator fail to remediate or
the Town or a contractor designated by the Stormwater Administrator/ Illicit Discharge
Officer will perform the restore, within the established deadline, the work and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
{B) Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance
Illicit discharges and illicit connections which exist within the Hudson Town Limits and
Extra-territorial Jurisdiction are hereby found, deemed, and declared to be dangerous or
prejudiced to the public health or public safety and are found, deemed, and declared to
be public nuisances and may be summarily abated or restored by the Town at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the Town.
43
