CODE OF THE CITY OF HIGH POINT, NORTH CAROLINA 
  
The Charter and the
General Ordinances of the City 
  
Ordained and Published 
By Order of the 
City Council 
  
 
OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
CITY OF HIGH POINT, NORTH CAROLINA 
MAYOR 
William S. Bencini, Jr. 
____________ 
CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS 
Cynthia Y. Davis 
James C. Davis 
Jason P. Ewing 
Jeffrey J. Golden 
Alyce E. Hill 
Alexander B. Latimer, IV 
Jay W. Wagner 
Christopher Williams 
____________ 
CITY CLERK 
Lisa B. Vierling 
____________ 
CITY MANAGER 
Gregory W. Demko 
____________ 
CITY ATTORNEY 
JoAnne L. Carlyle 
PREFACE 
This volume is a republication of the Charter and Code of Ordinances of High Point, North Carolina, including all general and permanent ordinances enacted by the City Council through Ordinance No. 7208/16-28, adopted May 16, 2016. The former volume was supplemented 27 times through Ordinance No. 7121/15-04, adopted February 2, 2015. Notations indicating supplemented pages have been deleted. 
The Code consists of: 
The Charter and all local acts which are not a part of the Charter document. 
State Laws which govern the organization and procedure of the municipal governing body. These laws control in situations to which they apply unless the Charter provides otherwise; and 
The Code of Ordinances, which includes citations referring to the official source and date of original ordinances, and those without citations representing new ordinances. 
This Code is designed to serve as a compilation of ordinances and as a reliable reference guide. The titles, chapters and articles of the Code follow in logical order. The table of contents, the sectional analysis at the beginning of each chapter and the indices provide sufficient points of reference for all elements of the Code. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this republication is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER LAWS INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of three component parts separated by dashes, the first figure referring to the title number, the second referring to the chapter number, and the third figure referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Title 2, Chapter 3 is numbered 2-3-1 and the fourth section of Title 3, Chapter 1 is 3-1-4. 
Index 
The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he/she is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The republication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Ms. Lisa Vierling, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
AN ORDINANCE REVISING, CONSOLIDATING, ELABORATING
AND ADDING TO THE ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF HIGH POINT, NORTH CAROLINA 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HIGH POINT THAT: 
Section 1. The following compilation of ordinances, set out immediately after the Charter, Related Local Laws and Related State Laws portions of this volume and designated as Part II, Titles 1 through 12 inclusive, is hereby adopted as the official Code of Ordinances of the City of High Point, North Carolina. 
Section 2. (a) All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the city enacted on or before April 20, 1982 and not included within this code, or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as provided in section 3. 
(b)  To the extent that ordinances or portions of ordinances included within this code are the same in substance as ordinances in effect prior to the adoption of this code it is intended that they be treated as continuations and not as new enactments or amendments, in order that all rights and liabilities that have accrued are preserved and may be enforced. 
Section 3. This code of ordinances contains all of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of High Point, but it does not contain, and is not intended to affect, the following classes of ordinances or actions having the effect of ordinances: 
1.  Annexation ordinances; 
2.  Budget ordinances or amendments thereto; 
3.  Bond orders and ordinances; 
4.  Ordinances granting a franchise; 
5.  Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the exercise of the power of eminent domain; 
6.  Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the levy of special assessments; 
7.  Ordinances amending the charter of the City of High Point, pursuant to article 5, part 4 of chapter 160A, General Statutes of North Carolina; 
8.  Ordinances, resolutions or orders naming, renaming or closing a street; 
9.  Ordinances or resolutions establishing or amending the boundaries of wards or election districts; 
10.  Ordinances establishing or amending the boundaries of zoning districts; 
11.  Resolutions of any type; 
12.  Ordinances establishing or amending a position, classification and pay plan for municipal employees; and 
13.  Ordinances of any type which are not normally or customarily codified, including but not limited to, ordinances of limited interest or ordinances of a transitory nature. 
Section 4. No provision of this ordinance is intended, nor shall be construed, to affect in any way any rights or interests (whether public or private): 
(a)  Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provision of an ordinance repealed by the adoption of this code. 
(b)  Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in reliance upon, action heretofore taken pursuant to or within the scope of any ordinance repealed by the adoption of this code. 
Section 5. No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal, judicial or administrative or otherwise) pending on the effective date of this ordinance by or against the City of High Point or any of its departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this code. 
Section 6. If any portion of this code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this code which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this code are declared to be severable. 
Section 7. Ordinances which are adopted after the cut-off date specified in section 2 shall be forwarded to the North Carolina League of Municipalities for codification into this volume. The League is hereby authorized to make all necessary editorial changes to codify such ordinances appropriately. 
Section 8. A copy of this code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and it shall be the express duty of the clerk, or someone authorized by the clerk, to insert in their designated places all duly adopted amendments to this code, and to extract from this code all provisions which may be from time to time duly repealed. A copy of this code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it during reasonable time, under the supervision of the city clerk. 
Section 9. It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this code, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the ordinances of the City of High Point to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in section 14-4 of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
Section 10. This ordinance, and the code of ordinances which it adopts, shall be full force and effect from and after the 20th day of April, 1982. 
	City of High Point 
	By:  s/ Robert O. Wells       
Mayor 
ATTEST: 	
s/ Patricia Paris Simmons       
City Clerk 	
  
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The City's Charter is derived from Chapter 501, Session Laws of 1979, May 1, 1979. The charter is reproduced herein as it was enacted, including arrangement and section numbers and catchlines. Subsequent amendments to the charter will be indicated by a history note at the end of each amended section. The absence of such a note indicates that the section has not been amended. Severability, repealer and effective date provisions have been omitted.  Sections 9 and 10 of the act creating a new charter for the City of High Point contain amendments to the General Statutes of North Carolina as they concern the city. The text of those sections has been included in the "Related Local Laws" portion of this code immediately following the charter. Other acts relating to the city but not amendatory of the charter are also codified in that part of the code.  A Local Acts Disposition Table has been included following the local law codification, setting out in chronological order, the date and chapter number of the act, the subject matter and the acts disposition in this volume. 
 
ARTICLE I - Incorporation, Powers and Boundaries 
 
Sec. 1.1. - Incorporation. 
The City of High Point, North Carolina lying in the counties of Guilford, Randolph and Davidson, and the inhabitants thereof, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate, under the name and style of the City of High Point.  
Sec. 1.2. - Powers. 
The City of High Point shall have and may exercise all of the powers, duties, rights, privileges and immunities, which are now or hereafter may be conferred, either expressly or by implication, upon the City of High Point specifically or upon municipal corporations generally, by this charter, by the State Constitution, or by general or special statute. Provided further that the City of High Point shall be authorized to participate in all Federal programs not contrary to the Constitution of the State of North Carolina and not explicitly denied to municipalities by the General Statutes.  
Sec. 1.3. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of High Point shall be those existing at the time of the ratification of this charter, as the same are set forth on the official map and written description of the city, and as the same may be altered from time to time in accordance with law. The official map and written description of the city, showing the current city boundaries, shall be maintained permanently in the office of the city clerk, and shall be available for public inspection. Upon alteration of the corporate limits pursuant to law, the council shall cause to be made the appropriate changes to the official map and written description.  
Sec. 1.4. - Form of government. 
The government of the city provided by this charter shall be the Council-Manager Form of Government, as provided by Part 2, Article 7, Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.  
ARTICLE II - Mayor and Council 
 
Sec. 2.1. - Governing body. 
The mayor and council shall be the governing body of the city. On behalf of the City, and in conformity with applicable laws, the mayor and council shall provide for the exercise of all municipal powers, and shall be charged with the general government of the city.  
Sec. 2.2. - Council; number; terms of office. 
The council shall be composed of eight (8) members, each of whom shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city to serve for a term of two (2) years in the manner provided by Article III of this charter and the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(S.L. 1991, Ch. 40, § 1; Ord. No. 00-100, § 1, 8-17-00)  
Sec. 2.3. - Mayor; term of office; duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city to serve for a term of two (2) years, in the manner provided by Article III of this charter. 
(b)  The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall have the power to vote on all questions before the council. The mayor shall be the official head and spokesman of the city in all acts of ceremony and shall represent the city in matters of governmental affairs.  
Sec. 2.4. - Mayor pro tempore. 
At its organizational meeting, the council shall elect from among its membership a mayor pro tempore to exercise the functions of mayor whenever the mayor is absent, disabled or unable to discharge the duties of the office of mayor. 
(S.L. 1987, c. 223, § 1; H.B. 1028, § 1(a), 5-19-05)  
Sec. 2.5. - Organization; meetings; rules; quorum; voting. 
(a)  The council shall meet for organization in the council chamber on the date and at the time of the first regular meeting in December after the results of the election have been certified, or if such day is a legal holiday, on the next following day not a legal holiday. At that meeting, the mayor and each member of the council shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed in Article VI, Sec. 7, of the Constitution of North Carolina. 
(b)  The council shall by ordinance adopt and publish rules to govern its proceedings and transaction of business, including the time and place of holding regular meetings. 
(c)  Any five (5) council members, or any four (4) council members and the mayor shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business in any matter before the council. A majority vote of the quorum shall control, except that in the matter of ordinances and resolutions a majority of the members of the council shall be required for passage of an ordinance or resolution.  
ARTICLE III - Elections 
 
Sec. 3.1. - Method of election. 
Beginning with the 2019 election, regular municipal elections shall be held in the city every four years in odd-numbered years, and shall be conducted in accordance with state law governing municipal elections. The mayor and members of the council shall be elected by the nonpartisan primary and election method provided in the G.S. 163A-1618. 
(Ord. No. 86-7, § 2, 4-14-86; S.L. 2006-171, § 2(a), 7-27-06; H.B. 468, § 1, 7-11-13; Ord. No. 7416/18-45 , 5-21-18)  
Secs. 3.2—3.7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— House Bill 1028, § 1(b), adopted May 19, 2005, repealed §§ 3.2—3.7 of article III, being Chapter 501 of the 1979 Session Laws, as amended, which pertained to elections, ward boundaries, candidates, voters, votes, and voting and derived from Ord. No. 86-7, adopted April 14, 1986; and Ord. No. 86-54, adopted Nov. 20, 1986.  
ARTICLE IV - Administration  
CHAPTER 1 - City Manager 
 
Sec. 4.1. - Appointment; qualifications; term and compensation. 
(a)  The council shall appoint the city manager who shall be the administrative head of the city government. He shall be chosen by the city council without regard to his political opinions and solely upon the basis of his character, training, experience and administrative qualifications and need not be a resident of the city or state when appointed. No member of the council, during the term for which elected, shall be appointed as city manager. The city manager shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by the city council. He shall give such bond as may be required by the council. He shall be appointed for an indefinite period and hold office during the pleasure of the council.  
Sec. 4.2. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall: 
(1)  Be administrative head of the city government; shall, except as specifically otherwise provided for herein, subject to the approval of the city council, organize the administrative functions and affairs of the city into various departments; and through such departments efficiently administer the functions and affairs of the city as provided for in this section or as authorized by law or by the city council; 
(2)  See that within the jurisdiction of the city the laws of the state and the ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the council are faithfully executed; 
(3)  Attend all meetings of the council with the right to take part in the discussion but with no vote, and recommend for adoption such measures as he shall deem expedient; 
(4)  Make reports to the council from time to time upon the affairs of the city, and keep the council fully informed and advised of the city's financial condition and its present and future financial needs; 
(5)  Have power and authority, pending action by the council to revoke licenses issued subject to revocation; 
(6)  Have the sole power to appoint and remove all heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the city, unless otherwise provided in this charter.  
Sec. 4.3. - Other duties and procedures. 
(a)  Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service of the city through the city manager. No member of the council shall give orders to or attempt to influence the action of any subordinate of the city manager either publicly or privately. Where this charter gives to the city manager the power to appoint or to employ persons in the administrative service of the city, neither the council nor any of its members shall attempt to in any manner influence the city manager in the appointment or employment of any such person or persons, but the city manager shall be left free to exercise his own judgment in appointing such person or persons and he shall have the power to suspend and dismiss any person appointed and his action in every case shall be final. 
(b)  The city manager shall, except when clearly inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, exercise supervision and control over all departments and divisions of the city. He shall prepare and submit to the city council for its consideration and action a proposed annual budget and shall keep the council at all times advised as to the conditions and efficiency of the various departments of the city under his direction and control and of the needs and condition of the city. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the council. 
(c)  The city manager shall not engage in electioneering nor take an active part in political campaigns nor attempt to influence the result of State, county or city elections except by exercising his right as a citizen to hold his own political views and to cast his own vote. Electioneering or improper political activities by the city manager or attempts to influence the results of election or primaries shall be cause for his immediate suspension or removal from office, either by the council or by any judge of the superior court having jurisdiction upon mandamus or other appropriate proceedings instituted by any taxpayer of said city.  
Sec. 4.4. - Authority to dispose of easements. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 12 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes, the council may authorize the city manager to dispose of or exchange any of the following property interests in easements when the easement is no longer needed by the city upon such terms as deemed appropriate by the council without obtaining council approval for each disposition: water, sewer, traffic control, drainage, access, sidewalk, greenway, landscape, or utility easements. 
(H.B. 1084 , § 1, 7-16-18)  
CHAPTER 2 - City Clerk 
 
Sec. 4.6. - Appointment; term; compensation. 
The council shall appoint a city clerk, who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The compensation of the city clerk shall be as fixed by the council. 
(S.L. 2014-38, H.B. 1207, § 1, 6-26-14) 
Editor's note— S.L. 2014-38, H.B. 1207, § 1, renumbered the former §§ 4.1 and 4.2 of Ch. 2 as §§ 4.6 and 4.7 as set out herein.  
Sec. 4.7. - Duties. 
The city clerk shall keep a journal of the proceedings of the council, maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city and perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the council or city manager may direct. 
(S.L. 2014-38, H.B. 1207, § 1, 6-26-14) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 4.6.  
CHAPTER 3 - City Attorney 
 
Sec. 4.10. - Appointment; term; compensation. 
The council shall appoint a city attorney who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The compensation of the city attorney shall be as fixed by the council. 
(S.L. 2014-38, H.B. 1207, § 2, 6-26-14)  
Sec. 4.11. - Duties. 
The city attorney shall act as the council's legal advisor and shall provide such other legal services to the city as prescribed by the council. 
(S.L. 2014-38, H.B. 1207, § 2, 6-26-14)  
ARTICLE VI - Alcoholic Beverage Control 
 
Sec. 6.1. - Membership; term of office; appointment; vacancy. 
The City of High Point Alcoholic Beverage Control Board shall be composed of a chairman and four (4) other members who shall be well known for their character, ability, and business acumen. The chairman and other members of the board shall serve for terms of three (3) years each on a staggered basis, with the term of one (1) member expiring each year except in those years when two members' terms will expire at the same time. All appointments to the board, including appointments to fill vacancies, shall be made by the Mayor and City Council of High Point. Compensation of the members of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board shall be fixed by the council. Any member appointed to the board must be a resident of the City of High Point and in the event any member, during the term of his appointment, shall move out of the corporate limits of the City of High Point it shall be the duty of the council to appoint a person to fill the vacancy. 
(S.L. 2006-90, 7-10-06)  
Sec. 6.2. - Powers and duties. 
The board shall have all the powers and duties imposed by State law on county boards of alcoholic control, shall be subject to the authority of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission to the same extent as are county alcoholic beverage control boards, and shall operate all city alcoholic beverage control stores in accordance with State laws regulating the operation of county alcoholic beverage control stores. The Council of the City of High Point shall, upon its request, have the right to review any action taken by said Alcoholic Beverage Control Board and to either approve or disapprove the action. 
(S.L. 2006-90, 7-10-06)  
Sec. 6.3. - Distribution of profit. 
The City of High Point Alcoholic Beverage Control Board shall at the end of each quarterly period following the establishment of alcoholic beverage control stores deduct the necessary expenses of the operation of such stores, and shall expend for law enforcement, education and rehabilitation purposes not less than five percent (5%) nor more than fifteen percent (15%) of the total profits, and shall retain a sufficient and proper working capital, the amount to be determined by the board; and the entire net profits derived from the operation of alcoholic beverage control stores in the City of High Point shall be paid as follows: 
a.  Twenty percent (20%) of the net profits shall be apportioned and paid into the General Fund of Guilford County. 
b.  Eighty percent (80%) of the net profits shall be paid to the city collector of the City of High Point and may be used by the City of High Point for any public purposes. 
(S.L. 1981, c. 290, § 1; S.L. 2006-90, 7-10-06)  
ARTICLE VII - Eminent Domain 
 
Sec. 7.1. - Condemnation procedure; interest acquired. 
The exercise of eminent domain, the procedure for its exercise, and the authority to acquire property is as described by general law. 
(S.L. 1993, c. 275, § 1)  
Sec. 7.2. - Effort to purchase not required. 
It shall not be necessary to the condemnation by the city of any land or interest therein, whether pursuant to this article or otherwise, that the city shall have attempted to acquire the needed land by grant or purchase prior to the commencement of condemnation proceedings.  
Sec. 7.3. - Resolution proposing condemnation. 
(a)  When any land required by the city for any purpose allowed by this charter or the general law of the State is proposed to be condemned under the specific provisions of this charter, the council shall adopt a resolution which shall contain substantially the following provisions: 
(1)  a description of the land proposed to be condemned in fee, or the interest or easement proposed to be condemned. 
(2)  if there is any building or other property situated wholly or partly upon the land to be condemned, the determination of the city council as to whether the owner shall be allowed to remove such property or whether the same shall be condemned; 
(3)  a statement of the purpose for which the land or easement is proposed to be condemned; 
(4)  the name and address of the owner or owners of the land and of any other person or persons interested therein whom it is necessary to make a party to the proceeding; 
(5)  the name of a disinterested freeholder of the city appointed as appraiser by the council; 
(6)  a notice that the owner or owners of the land, or interest therein, or a majority in interest of the owners, may, within five (5) days after service of the resolution upon all of them, appoint one (1) appraiser (who shall be a disinterested freeholder of the city) to represent them, the name of which appraiser shall be reported in writing to the city clerk within said five (5) days; 
(7)  a notice that the appraiser appointed by the city and the appraiser appointed by the owner or owners, or if the owner or owners fails to appoint, then the two (2) appraisers appointed by the city, shall appoint a third appraiser, and that the three thus appointed shall constitute a board of appraisers, whose duty it shall be to determine the damages and benefits which will result from the condemnation of said land or easement or interest therein; 
(8)  a notice of the time fixed for the first meeting of the appraisers, and that the meeting will be held upon the premises to be condemned. 
(b)  It shall not be necessary to institute separate condemnation proceedings against the several owners of tracts or parcels of land affected by proposed local improvements.  
Sec. 7.4. - Service of resolution proposing condemnation. 
A copy of the resolution proposing condemnation shall be personally served upon each of the owners of the land proposed to be condemned; provided, that if the resolution cannot be personally served upon any of the owners, then it may be served by publication once a week for two (2) successive weeks in some newspaper published in the city which is qualified to carry legal notices, or, if there be no such newspaper, by posting in three (3) public places in the city.  
Sec. 7.5. - Failure of owners to appoint appraiser. 
If within five (5) days after service of the resolution upon all of the owners, they or a majority in interest of them fail to appoint an appraiser and to report his name to the city clerk, the council shall appoint a disinterested freeholder of the city to represent them.  
Sec. 7.6. - Appointment of third appraiser; oath. 
The appraiser appointed by the council, and the appraiser appointed by the owner or owners, or if the owner or owners fail to appoint, then the two (2) appraisers appointed by the council, shall appoint a third appraiser, who shall be a disinterested freeholder of the city, and shall report his name to the city clerk. Each appraiser shall take an oath or affirmation that he will fairly and impartially discharge his duties as an appraiser.  
Sec. 7.7. - First meeting of appraisers. 
At the time fixed by the resolution of condemnation, the appraisers shall meet on the premises proposed to be condemned. If for any reason a meeting cannot be held at the time fixed by the council, then a meeting shall be held at another time fixed by the appraisers, in which case notice of the time and place of the meeting shall be personally served upon each of the owners of the land or easement proposed to be condemned, or if the notice cannot be personally served, it may be served by publication once a week for two (2) successive weeks in some newspaper published in the city which is qualified to carry legal notices, or if there be no such newspaper, by posting in three (3) public places in the city. The notice, whether given personally, by publication, or by posting, shall be served not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. At the first meeting the appraisers shall view the premises affected by the proposed condemnation; and shall hear, but need not reduce to writing, any evidence as to damages and benefits that will result from the proposed condemnation presented by the owners or by the city. The appraisers may make their report at or after the hearing or they may, in their discretion, hold subsequent meetings.  
Sec. 7.8. - Subsequent meetings; when notice required. 
Subsequent meetings of the appraisers shall be held at such times and places as may be determined by them. Of such meetings no notice need be given either to the owners or to the city unless the meetings are to be public and for the purpose of hearing evidence. If held for such purpose, then unless the meeting is held at a time and place to which a former meeting of which the parties had lawful notice was adjourned, notice of the meeting shall be personally served upon all parties, or, if such notice cannot be personally served, it may be served by publication once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper published in the city which is qualified to carry legal notices, or, if there be no such newspaper, by posting in three (3) public places in the city. The notice shall be served or publication or posting thereof completed not less than five (5) days prior to the time fixed for the meeting.  
Sec. 7.9. - Determination of damages and benefits; report. 
In determining the compensation to be paid by the city for the land or easement condemned, the appraisers shall take into consideration both the loss or damage which will result to the owners from the condemnation of the land or easement and the benefits that will result to any remainder of such land from the improvement for which the land or easement is to be condemned, the benefits to include both benefits or advantages special to the land and the benefits or advantages to the land in common with other lands affected by the improvement. The appraisers shall also take into consideration the value of any building or other property situated on the land proposed to be condemned if the owner is to be allowed to remove the building or other property, and the value thereof shall not be included in the compensation award. Having determined damages and benefits, the appraisers shall make their report to the council, in which report the appraisers shall show separately the amount of damages, the amount of benefits, and the amount which shall be paid by the city if it finally condemns the land or easement. In the event the property condemned is subject to a recorded lease or leases, the appraisers shall apportion the award between or among the person or persons owning the fee or fees and the person or persons owning the leasehold interest or interests; but in no event shall the total of the amounts so apportioned exceed the value of the property were it not subject to a recorded lease or leases. The report shall be sufficient if it is concurred in by two (2) of three (3) appraisers. In the event that no two (2) of the three (3) appraisers can agree upon an appraisal, three (3) new appraisers may be appointed in the same manner as the original appraisers, and the new appraisal board shall follow the same procedure as required of the original appraisal board.  
Sec. 7.10. - Action of council on report. 
Within 30 days after the report of the appraisers is submitted to the council, the council shall determine what action it will take thereon. If the council determines to abandon the proposed condemnation, it shall adopt a resolution to the effect; but the abandonment of the condemnation shall not prevent the council from thereafter instituting a proceeding to condemn the same land or easement. If the council determines to condemn the land or easement, it shall adopt a resolution which shall contain substantially the following: 
(1)  a recital that a board of appraisers has been appointed to determine the compensation to be paid for the land or easement, as provided by this charter, and that the appraisers have submitted their report to the council; 
(2)  a statement of the amount of damages and benefits as fixed by the appraisers and of the compensation to be paid by the city for the land or easement condemned as fixed by the appraisers. 
(3)  the determination of the council as to the condemnation of the land or easement; 
(4)  a description of the land condemned in fee or of the easement condemned; 
(5)  a statement of the purpose for which the land or easement is condemned; 
(6)  the name of the owner or owners of the land and of other persons interested therein who were made parties to the proceeding; 
(7)  the determination of the council as to the time when the city will take possession of the land or easement condemned, and a direction that such premises shall be vacated by such time, and, in case the owner is allowed to remove any building or part thereof or any other property on the premises, a direction that such property shall be removed before said date and that if the owner fails to remove the same within said time, the council will have the same removed and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon the remainder of the property.  
Sec. 7.11. - Vesting of title in city. 
The adoption by the city council of a final resolution of condemnation, as provided in the preceding section, shall have the effect of a judgment against the City of High Point for the amount of compensation fixed by the appraisers and shall vest in the city title to the land or easement condemned.  
Sec. 7.12. - Appeal to superior court. 
If upon the adoption by the council of a final resolution of condemnation, either the owner of the land or easement condemned or the city council itself is dissatisfied with the amount of the compensation to be paid for such land or easement as fixed by the appraisers, such owner or the city or both may, within 10 days from the date of adoption of such resolution, appeal to the General Court of Justice, High Point Superior Court Division. The party or parties appealing shall, within 10 days, give notice of appeal to the other party by personal service if practicable and, if not, by publication of a notice one (1) time in a newspaper published in the city which is qualified to carry legal notices. The appeal or appeals shall not interfere with the vesting in the city of the title to the land or easement condemned or hinder the city in any way from proceeding with the improvements for which such land or easement was condemned, except that if the land or interest therein is owned by another public or quasi-public body, or by a railroad or public utility company, the vesting of title in the city shall not become effective until the court has rendered final judgment on the question of whether the condemnation by the city is in the public interest, and has determined the amount of compensation to be awarded for the condemnation, in which case the court may, in its discretion, reduce the amount of land or interest therein which it shall allow to be condemned.  
Sec. 7.13. - Record upon appeal. 
Upon an appeal taken by either party, the city clerk shall certify a copy of the record in the condemnation proceeding to the General Court of Justice, High Point Superior Court Division, and such appeal shall be tried as other actions at law. The record upon appeal shall be composed of the preliminary resolution of condemnation, the oath of appraisers, the report of appraisers, the final resolution of condemnation, and the notice or notices of appeal. The record upon appeal, or any part thereof, shall be competent as evidence upon the trial of an appeal.  
Sec. 7.14. - Condemnation before determination of compensation. 
When, in the judgment of the council, the public interest requires that the city enter into immediate possession of any land, it shall adopt a resolution stating such necessity and the reason therefor, and condemning the required land or easement, and providing for the determination of the compensation to be paid by the city for the land or easement. The procedure therefor with respect to determination of such compensation shall follow as closely as practicable the provisions of this article, or of the provisions of Article 11, Chapter 160A of the General Laws of North Carolina concerning `Eminent Domain.' This section shall not apply to land, or interests therein, owned by another public or quasi-public body, or railroad or public utility company.  
Sec. 7.15. - Registration of condemnation proceedings. 
In any case where any land or any easement therein has been or may hereafter be condemned by the council, a copy of so much of the condemnation proceedings as may be necessary to show the land or easement therein condemned and the condemnation thereof shall be certified by the city clerk and the same, upon being probated by the Clerk of the Superior Court, or other person authorized by law to probate instruments for registration, shall be registered in the office of the Register of Deeds of Guilford County.  
Sec. 7.16. - Sale or other disposition of land condemned. 
When any land condemned in fee by the city is no longer needed for the purpose for which it was condemned, the same may be used by the city for any other public purpose or may be sold or otherwise disposed of.  
Sec. 7.17. - Removal by city of structures on condemned land; lien. 
When property upon which any building or other structure is wholly or partly located is condemned by the city under the provisions of this charter or any other law, and the owner is allowed to remove such building or structure or part thereof, the council may, after the report of the appraisers has been made, name the time within which the owner may remove the building or structure, or part thereof, and if the owner fails to remove the same within said time, the council may remove the same and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon the remainder of said land, or such cost may be recovered by the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
Sec. 7.18. - Procedure not exclusive. 
The condemnation procedure set forth in this article shall not be exclusive, but shall be in addition to any other procedure provided by law. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply with regard to properties owned by public service corporations as defined in G.S. 160A-243(c) unless the exercise of such power of eminent domain is either consented to by the owner of the property, to be acquired by the city or, otherwise, first adjudicated after notice and a hearing that such acquisition will not prevent or unreasonably impair the continued devotion to the public use of such properties and the operation by such public service corporation.  
ARTICLE VIII - Local Improvements 
 
Sec. 8.1. - General purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to provide a method whereby one or more local improvements of the kind specified in section 8.4 of this article and the assessments therefor may be made on or in one (1) or more streets in a single proceeding by the city.  
Sec. 8.2. - Procedure herein prescribed complete but not exclusive. 
This article is intended to prescribe the complete procedure for the making of those local improvements referred to in the article and for assessing and collecting such portion of the cost thereof as is hereinafter provided; but the method hereby provided is not intended to be exclusive, and the city may proceed with respect to such local improvements either as prescribed by this article or as is now or may hereafter be prescribed by the charter of the city or by other general laws of the State.  
Sec. 8.3. - Definition of terms. 
In this article certain words and phrases will be used with the following meaning, unless some other meaning is plainly intended: 
(1)  The word city shall mean the City of High Point, North Carolina. 
(2)  Governing body means the City Council of the City of High Point. 
(3)  A local improvement is an improvement defined by this article and made under the provisions hereof. 
(4)  A street is a public way embracing a street, boulevard, avenue, lane, alley, parkway, court and terrace, but not embracing sidewalks. 
(5)  A sidewalk is a path for pedestrians along a street. 
(6)  A storm sewer is a conduit above or below ground for the passage of storm water, and may embrace a pumping station and outlet where deemed necessary; and may also embrace the building of culverts over or the enclosing of streams where necessary or advisable to carry off storm water. 
(7)  A sanitary sewer is an underground conduit for the passage of sewage, and may embrace a pumping station and outlet where deemed necessary. 
(8)  A water main is a pipe for the passage of city water for public hydrants and private and public use and consumption. 
(9)  A lateral is a pipe connecting a storm or sanitary sewer or water main with the line of adjacent property or the curb line, as the governing body may prescribe, being either a sewer lateral or a water lateral, but does not include a building connection, that is a pipe extending from a lateral at the property line or curb line to the house or plumbing fixtures on the property to be served. 
(10)  The word sewer includes both sanitary and storm sewers unless a contrary intention is shown.  
Sec. 8.4. - Local improvements authorized. 
Improvements authorized to be made under the provisions of this article are divided into eight (8) classes, as follows: 
(1)  Water main improvements, which include the laying or construction of water mains, the relaying where necessary of parts of paved streets and sidewalks torn up or damaged incident to the laying or construction of such mains, and in any case where the improvement is made upon petition and the petition so requests, or in any case where the improvement is made without petition and the governing body so directs, the laying of water laterals. 
(2)  Storm sewer improvements, which include the laying or construction of storm sewers, the relaying, where necessary, of parts of paved streets and sidewalks torn up or damaged incident to the laying or construction of such sewers, and in any case where the improvement is made upon petition and the petition so requests, or in any case where the improvement is made without petition and the governing body so directs, the laying of storm sewer laterals. 
(3)  Sanitary sewer improvements, which include the laying or construction of sanitary sewers, the relaying, where necessary, of parts of streets and sidewalks torn up or damaged incident to the laying or construction of such sewers, and in any case where the improvement is made upon petition and the petition so requests, or in any case where the improvement is made without petition and the governing body so directs, the laying of sanitary sewer laterals. 
(4)  Street paving improvements, which include the grading, regrading, paving, repaving, macadamizing and remacadamizing of streets, with necessary drainage, sewer inlets, manholes and catch basins and the construction or reconstruction of retaining walls made necessary by any change of grade incident to such improvement, and in any case where the improvement is made upon petition if the petition so requests, or in any case where the improvement is made without petition if the governing body so directs, it may include the construction or reconstruction of curbs, gutters and drains. 
(5)  Sidewalk improvements, which include the grading, regrading, construction and reconstruction of paved or otherwise improved sidewalks, the construction or reconstruction of retaining walls made necessary by and incident to such improvement, and in any case where the improvement is made upon petition, if the petition so requests, or in any case where the improvement is made without petition if the governing body so directs, it may include the construction or reconstruction of curbs, gutters and drains. 
(6)  Grass plot improvements, which include the grading and planting of grass plots in a street or along one (1) or both sides of a street. 
(7)  Lighting improvements, which include the construction of street lighting systems, consisting of ornamental lights or of lights of greater strength, or lights placed at more frequent intervals, or both, than is ordinarily provided by the city for streets of such character at public expense. 
(8)  Water front improvements, which embrace the construction of boardwalks, bulkheads, seawalls and other retaining walls along a bay, river, canal or lake, with necessary fills and dredging, and may embrace the acquisition by purchase, condemnation or otherwise of land, rights and easements therefor.  
Sec. 8.5. - Power to make local improvements embraced in this article. 
The power of the city to make the local improvements embraced in this article shall be exercised only upon petition as set out in section 8.7 of this article, except in those cases covered by section 8.8 of this article in which cases such power may be exercised without petition.  
Sec. 8.6. - Petition may embrace any one or more local improvements to which this article is applicable. 
Any petition to the governing body of the city for the making of the local improvements authorized by this article may embrace any one (1) or more of the classes of local improvements named in section 8.4, and may embrace improvements to be made on or in one (1) or more streets; provided, any improvements to be made on or in more than one (1) street shall be practically uniform in cost and kind throughout the improvement.  
Sec. 8.7. - The petition; certificate of sufficiency of petition. 
The petition for any one (1) or more of such local improvements shall designate by a general description the improvement or improvements proposed, and shall request that the same be made in conformity with the provisions of this article and that such proportion of the cost of each of such improvements as may be specified in the petition be specially assessed against the property abutting on the street or streets or part thereof in which or on which such improvements are proposed to be made. The petition shall be signed by at least a majority in number of the owners, which majority must own at least a majority of all the lineal feet of frontage, of the lands abutting upon the street or streets or part of a street or streets proposed to be improved, excluding street intersections, and for the purpose of the petition, all the owners of undivided interests in any land shall be deemed and treated as one (1) person and such land shall be sufficiently signed for when the petition is signed by the owner or owners of a majority in amount of such undivided interests; provided, that for the purpose of this section the word `owners' shall be considered to mean the owners of any life estate, of an estate by entirety, or of the estate of inheritance, and shall not include mortgagees, trustees of a naked trust, trustees under deeds of trust to secure the payment of money, lienholders, or persons having inchoate rights of curtesy or dower. Upon the filing of such petition with the city, the clerk, or other person designated by the governing body thereof, shall investigate the sufficiency of the petition, and if it is found to be sufficient, he shall certify the same to the governing body.  
Sec. 8.8. - When petition necessary. 
(a)  Whenever in the judgment of the governing body of the city any street or part of a street is unsafe and dangerous, or whenever the paving or repaving of any street or part thereof is necessary in order to connect streets already paved, or whenever the paving of any street is necessary in order to connect any paved portion of the city's streets with a paved highway outside the corporate limits of the city, or whenever the paving of any street or part thereof is necessary to provide a paved approach to any railroad underpass or overpass or other bridge, or whenever any paved street or part thereof has been widened, if in such case, in the opinion of the governing body, public interest requires that said improvement be made, and if, in the opinion of the governing body, the abutting property will be benefited by said improvement to the extent of the part of the cost thereof to be assessed against such abutting property, the governing body may without petition of the property owners order the making of such improvement. Whenever any such improvement is ordered made by authority of this section, the ordering of the paving of any street or part thereof may include the necessary water main and sewer improvements and the necessary water and sewer laterals, and it may, but need not, include the construction of sidewalks on one (1) or both sides of the street. 
(b)  Whenever in the opinion of the governing body the best interests of the city will be served, and it will be more economical and the interests of the property owners will best be served by constructing either water or sanitary sewer mains, or both, between the streets rather than in a street, the petition may provide therefor, or in the event the water and sanitary sewer mains may be constructed in a street without petition, they may be constructed between streets without petition, and the cost of the construction of such water or sewer mains and laterals shall be assessed according to the street frontage in the same manner and to the same extent that it would be assessed if the improvements were constructed in a street; provided that the city shall provide the rights-of-way for construction and maintenance of such mains at its own expense and without assessing the costs thereof.  
Sec. 8.9. - Preliminary resolution. 
Upon the finding by the governing body that the petition for a local improvement or improvements is sufficient, or when it is proposed to make without petition any improvement or improvements authorized to be made without petition by section 8.8 of this article, the governing body shall adopt a resolution which shall contain substantially the following: 
(1)  that a sufficient petition has been filed for the making of the improvement or improvements; or, if it is proposed to make the improvement or improvements without petition, a statement of the reasons proposed for the making thereof; 
(2)  a brief description of the proposed improvement or improvements; 
(3)  the proportion of the cost of the improvement or improvements to be specially assessed and the terms of payment; 
(4)  a notice of the time and place, when and where a public hearing will be held on the proposed improvement or improvements. (The time fixed for such public hearing shall be such as to follow the notice being given thereof not less than 10 days prior thereto.); 
(5)  a notice that all objections to the legality of the making of the proposed improvement or improvements shall be made in writing, signed in person or by attorney, and filed with the city clerk of the city at or before the time of such hearing, and that any such objections not so made will be waived. 
The resolution shall be published one (1) time in a newspaper published in the city, or if there be no such newspaper, such resolution shall be posted in three (3) public places in the city for at least five (5) days, the date of publication or posting of the resolution to be not less than 10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing.  
Sec. 8.10. - Public hearing on preliminary resolution. 
At the time for the public hearing, or at some subsequent time to which such hearing shall be adjourned, the governing body shall consider such objections to the legality of the making of the improvement or improvements as have been made in compliance with subsection (5) of the preceding section, together with such objections as may be made to the policy or expediency of the making of the improvement or improvements; and the governing body shall thereafter determine whether it will order the making of said improvement or improvements. Any objection against the legality of the making of the improvement or improvements not made in writing, signed in person or by attorney, and filed with the city clerk of the city at or before the time or adjourned time of such hearings shall be considered as waived; and if any such objection shall be made and shall not be sustained by the governing body, the adoption of the resolution ordering the making of the improvement or improvements as provided in the next following section, shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented, unless within 10 days after the adoption of such resolution proper steps shall be taken in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief.  
Sec. 8.11. - Contents of resolution ordering improvement; publication. 
After such public hearing, if the governing body determines to make the improvement or improvements proposed, the governing body shall adopt a resolution which shall contain: 
(1)  if the improvement or improvements are to be made by virtue of a petition, a finding by the governing body as to the sufficiency of the petition. (The finding of the governing body as to the sufficiency of the petition shall be final and conclusive.) If the improvement or improvements are to be made without petition by virtue of the authority contained in section 8.8 of this article, a finding by the governing body of such facts as are required by said section in order to authorize said governing body to order such improvement or improvements made without petition; 
(2)  a general description of the improvement or improvements to be made and the designation of the street or streets or parts thereof where the work is to be done; 
(3)  if the improvement directed to be made is the paving of a street or part thereof wherein a street railway or railroad company has tracks, a direction that said company pave that part of the street occupied by its tracks, such part to include the space between the tracks, the rails of the tracks and 18 inches in width outside such tracks, with such material and in such manner as the governing body may prescribe, and that unless such paving shall be completed on or before a day specified in the resolution, the governing body will cause the same to be done; provided, however, that where any such company shall occupy such street or streets under a franchise or contract which otherwise provides, such franchise or contract shall not be affected by this section, except insofar as may be consistent with the provisions of such franchise or contract; 
(4)  if the improvement directed to be made includes the construction of water mains or sewers, and in order to provide such mains or sewers in the street or streets to be improved it is necessary to extend the same beyond the limits of such street or streets, the resolution shall contain a provision for the necessary extension of such mains or sewers and a further provision that the cost of such extension shall eventually be assessed against the lots or parcels of land abutting on the street or streets in which such extensions are made but that such assessment shall not be made until such time as the governing body shall thereafter determine; 
(5)  if the improvement directed to be made is the paving of a street or part thereof, or the construction of sidewalks, the resolution may, but need not, contain a direction that the owner of each lot abutting on the part of the street to be improved, connect his lot by means of laterals with water mains, gas or sewer pipes, or any one (1) or more thereof, located in the street adjacent to his premises in accordance with the requirements of the city governing the laying of such laterals, and that unless such owners cause such laterals to be laid on or before a date specified in the resolution, such date to be not less than 30 days after the date of the resolution, the governing body will cause the same to be laid; 
(6)  a designation of the proportion of the cost of the improvement or improvements to be assessed against abutting property, and of the number of equal annual installments in which assessments may be paid. Said resolution after its passage shall be published at least once in some newspaper published in the city, or if there be no such newspaper, such resolution shall be posted in three (3) public places in the city for at least five (5) days.  
Sec. 8.12. - Governing body to determine details of construction; power with respect to contracts for construction. 
The governing body of the city shall have power to determine the character and type of construction and of material to be used and to determine any other details of plan or construction necessary to be determined in making any of the improvements authorized by this article and to determine whether any work to be done by the city shall be done by contract or by forces of the city. Such governing body shall have power also subject to the provisions of section 8.11, subsection (5) of this article, to determine the number of water, sewer and gas laterals that shall be laid to any lot on any street to be improved. If said work or any part thereof is to be done by contract, the city may let all of said work in one (1) contract, or it may divide the same into several contracts, and may let said contracts separately. In any case where part of a street is required to be paved by a street railway or railroad company as provided in the next preceding section, the city may, in the discretion of its governing body, contract with said street railway or railroad company for said paving, or work incidental thereto, or both, and the cost of said paving or work incidental thereto, or both, as fixed by said contract shall constitute a lien on the franchises and other property of such street railway or railroad company.  
Sec. 8.13. - Governing body to determine cost of improvement. 
Upon the completion of the improvement or improvements to be made by said resolution, the governing body of the city shall ascertain the total cost thereof. In addition to other items of cost, there shall be included in such total cost the cost of all necessary legal services, the amount of damages paid or to be paid for injury to property by reason of any change of grade or drainage, including court costs and other expenses incidental to the determination of such damages, and the cost of retaining walls, sidewalks or fences built or altered in lieu of cash payment for such property damage, including the cost of moving or altering any building. In determining the cost of any street lighting improvement, the governing body shall ascertain the excess of cost of construction of said system of lighting over and above the cost of construction of such system of lighting as the city provides at public expense for streets of the same kind, and such excess shall be considered the cost thereof. In determining the cost of any of the improvements authorized by this act, the governing body shall include therein the interest paid on the cost of the improvement during the period of construction. The determination of the governing body as to the total cost of any improvement shall be conclusive.  
Sec. 8.14. - Preliminary assessment. 
Having determined such total cost, the governing body of the city shall thereupon make a preliminary assessment as hereinafter set out in this section. Such preliminary assessment shall, however, be advisory only, and shall be subject to the action of the governing body thereon as hereinafter set out in section 8.17 of this article. Said preliminary assessment shall be made on the basis hereinafter set out in this section for the classes of improvements indicated; provided, that if the petition, or the resolution, in those cases where the improvement was ordered made without petition, specified that there should be specially assessed against the abutting property a smaller proportion of the cost of any improvement than is hereinafter specified in this section, then there shall be assessed against such abutting property only such proportion of the cost of such improvement as was specified in said petition or in said resolution. 
(1)  Street paving. The total cost of any street paving improvement, exclusive of so much of said cost as is incurred at street intersections and the share of street railways or railroads, shall be specially assessed against the lots and parcels of land abutting directly on the street paved, according to the extent of their respective frontages thereon, by an equal rate per foot of such frontage. The cost of that part of the paving required to be borne by a street railway or railroad, which paving is done by the city after default by said street railway in making the same, as hereinbefore provided in this article, or which is done by the city by contract with such railway or railroad as provided in section 8.12 of this article, shall be assessed against such street railway or railroad, and such assessment shall be a lien on all of the franchises and property of such street railway or railroad company, and may be collected by sale of such property and franchises as is provided in section 8.23 of this article. 
(2)  Sidewalks. The total cost of constructing or reconstructing sidewalks shall be assessed against the lots and parcels of land abutting on that side of the street upon which such improvement is made, according to their respective frontages thereon by an equal rate per foot of such frontage, the lots within a block being deemed to abut upon a sidewalk although the latter extends beyond the lots to the curb line of an intersecting street. 
(3)  Water mains and sewers. In the case of water mains and storm and sanitary sewers, the cost of not exceeding an eight-inch water or sanitary sewer main and of not exceeding a thirty-inch storm sewer main and of such portion of said mains as lie within the limits of the street or streets, or part thereof, to be improved as provided in the petition or resolution ordering the same, shall be assessed against the abutting property. Such cost shall be assessed against the lots and parcels of land abutting on said street or streets or parts thereof, according to their respective frontages thereon by an equal rate per foot of such frontage; provided, that in case of a corner lot, used as a single lot, where there is a water main or sewer already laid on the intersecting street on which such lot abuts and by which such lot is or can be served, the city council may provide that no assessment shall be made against said lot for the second water main or sewer for any part of the frontage of said lot except that portion in excess of 150 feet or in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of the frontage of any side of said corner lot, whichever is greater, in a residential section of the city, or in excess of 100 feet if said lot is in a business section of the city, and in such case such portion of said cost as would otherwise be assessed against said lot shall be borne by the city; provided further, that if a water or sanitary sewer main in excess of eight (8) inches in size or a storm sewer main in excess of 30 inches in size is laid in said portion of said street or streets, then the cost of such water or sanitary sewer main in excess of the cost of an eight-inch main and the cost of such sewer main in excess of a thirty-inch main shall be borne by the city; provided further, that if the resolution ordered the construction of any pumping station, outfall, septic tank or disposal plant, no part of the cost of the same shall be specially assessed. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the right of the city to contract with any property owner or owners for the construction of any pumping station, outfall, septic tank or disposal plant or for the construction of water mains or storm or sanitary sewers and for the assessment of the cost thereof according to the terms of such contract. 
(4)  Water and sewer laterals. The entire cost of each water and sewer lateral required to be laid by the owner of the property for or in connection with which such lateral is laid, but laid by the city after default by such property owner in making the same as hereinbefore provided, shall be specially charged against the particular lot or parcel of land for or in connection with which it was made. 
(5)  Grass plots. The entire cost of grading or otherwise improving, or of planting, the grass plots in any street or part thereof, shall be assessed against the lots and parcels of land abutting on the street or part thereof wherein or whereon such improvements are made by an equal rate per front foot of such frontage; provided, that this subsection shall be construed to mean that when a grass plot in any street is graded or planted or otherwise improved, the cost thereof shall be assessed against all of the property abutting on the street within the block where such grass plot is located. 
(6)  Lighting improvements. The cost of any lighting improvement, such cost being determined as provided in section 8.13 of this article, shall be specially assessed against the lots and parcels of land abutting directly on the street or streets, or part thereof, where such improvement is made, according to their respective frontages thereon by an equal rate per foot of such frontage. 
(7)  Water front improvements. The cost of any water front improvement shall be specially assessed against the lots and parcels of land abutting on the improvement according to their respective frontages thereon by an equal rate per foot of such frontage. 
(S.L. 1987, H.B. 2296, § 1)  
Sec. 8.15. - Preliminary assessment roll. 
For the purpose of assessment, the governing body of the city shall cause to be prepared a preliminary assessment roll, on which shall be entered a brief description of each lot or parcel of land assessed, the amount assessed against each such lot as determined under the provisions of the next preceding section, and the name or names of the owner or owners of each such lot, as far as the same can be ascertained; provided, that a general plan map of the improvement or improvements on which is shown the frontage and location of each lot on the street improved, together with the amount assessed against each such lot and the name or names of the owner or owners thereof, as far as the same can be ascertained, shall be a sufficient assessment roll. If the resolution directed the making of more than one improvement, a single preliminary assessment roll for all of the improvements authorized by such resolution shall be sufficient, but the cost of each improvement to each lot affected shall be shown separately.  
Sec. 8.16. - Filing of preliminary assessment roll; publication of notice of hearing thereon. 
After such preliminary assessment roll has been completed, the governing body of the city shall cause it to be filed in the office of the clerk of the city for inspection by parties interested, and shall cause to be published one (1) time, in some newspaper published in the city, or if there be no such newspaper the governing body shall cause to be posted in three (3) public places in the city, a notice of the completion of the assessment roll, setting forth a description in general terms of the local improvement or improvements, and stating the time fixed for the meeting of the governing body for the hearing of objections to the special assessments, such meeting to be not earlier than 10 days after the first publication or from the date of posting of said notice. Any number of assessment rolls may be included in one (1) notice. The governing body shall publish in said notice the amount of each assessment.  
Sec. 8.17. - Hearing; revision; confirmation; lien. 
At the time appointed for that purpose or at some other time to which it may adjourn, the governing body of the city shall hear the objections to the preliminary assessment roll of all persons interested, who may appear and offer proof in relation thereto. Then or thereafter, the governing body shall either annul or sustain or modify in whole or in part the prima facie assessment as indicated on said roll, either by confirming the prima facie assessment against any or all lots or parcels described therein, or by canceling, increasing or reducing the same, according to the special benefits which said governing body decides each of said lots or parcels has received or will receive on account of such improvement, except that assessments against railroads made because of contract or franchise obligations to pay a portion of cost shall be in accordance with such obligations. If any property which may be chargeable under this article shall have been omitted from said preliminary roll or if the prima facie assessment has not been made against it, the governing body may place on said roll an apportionment to said property. The governing body may thereupon confirm said roll, but shall not confirm any assessment in excess of the special benefits to the property assessed and the assessments so confirmed shall be in proportion to the special benefits, except as hereinabove provided in the case of franchise obligations of railroads. Whenever the governing body shall confirm an assessment for a local improvement, the city clerk of the city shall enter on the minutes of the governing body and on the assessment roll, the date, hour, and minute of such confirmation, and from the time of such confirmation the assessments embraced in the assessment roll shall be a lien on the property against which the same are assessed of the same nature and to the same extent as county and city taxes and superior to all other liens and encumbrances. After the assessment roll is confirmed a copy of the same shall be delivered to the tax collector of the city.  
Sec. 8.18. - Appeal to superior court. 
If the owner of, or any person interested in, any lot or parcel of land against which an assessment is made is dissatisfied with the amount of such assessment he may, within 10 days after the confirmation of the assessment roll, give written notice to the mayor or city clerk of the city that he takes an appeal to the General Court of Justice, High Point Superior Court Division, in which case he shall within 20 days after the confirmation of the assessment roll serve on said mayor or city clerk a statement of facts upon which he bases his appeal. The appeal shall be tried as other actions at law. The remedy herein provided for any person dissatisfied with the amount of the assessment against any property of which he is the owner or in which he is interested shall be exclusive.  
Sec. 8.19. - Power to correct error in assessment. 
If it shall be made to appear to the governing body after confirmation of any assessment roll that any error has been made therein, then the governing body shall cause to be published one (1) time in some newspaper published in the city, or if there be no such newspaper the governing body shall cause to be posted at three (3) public places in the city, a notice referring to the assessment roll in which such error was made, naming the owner or owners of the lot or parcel of land with respect to which such error was made, if the same can be ascertained, and naming the time and place fixed for the meeting of the governing body for the correction of such error, such meeting not to be earlier than 10 days from the publication or from the date of the posting of said notice. At the time fixed in the notice or at some subsequent time to which the governing body may adjourn, said governing body, after giving the owner or owners of the property affected and other persons interested therein an opportunity to be heard, may proceed to correct such error, and the assessment then made shall have the same force and effect as if it had originally been properly made.  
Sec. 8.20. - Reassessment. 
The governing body shall have the power, when in its judgment there is any irregularity, omission, error or lack of jurisdiction in any of the proceedings relating thereto, to set aside the whole of the local assessment made by it, and thereupon to make a reassessment. In such case there shall be included, as a part of the cost of the public improvement involved, all interest paid or accrued on notes or certificates of indebtedness, or bonds issued by the city to pay the expenses of such improvement. The proceeding shall, as far as practicable, be in all respects as in the case of original assessments, and the reassessment shall have the same force as if it had originally been properly made.  
Sec. 8.21. - Publication of notice of confirmation of assessment roll. 
After the expiration of 20 days from the confirmation of the assessment roll, the tax collector, or such other officer of the city as the governing body may direct so to do, shall cause to be published one (1) time in some newspaper published in the city, or, if there be no such newspaper, shall cause to be posted at three (3) public places in the city, a notice that any assessment contained in the assessment roll, naming and describing it, may be paid to him at any time before the expiration of 30 days from the date of publication or posting of the notice, without interest from the date of confirmation of said assessment roll, but that if such assessment is not paid in full within said time, all installments thereof shall bear interest at the rate of at least six percent (6%) per annum from said date of confirmation of the assessment roll.  
Sec. 8.22. - Payment of assessments in cash or by installments. 
The property owner or street or railway or railroad hereinbefore mentioned in this article shall have the option and privilege of paying for the improvements hereinbefore provided for in cash as provided in the preceding section or in not less than five (5) nor more than 10 equal annual installments as may have been determined in the original resolution ordering the improvement or improvements. If paid in installments, such installments shall bear interest at the rate of at least six percent (6%) per annum from the date of the confirmation of the assessment roll. If any assessment is not paid in cash, the first installment thereof with interest thereon shall become due and payable 30 days after the publication or posting of the notice required by the preceding section and one subsequent installment and interest thereon shall be due and payable on the same day of the same month in each successive year until said assessment is paid in full; provided, however, that if the governing body shall so direct such installments shall become due and payable on the same date when property taxes of the city are due and payable. If any installment with interest thereon is not paid when due, it shall be subject to the same penalties as are now prescribed by law for unpaid taxes, in addition to the interest herein provided for. The whole assessment may be paid at any time by the payment of the full amount due with accrued interest.  
Sec. 8.23. - Enforcement of payment of assessments. 
In case of the failure of any property owner or street railway or railroad company to pay any installment when the same shall become due and payable, then and in that event all of the installments remaining unpaid shall immediately become due and payable, and such property and franchises may be sold by the city under the same rules, regulations, rights of redemption and savings as are now prescribed by law for the sale of land for unpaid taxes. Collection of such assessments with interest and penalties, may also be made by the city by proceedings to foreclose the lien of assessments as a lien for mortgages is or may be foreclosed under the laws of the State, and it shall be lawful to join in any bill for foreclosure any one of more lots or parcels of land, by whomsoever owned, if assessed for an improvement ordered by the same resolution. After default in the payment of any installment, the payment of said installment, together with interest and penalties due thereon, before the lot or parcel of land, against which the same is a lien, is sold or said lien is foreclosed as hereinbefore provided, shall bar the right of the city to sell said land or to foreclose the lien thereon by reason of said default.  
Sec. 8.24. - Assessment of cost of water main and sewer extensions. 
If the resolution ordering the making of any improvement or improvements included a provision for any necessary extension of a water main or sewer or sewers, as provided in section 8.11, subsection (4), of this article, at such time after the completion of said extension or extensions as, in the judgment of the governing body, circumstances justify the assessment of the cost, thereof, the governing body shall cause a preliminary assessment to be made as provided in section 8.14, subsection (3), of this article, and the procedure thereafter to be followed with respect to such assessment and the force and effect thereof shall be as already prescribed in this article.  
Sec. 8.25. - Annual assessment of cost of maintenance and operation of lighting improvement. 
After any lighting improvement is made as provided in this article, the city is hereby authorized, as long as said lighting system shall be maintained, to make an annual assessment against the lands assessed with the original cost of the improvement sufficient to cover the excess of actual cost of maintenance and operation of said lighting system over and above the cost of maintenance and operation of such system of lighting as the city provides at public expense for streets of the same character as that whereon said lighting improvement is made. To that end the governing body of the city shall cause to be prepared a preliminary assessment which shall, as far as practicable, conform to the requirements of section 8.14, subsection (6), of this article; and the procedure thereafter to be followed with respect to such assessment and the force and effect thereof shall be as already prescribed in this article.  
Sec. 8.26. - Apportionment of assessment. 
When any special assessment has been made against any property for any improvement authorized by this article, and it is desirable that said assessment be apportioned among subdivisions of said property, the governing body of the city shall have authority, upon petition of the owner of said property, to apportion said assessment fairly among said subdivisions. Thereafter, each of said subdivisions shall be relieved of any part of such original assessment except the part thereof apportioned to said subdivision; and the part of said original assessment apportioned to any such subdivision shall be of the same force and effect as the original assessment.  
Sec. 8.27. - No change of ownership affects proceedings. 
No change of ownership of any property or interest therein after the passage of a resolution ordering the making of any improvement authorized by this article shall in any manner affect subsequent proceedings, and such improvement may be completed and assessments made therefor as if there had been no change in such ownership.  
Sec. 8.28. - Lands subject to assessment. 
No lands in the city shall be exempt from special assessment as provided in this article except lands belonging to the United States; and the governing body of the city in whom is vested the right to hold and dispose of real property shall have the right by authority duly given to sign the petition for any local improvement authorized by this article.  
Sec. 8.29. - Proceedings in rem. 
All proceedings for special assessment under the provisions of this article shall be regarded as proceedings in rem, and no mistake or omission as to the name of any owner or person interested in any lot or parcel of land affected thereby shall be regarded a substantial mistake or omission.  
Sec. 8.30. - Street utility assessments. 
(a)  The governing body of the city, by resolution duly adopted, is hereby authorized to provide that assessments levied against abutting lots or parcels of land for water main improvements or sanitary sewer improvements, when in the opinion of the governing body such improvement or improvements may not presently be used by the owner or owners of the abutting lots or parcels of land, may be held in abeyance without the payment of any interest thereon until such time as the governing body shall, by resolution duly adopted, determine that any such assessment or assessments shall be paid in accordance with the terms set out in the resolution confirming such assessment or assessments; provided, that a part of the assessments, levied for the improvement or improvements herein set out on a street or streets or portion thereof, may be held in abeyance as herein provided without holding all of said assessments in abeyance. 
(b)  All statutes of limitations, authorized by law are hereby suspended during the time that any assessment or assessments are held in abeyance without the payment of interest, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, and such time shall not be a part of the time limited for the commencement of action for the enforcement of the payment of any such assessment or assessments, and such action may be brought at any time within 10 years from the date of the adoption of a resolution by the governing body determining that such assessment or assessments shall be paid in accordance with the original resolution confirming such assessments.  
Sec. 8.31. - Sidewalk; paving, maintenance and repair. 
Every owner of a lot abutting on a paved street, if so ordered by the Council of the City of High Point, shall pave, repave, repair and maintain in such manner as the council may direct, the sidewalk as far as it may extend along such lot, with such materials and in such manner as may be required by the council, and all work done under this section shall be under the strict supervision of the city manager, and on failure to do so as directed within 30 days after notice from the city manager or the director of public works of the city to such owner (if the owner be a nonresident, once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper published in High Point of a notice directed to said owner), calling on the owner to pave, repave, repair and maintain the sidewalk, the Council of the City of High Point may cause the same to be made, and the expense shall be paid by the owner or owners in default, and the expense thereof shall be a lien upon the lot superior and prior to all liens except taxes, and collected in the same manner as provided by law for the collection of taxes.  
ARTICLE IX - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 9.1. - Removal of weeds, debris, trash; lien for cost of removal. 
The council is hereby authorized and empowered, in its discretion, to promulgate ordinances, rules and regulations requiring the owner of any property on which there exists any debris, garbage, litter, weeds, undergrowth, trash or other offensive matter or thing to remove the same. If after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, the owner fails or refuses to remove such debris, garbage, litter, weeds, undergrowth, trash or other offensive matter or thing, the City of High Point is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the same to be removed and the cost of removal shall become a lien upon the property from which such removal occurred.  
Sec. 9.2. - Traffic bureau. 
(a)  The Council of the City of High Point may by ordinance provide a traffic bureau to accept a plea of guilty and to otherwise handle the following traffic violations within the city: 
(1)  parking over the allowed time; 
(2)  parking between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(3)  parking more than 12 inches from the curb; 
(4)  parking within 25 feet of a street corner; 
(5)  parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(6)  parking in a nonparking space; 
(7)  illegal use of loading zones, bus stops, and taxi stands; 
(8)  parking at entrance of alley or driveway; 
(9)  parking left side of curb; and 
(10)  double parking. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation receiving citations for the above offenses shall pay through the traffic bureau one dollar ($1.00) as partial payment of the court cost for such violations or such other amounts as fixed from time to time by the council. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation cited by the law enforcement personnel of the City of High Point to appear before the traffic bureau may submit thereto a plea of guilty to such traffic violation or violations and tender the sum or sums provided for in subsection (b) of this section as partial payment of court cost for the violation or violations. In the event the person, firm or corporation so cited shall be unwilling to submit a plea of guilty to the traffic violation or violations, shown in the citation, thereupon a warrant shall be duly issued by the Police Department of the City of High Point and the person so charged with the violation or violations shall be tried upon such warrant in the district court. 
No State tax shall be paid to the State of North Carolina in such cases, except where a warrant is issued and the case is tried in the district court.  
Sec. 9.3. - Public facilities on Deep River. 
(a)  The council is authorized to make rules and regulations for the protection and use of the city's raw water reservoir located on Deep River. Such rules and regulations shall include terms and conditions under which fishing and boating shall be permitted, fix a charge for fishing permits, and provide for a warden or wardens to enforce the rules and regulations. 
(b)  The council is authorized to make such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to enforce the provisions of this section, and to carry out its true purpose and intent, for the protection, betterment, administration and use of the city's park and swimming pool located on Deep River just below its water supply lake. Such rules and regulations shall provide for the use of streets, alleys, driveways, and authorize the establishing of parking areas and places in the park, and prohibit the sale and use of beer, wine and whiskey in the park. 
(c)  All rules and regulations adopted by the council pursuant to this section shall, upon their adoption, have the force and effect of ordinances and shall be enforced by law enforcement personnel of the city. 
(d)  Any parking regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall also be enforced by police officers of the city. Any police officer of the city who may be injured while enforcing the rules and regulations in the park shall be covered by the provisions of North Carolina Workmen's Compensation Act. 
(e)  The violation of any of the rules and regulations shall be a misdemeanor and any person found guilty of violation of any one or more of the rules and regulations shall be punished for the violation by a fine of $25.00 and the cost of the court.  
Sec. 9.4. - Promotion of city. 
The council is hereby authorized and empowered to appropriate annually and to expend, in its discretion, a sum not exceeding $10,000 for the purpose of advertising the city or promoting the public interest and general welfare of the city; provided, however, that any such appropriation, which is hereby declared to be for a public purpose, shall be from currently available nontax revenue.  
Sec. 9.5. - Purchasing, contracting, bidding. 
(a)  Contracts on informal bids. All contracts for construction or repair work in the amount of $5,000, or more, but not in excess of $50,000, the amount established by North Carolina General Statute Section 143-129 as amended from time to time, or contracts for the purchase of apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment involving expenditure of public funds in the amount of $5,000 or more, but not in excess of $10,000, the amount established by North Carolina General Statute Section 143-129 as amended from time to time, made by any officer, department, board or commission of the city, when practical, shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder taking into consideration quality, performance and the time specified in the proposal for the performance of the contract, after informal bids have been secured; provided, contracts may be awarded upon receipt of one (1) bid in all cases where there is only one (1) source of supply and in all cases where only one (1) bid has been received after efforts have been made in writing to secure more than one (1) bid, and it shall be the duty of such officer, department, board or commission to keep record of all bids submitted, and such records shall be subject to public inspection at any time. 
(b)  Procedure for letting public contracts. No construction or repair work requiring estimated expenditure of public money in an amount of more than $50,000, the amount established by North Carolina General Statute Section 143-129 as amended from time to time, or purchases of apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment requiring estimated expenditure of public money in amount of more than $10,000, the amount established by North Carolina General Statute Section 143-129 as amended from time to time, except in cases of special emergencies as determined by the council involving health and safety of people and their property, shall be performed and no contract shall be awarded therefore unless the provisions of this section are complied with. 
(c)  Advertisement for letting of contracts. Proposals shall be invited by advertisement at least one (1) week before the time specified for opening of such proposals in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. Such advertisement shall state the time and place where plans and specifications of proposed work or a complete description of the apparatus, supplies, materials, or equipment may be had, and the time and place for opening the proposals and the council shall reserve the right to reject any or all such proposals. 
Proposals shall not be rejected for the purpose of evading the provisions of this section and the council shall not assume responsibility for the construction or purchase contracts and shall not guarantee payment of labor or materials therefor. All proposals shall be opened in public and shall be recorded on the minutes of the council and the award shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder, taking into consideration quality, performance and the time specified in the proposals for the performance of the contract; provided, a committee selected by the council may open such proposals in advance of the meeting of council, analyze the bids and make recommendations to the council. In the event the lowest responsible bid is in excess of funds available for such purpose, the council is authorized to enter into negotiations with the lowest responsible bidder and may award such contract to such bidder if such bidder agrees to perform same, without making substantial changes in plans and specifications, at a sum within the funds available therefor. If the contract cannot be let under the above conditions, the council is authorized to readvertise, as herein provided, the said letting and make such changes in the plans and specifications as may be necessary to bring the cost of the project within funds available therefor. The procedure above specified may be repeated if necessary in order to secure an acceptable contract within the funds available therefor. No proposal shall be considered or accepted by the council unless at the time of its filing the same shall be accompanied by a deposit with the council of cash or a cashier's check or a certified check on some bank or trust company insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in an amount equal to not less than five percent (5%) of the proposal. In lieu of making cash deposit as above provided, such bidder may file a bid bond executed by a corporate surety licensed under the laws of North Carolina to execute such bonds, conditioned that the surety will upon demand forthwith make payment to the obligee upon the bond if the bidder fails to execute the contract in accordance with the bid bond and upon failure to forthwith make payment the surety shall pay the obligee an amount equal to double the amount of the bid bond. The deposit shall be retained if the successful bidder fails to execute the contract within 10 days after the award or fails to give satisfactory surety as herein required. All contracts to which this section applies shall be executed in writing, and the council shall require the person to whom the award of contract is made to furnish bond in some surety company authorized to do business in North Carolina, or require a deposit of money, certified check or government securities for the full amount of the contract for faithful performance of the terms of the contract in connection with awarding contracts covering construction or repair work only; and no such contract shall be altered except by written agreement of the contractor, sureties on his bond and the council. Such surety bond or securities required herein shall be deposited with the city until the contract has been carried out in all respects. 
Nothing in this section shall operate so as to require any public agency to enter into a contract that will prevent the use of unemployment relief labor paid for in whole or in part by appropriations or funds furnished by the State or Federal Government. 
The council may enter into any contract with the United States of America or any agency thereof for the purchase, lease or acquisition of any apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment without regard to the provisions of this section which require: 
(1)  posting of notice or public advertisement for proposals or bids; 
(2)  inviting or receiving of competitive bids; 
(3)  delivery of purchases before payment; 
(4)  posting of deposits of bonds or other sureties; or 
(5)  execution of written contracts. 
The council may designate any office holder of the city to enter a bid or bids in its behalf at any sale of apparatus, supplies, materials, equipment or other property owned by the United States of America or any agency thereof, and may authorize such person to make any partial or down payment, or payment in full that may be required by regulations of the United States of America or any agency thereof in connection with such bid or bids. 
(d)  Minimum number of bids for public contracts. Proposal forms shall be mailed to prospective bidders in connection with awarding contracts under section (b) listed above, but the award may be made if only one (1) bid has been received. 
(e)  No evasion permitted. No bid or contract shall be divided for the purpose of evading the provisions of this section. 
(f)  City not limited on certain construction or repairs with own regular employees. The city is authorized to make repairs, install any sewer lines, water lines, street improvements, improvements or repairs to the electric utilities, or other improvements with its own regular employees regardless of the amount of the estimated cost, and to construct new buildings with its own regular employees when the estimated cost of each building shall not exceed $50,000; provided, funds have been made available for the repairs or improvements. 
(S.L. 1987, H.B. 2297, § 1; Ord. No. 89-29, § 1, 3-2-89) 
Editor's note— The dollar amounts stated in Charter § 9.5 are at variance with the dollar amounts in G.S. 143-129.  
Sec. 9.6. - Appointment of park rangers and lake wardens. 
(a)  With respect to the use of city-owned reservoirs or bodies of water in Guilford County, the council may employ wardens to enforce any regulations, and stock such reservoirs with fish, and any lake wardens so employed shall, upon taking a proper oath, have all of the powers of peace officers, including the power of arrest, for the purpose, and no other, of enforcing federal and State laws and ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, which laws ordinances, rules and regulations pertain to the protection of the city watershed and the protection of game and wildlife in this area; provided, that such lake wardens shall not be police officers of the city, nor shall they be eligible for membership in the Law Enforcement Officers Benefit and Retirement Fund, or in the High Point Policemen's Pension and Disability Retirement Fund. 
(b)  With respect to the use of city-owned or leased parks, playgrounds and recreation areas, the council may employ park rangers to enforce any such rules and regulations and any rangers so employed shall, upon taking a proper oath, have all of the powers of peace officers, including the power of arrest, for the purpose, and no other, of enforcing federal and State laws and ordinances, rules and regulations of the city pertaining to parks and recreation areas; provided, that such park rangers shall not be police officers of the city nor shall they be eligible for membership in the Law Enforcement Officers Benefit and Retirement Fund, or in the High Point Policemen's Pension and Disability Retirement Fund.  
Sec. 9.7. - Public library. 
The council shall appoint a board of library trustees as now or hereafter authorized by the General Statutes of North Carolina.  
Sec. 9.8. - Downtown development projects. 
(a)  Definition. In this section, `downtown development project' means a capital project in the city's central business district, as defined by the city council, comprising one or more buildings and including both public and private facilities. By way of illustration but not limitation, such a project might include a single building comprising a publicly owned parking structure and publicly owned convention center and a privately owned hotel or office building. 
(b)  Authorization. If the city council finds that it is likely to have a significant effect on the revitalization of the central business district, the city may acquire, construct, own, and operate or participate in the acquisition, construction, ownership, and operation of a downtown development project or of specific facilities within such a project. The city may enter into binding contracts with one (1) or more private developers with respect to acquiring, constructing, owning, or operating such a project. Such a contract may, among other provisions, specify the following: 
(1)  the property interests of both the city and the developer or developers in the project; 
(2)  the responsibilities of the city and the developer or developers for construction of the project; 
(3)  the responsibilities of the city and the developer or developers with respect to financing the project. 
Such a contract may be entered into before the acquisition of any real property necessary to the project. 
(c)  Property acquisition. A downtown development project may be constructed on property acquired by the developer or developers, on property directly acquired by the city, or on property acquired by the city while exercising the powers, duties, and responsibilities of a development commission pursuant to G.S. 160A-505. 
(d)  Property disposition. In connection with a downtown development project, the city may convey interests in property owned by it, including air rights over public facilities, as follows: 
(1)  If the property was acquired while the city was exercising the powers, duties, and responsibilities of a redevelopment commission, the city may convey property interests pursuant to the `Urban Redevelopment Law' or any local modification thereof. 
(2)  If the property was acquired by the city directly, the city may convey property interests by private negotiation or sale, and G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 12 does not apply to such dispositions. 
(e)  Construction of the project. The contract between the city and the developer or developers may provide that the developer or developers shall be responsible for construction of the entire downtown development project. If so, the contract shall include such provisions as the city council deems sufficient to assure that the public facility or facilities included in the project meet the needs of the city and are constructed at a reasonable price. A project constructed pursuant to this paragraph is not subject to G.S. Chapter 143, Article 8. 
(f)  Operation. The city may contract for the operation of any public facility or facilities included in a downtown redevelopment project by a person, partnership, firm or corporation, public or private. Such a contract shall include provisions sufficient to assure that any such facility or facilities are operated for the benefit of the citizens of the city. 
(g)  Grant funds. To assist in the financing of its share of a downtown development project, the city may apply for, accept and expend grant funds from the federal or State governments.  
ARTICLE X - Transitional Provisions 
 
Sec. 10.1. - Terms of present officers. 
All present elected officers of the city shall hold their offices until the expiration of their present terms, and until their successors are elected and qualified, except as herein provided.  
Sec. 10.2. - Ordinances and regulations. 
Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city and its agencies now lawfully in effect not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall remain effective until they have been repealed, modified or amended.  
Sec. 10.3. - Contracts and obligations; proceeding. 
(a)  All contracts, orders, leases, bonds and other obligations or instruments entered into by the city or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof, as obligations and rights of the city. 
(b)  No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal), judicial or administrative, or otherwise, pending at the effective date of this charter by or against the city or its departments and agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this charter. 
(c)  The existing agency and departmental organization of the city shall continue in effect upon the effective date of this charter until such organization is changed or reorganized as authorized by this charter.  
Sec. 10.4. - Section captions; rules of construction. 
(a)  The captions of the several sections of this charter are informative only and are not to be construed as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" in this charter is intended to be mandatory and the word "may" is to be permissive. 
(c)  In the construction of this charter, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the adopting body: 
(1)  City. The words the city or this city shall mean the City of High Point, North Carolina. 
(2)  County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the respective Counties of Guilford, Randolph, and Davidson, North Carolina. 
(3)  Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
(4)  Governing body or governing authority. The words "governing body" or "governing authority" shall mean the Mayor and Council of the City of High Point, North Carolina. 
(5)  Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
(6)  Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
(7)  Other officials or officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., mayor, city council, city manager, they shall be deemed to refer to officials of the City of High Point, North Carolina. 
(8)  Council or city council. The term "council" or "city council" shall mean or refer to Mayor and Council of the City of High Point. 
(9)  Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
(10)  State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of North Carolina.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the disposition of ordinances amendatory of the Charter. 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Section 	Disposition 
86-7 	 4-14-86 	2 	3.1 
			3.4, 3.5 
89-29 	 3- 2-89 	1 	9.5(a), (b) 
00-100 	 8-17-00 	1 	2.2 
1028 (H.B.) 	 5-19-05 	1(a) 	2.4 
		1(b)       Rpld 	3.2—3.7 
2006-90 (S.L.) 	 7-10-06 	1 	6.1—6.3 
2006-171 (S.L.) 	 7-27-06 	2(a) 	3.1 
468 (H.B.) 	 7-11-13 	1 	3.1 
1207 (H.B.) 	 6-26-14 	1       Rnbd 	4.1, 4.2 
		      as 	4.6, 4.7 
		2       Added 	4.10, 4.11 
7416/18-45 
 5-21-18 		3 
House Bill 1084 
 7-16-18 	1       Added 	4.4 
  
RELATED LOCAL LAWS  
CHAPTER 1 - Animal Shelter 
 
Sec. 1-101. - Joint animal shelter authorized. 
The Board of Commissioners of Guilford County, the City Council of the City of Greensboro and the City Council of the City of High Point are hereby authorized and empowered to construct or have constructed and to maintain and operate one or more animal shelters for the joint use of the three (3) governmental units, for the purpose of confining, caring for, treating, disposing of and otherwise providing for the general welfare of any animals in Guilford County which are lost, strayed, unclaimed, or which are dangerous or injured, or which are at large in violation of any law or ordinance, or which are otherwise fit subjects for confinement. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 314, § 1)  
Sec. 1-102. - Allocation of initial costs. 
It shall be within the authority and the discretion of the Board of Commissioners of Guilford County, the City Council of Greensboro, and the City Council of High Point, acting by agreement of the three (3) bodies (jointly or otherwise), to purchase or otherwise acquire land suitable for the construction and maintenance of the above animal shelter, and to determine all matters relating to the location of the animal shelter, the construction of the building or buildings, the initial cost of the land and buildings, as well as that of the equipment, and any other matters relating to the construction of the buildings and other improvements of the land selected for the purpose: Provided, that the initial cost of providing said animal shelter, including the equipment and the site, shall be borne by Guilford County and the cities of Greensboro and High Point in such proportions as may be agreed upon by their governing bodies; and the ownership of said property shall be in Guilford County and the cities of Greensboro and High Point in the same proportions; and the proportion each governmental unit owns in said property may be changed from time to time by mutual agreement and adjustment, by resolution of the governmental bodies, without notice, advertisement or public sale. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 314, Sec. 2)  
Sec. 1-103. - Annual maintenance and operation. 
The Board of Commissioners of Guilford County, the City Council of Greensboro, and the City Council of High Point shall also have the authority and discretion, acting in agreement (jointly or otherwise), to provide for the maintenance of the animal shelter from year to year, by contract or otherwise, and to prescribe the methods of operation as well as the scope of operation and of the activities of the animal shelter. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 314, Sec. 3)  
Sec. 1-104. - Cost of maintenance; allocation. 
The cost of the maintenance and operation of the animal shelter and its activities may be apportioned among Guilford County, Greensboro and High Point by agreement, or Guilford County may assume entire responsibility for the said maintenance, activities and operation. Guilford County may pay any or all of its proportionate part of the cost of the maintenance of the animal shelter and its operation from and out of proceeds of the county dog tax. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 314, Sec. 4)  
Sec. 1-105. - Regulations governing operation of shelter. 
The operation of the animal shelter shall be as agreed upon by the Board of Commissioners of Guilford County and the City Council of Greensboro and the City Council of High Point, which shall also have the authority to set up rules and regulations prescribing said administrative operation, and to determine any other matter necessary or proper relating to the construction, maintenance and use of the buildings and grounds comprising the animal shelter; provided, however, that if one (1) or more of the governmental units operating the animal shelter as herein provided shall retire or withdraw from its operation, the rules and regulations for its operation shall be made by the governmental unit or units which continue to operate said animal shelter. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 314, Sec. 5)  
Sec. 1-106. - Contract requirements; expenditures. 
In making all contracts and expending all funds herein authorized, the Board of Commissioners of Guilford County, the City Council of Greensboro, and the City Council of High Point shall comply with all of the applicable laws of North Carolina with respect to the awarding of contracts and expenditure of funds for public purposes by counties and municipalities. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 314, Sec. 6)  
Sec. 1-107. - Withdrawal of participating governments; discontinuance of operation. 
Any one (1) or more of the three above mentioned governmental units may, with the consent of the other unit or units, withdraw from the ownership and/or maintenance of the animal shelter, and in such event the other unit or units shall proportionately bear the additional cost of ownership and/or maintenance of the said shelter, provided, however, that any change in ownership shall be in accordance with the laws of North Carolina and any applicable local laws concerning the disposition of property owned by Guilford County and the cities of High Point and Greensboro; further, the three (3) governmental units shall be empowered to cease and discontinue operation of the said shelter at any time, as they may agree in their discretion, and in such case the property owned by the three (3) units or any of them in conjunction with operation of the said shelter shall be disposed of in accordance with the laws of North Carolina and applicable local laws respecting disposition of property belonging to any of the said units. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 314, Sec. 7)  
CHAPTER 2 - Urban Redevelopment[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The following provisions are local amendments to certain general laws and are derived from S.L. 1979, c. 501, which enacted a new charter for the City of High Point. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Urban redevelopment law amendments. 
The "Urban Redevelopment Law," G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 22, is amended as provided in this section. Each of the amendments made by this section apply to the City of High Point only. 
(a)  G.S. 160A-505 is amended by adding a new subsection (e) at the end thereof, as follows: 
"(e) If a municipality, pursuant to this section has designated its housing authority to exercise the powers, duties, and responsibilities of a redevelopment commission, the governing body of the municipality may, by resolution, undertake to exercise the powers, duties, and responsibilities of a redevelopment commission with respect to all or a portion of a particular redevelopment area. If the municipality elects to undertake these powers, duties, and responsibilities with respect to a portion of a redevelopment area only, the resolution shall describe the portion of the area involved." 
(b)  G.S. 160A-513(j) is amended by adding a new sentence at the end thereof to read as follows: 
"The commission may acquire property, execute contracts, and take other necessary actions in a redevelopment area at any time during the duration of the redevelopment plan." 
(c)  G.S. 160A-515 is amended by adding a new unnumbered paragraph at the end of the section, to read as follows: 
"In addition to its authority to exercise the right of eminent domain pursuant to the procedures set out above in this section, a municipality exercising the powers, duties, and responsibilities of a redevelopment commission pursuant to G.S. 160A-505 may exercise the right of eminent domain in accordance with any procedure set out in its charter or otherwise authorized to it by law." 
(S.L. 1979, c. 501, Sec. 9)  
Sec. 2-102. - Disposition of redevelopment properties. 
Chapter 1060 of the 1971 Session Laws, as amended, is further amended as follows: 
(a)  The second line of Section 2 thereof is rewritten as follows: 
"(5) Convey at private sale or by private negotiation to any other redeveloper particular properties or interests therein within." 
(b)  Section 4 is amended by adding a new sentence at the end thereof to read as follows: 
"This act also applies to the City of High Point." 
(S.L. 1979, c. 501, Sec. 10)  
CHAPTER 3 - Police Pensions 
 
Sec. 3-101. - Pension fund established; contributions. 
There shall be established a pension fund for the Police Department of the City of High Point, to be known as High Point Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund, hereinafter referred to as pension fund, and said fund shall be made up and established as follows: 
a.  Chapter 241 of Private Laws of the General Assembly of North Carolina of 1933 be and the same is hereby repealed and the funds now in said Police and Firemen's Fund of the City of High Point shall be transferred to the pension fund herein established. 
b.  Any policeman or fireman now receiving benefits under Chapter 241 of Private Laws of the General Assembly of North Carolina of 1933 shall continue to receive the same benefits under the pension fund herein created in the same manner as if said Act had not been repealed. 
c.  The City Treasurer of the City of High Point is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to deduct each month from the second pay check of each and every member of the police department coming under the provisions of this act, beginning July 1, 1971, five percent (5%) of the monthly salary of each of said persons up to $5,600 per annum, and six percent (6%) per annum of the monthly salary of each of said persons over $5,600 per annum, provided that the determination of said deductions shall at all times conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Local Government Employees' Retirement System as it may be amended from time to time. The City of High Point shall contribute to the said pension fund a percentage of the covered pay roll of the police department as determined on the basis of an annual actuarial valuation, provided that such percentage shall not be less than the normal rate of contribution nor more than the total percentage rate of contribution (both exclusive of the death benefits percentage) payable by the City of High Point to the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees Retirement System for the same period of account of said employees covered therein. 
Provided, however, that any member of the police department who has been a member of the North Carolina Law Enforcement Officer's Benefit and Retirement Fund for 10 years may elect to remain in said fund in lieu of joining the High Point Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund. In such event the city treasurer shall deduct five percent (5%) from such member's monthly salary and pay it to the account of said member in the North Carolina Law Enforcement Officer's Benefit and Retirement Fund and the City of High Point shall contribute an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the member's salary in lieu of contributing to the High Point Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund. 
d.  That after deducting the amounts set out in subsection c. of this section, the city treasurer shall each month beginning in the month of July 1971, pay over to the said pension fund the amount deducted from the salary of each member of the police department, and in the event the City of High Point contributed to the said fund, then and in that event the city treasurer shall also pay over to said fund at such time or times as the city council may by ordinance direct, but at least once every three (3) months, the amount of said contributions. 
(S.L. 1955, ch. 496, § 1; S.L. 1955, c. 1235, § 1; S.L. 1957, c. 825, § 1; S.L. 1959, c. 133, §§ 1, 2; S.L. 1971, c. 761, §§ 1, 2; S.L. 1973, c. 282, § 1; S.L. 1975, c. 691, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 3-102. - Custodian of fund. 
Any person, firm or corporation designated by the board of trustees of any duly convened meeting shall be the custodian of said pension fund, and shall pay the beneficiaries thereof on the first day of each and every month any moneys in his or its possession that such beneficiary or beneficiaries may be entitled to as set out in the succeeding paragraphs of this Act. Said custodian shall serve at the will of the board of trustees and shall be paid for his or its service out of said pension fund at such compensation as shall be agreed upon between him or it and said board of trustees. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 496, § 2; S.L. 1975, c. 691, § 3)  
Sec. 3-103. - Eligibility for benefits. 
Any person who is a full time member of the High Point Police Department as shown by the records of the City of High Point at the time of the ratification of this act, or who becomes a full time member thereof after the notification of this act, shall, upon his termination from service including both service retirement and disability retirement be entitled to receive benefits equal to those he would have received based upon his eligibility under the provisions of Chapter 128 of the General Statutes governing the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees Retirement System, as amended from time to time, had he been a member of that retirement system, exclusive of an employer providing lump sum death benefit. Post retirement benefit increases shall not apply to members retired prior to the ratification of this act. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 496, § 3; S.L. 1959, c. 133, § 3; S.L. 1971, c. 761, § 3; S.L. 1975, c. 691, § 4) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of the 1955 act which concerned disability benefits was repealed by S.L. 1975, c. 691, Sec. 5.  
Sec. 3-104. - Board of trustees; composition; medical board. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall consist of five (5) members; the City Manager of the City of High Point and four (4) additional members to be appointed by the Council of the City of High Point. The four (4) appointed members shall include a licensed physician, a full-time paid member of the Police Department of the City of High Point, and two (2) citizens of the City of High Point. The four (4) appointed members shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Vacancies must be filled in the same manner as provided in the original selection. 
(b)  The medical board to be designated by the board of trustees shall be composed of not less than three (3) nor more than five (5) licensed physicians. The medical board shall arrange for and pass upon all medical examinations required under the provisions of Chapter 128, Section 27 of the General Statutes governing the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System, and shall investigate all essential statements and certificates by or on behalf of a member in connection with an application for disability retirement, and shall report in writing to the board of trustees its conclusions and recommendations upon all the matters referred to it. 
(c)  The City Attorney for the City of High Point shall be the legal advisor of the board of trustees. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 496, Sec. 6; S.L. 1971, c. 761, Sec. 5; S.L. 1973, c. 282, Sec. 4; S.L. 1975, c. 691, Sec. 6; S.L. 1977, c. 247, Sec. 1) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of the 1955 act was repealed by S.L. 1973, c. 282, Sec. 3 which renumbered sections 6 through 10 of the 1955 act as new sections 5 through 9 respectively.  
Sec. 3-105. - Board of trustees; powers; procedures; claims for benefits. 
The said board of trustees is vested with authority to determine all matters affecting the administration of this act, including the power and authority to determine the claims of policemen coming under the provisions of this act, and the decision of the members of the board shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom. The board may meet at any time upon the call of the chairman, or upon the call of any three (3) members if the chairman neglects or refuses to call a meeting. 
Two (2) days' written notice of the time and purpose of a meeting to determine the claims of policemen shall be given, but the failure to give such notice shall not invalidate the proceedings at any such meeting, provided all members of the board are present. Two (2) days' oral notice of the time of meeting shall be sufficient as to meetings held for any other purpose. The board shall select one (1) of its members to be chairman and shall also designate someone, who need not be a member of the board, to act as secretary at its meetings, and it shall be his duty to give notice of all meetings. A majority of the members of the board of trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting except meetings to determine contested claims by policemen, in which event the three (3) members not connected with the police department shall constitute a quorum. In any meeting a majority of those present shall decide any matter coming before a meeting, but any member of the board who is employed in the police department shall be disqualified from voting in the determination of his own claim for compensation. All claims for policemen for benefits under this act shall be made in writing and shall state the nature of the claim and the relief demanded. All claims shall be filed with the chairman of the board of trustees within 60 days from the arising date of the claim. Failure to so present a written claim within said 60 days, or acceptance of a refund of all money deducted from his salary which went into said pension fund, shall operate as a bar to the consideration and payment of said claim. Provided, that the time for presenting any claims which arose prior to the enactment of this section shall be extended to a date 60 days from said date. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 496, Sec. 7; S.L. 1959, c. 133, Sec. 5; S.L. 1973, c. 282, Sec. 5; S.L. 1975, c. 691, Sec. 7)  
Sec. 3-106. - Bond of custodian. 
The custodian of the said pension fund shall be required to give bond with an indemnity company authorized to do business in the State of North Carolina, as surety, in a sum equal to the maximum amount calculated and expected to be in his possession as such custodian at any time within the fiscal year for which the bond is given; the condition of said bond shall be that said custodian shall faithfully keep, preserve, spend as herein provided, and account for all funds and property coming into his hands as such custodian; and the premium on such bond shall be paid by the City of High Point. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 496, Sec. 8; S.L. 1973, c. 282, Sec. 6)  
Sec. 3-107. - Investment of funds; payment of expenses. 
The said custodian of said pension fund is authorized and directed to invest all moneys coming into his possession belonging to such pension fund, except as much as the board of trustees shall from time to time decide is reasonably necessary for the prompt payment of claims and expenses, in such securities as the board of trustees may select: Provided, however, that such securities shall be limited to and upon the same conditions as those enumerated in Section 159, subsection 25 of the General Statutes of North Carolina of 1943, as amended. The board of trustees is authorized to pay out of this pension fund all expenses incurred in connection with the administration of this Act, including reasonable fees of an attorney employed by the police department to assist in having this Act amended from time to time, or to represent the police department in connection with any contests claims for benefits under this Act. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 496, Sec. 9; S.L. 1973, c. 282, Sec. 6; S.L. 1975, c. 691, Sec. 8)  
Sec. 3-108. - Participation in other retirement systems. 
This Act is not intended to deprive the full-time paid members of the Police Department of the City of High Point of the right to also come under the provisions of any amendment to "An Act to Provide Old Age Security for Old and Incapacitated Teachers, and State Employees, to Provide for the Creation of a Retirement Fund through joint contributions of employers and employees, and to provide Machinery for the Proper Administration of this Law," which will permit cities at their own expense to participate in said retirement system, provided the City of High Point shall come under the amendment to said Act. 
(S.L. 1955, c. 496, § 10; S.L. 1973, c. 282, § 6)  
Sec. 3-109. - Procedure for transfer to the North Carolina Governmental Employees Retirement System. 
Should sixty (60) percentum of the full-time paid members of the Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund of the City of High Point elect to become members of the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System by a petition duly signed by such members, the participation of such members in the Retirement System may be approved as provided in G.S. 128-24 as though such local pension system were not in operation, and the provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 128 of the General Statutes shall also apply, except that the existing pensioners or annuitants of the local pension system who were being paid pensions on the date of the approval shall be continued and paid at their existing rates by the North Carolina Local Governmental Employee's Retirement System, and the liability on this account shall be included in the computation of the accrued liability by the actuary as provided by G.S. 128-30(d). Any cash and securities to the credit of the local pension system shall be transferred to the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System as of the date of the approval. The trustees or other administrative head of the local pension system as of the date of the approval shall certify the proportion, if any, of the funds of the system that represents the accumulated contributions of the members, and the relative shares of the members as of that date. Such shares shall be credited to the respective annuity savings accounts of such members in the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System. The balance of the funds transferred to the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System shall be offset against the accrued liability before determining the special accrued liability contribution to be paid by the city as provided by G.S. 128-30(d). The operation of the local pension system shall be discontinued as of the date of the approval. Should the members of the Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund of the City of High Point become members of the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System, the governing body of the City of High Point may provide for its employees to receive prior service credit in the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System equal to the period of prior service credit which such employee has in the Policemen's Pension and Disability Fund of the City of High Point at the time said fund is merged into the Local Government Employees' Retirement System, and no other prior credit service shall be given for service with the High Point Police Department. 
(S.L. 1987, H.B. 625, § 1)  
CHAPTER 4 - Firemen's Pensions[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Pension coverage of High Point Fire Fighters is currently provided through the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System, see section 15. The pension laws derived from Public Local Laws 1941, Chapter 293, as amended, are included here for the benefit of certain retired firemen still covered under that system. 
 
Sec. 4-101. - Pension fund established; contributions. 
There shall be established a pension fund for the fire department of the City of High Point, said fund to be known as the High Point Firemen's Pension and Disability Fund, hereinafter referred to as pension fund, and said fund shall be made up and established as follows: 
(a)  By the transfer of certain funds from the firemen's relief fund as provided for in the amendment to Chapter 98, Section 6096 of the Consolidated Statutes of North Carolina, as amended. 
(b)  The City Treasurer of the City of High Point is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to deduct each month from the second pay check of each and every member of the fire department coming under the provisions of this Act three per cent (3%) of the monthly salary of each said person; provided that in the event the City of High Point hereafter establishes a pension plan for any other department or departments of said city and the members of the fire department are not included in such plan, and the City of High Point makes contributions thereto, then in such event the City of High Point shall make the same contribution in percentage or amount, whichever method is used in any such pension plan, per member of the fire department of said city as it makes per employee in any other department of said city in which a pension plan is established. 
(c)  That after deducting the three per cent (3%) set out in subsection (b) of this section, the city treasurer shall each month pay over to the pension fund an amount equal to three per cent (3%) of the total salaries referred to above; and in the event the City of High Point contributes to said pension fund, then and in such event, the city treasurer shall also pay over to said pension fund at such time or times as the city council may by order direct, but at least every three (3) months, the amount of such contribution. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Sec. 1; S. 1945, c. 293, Secs. 1, 2; S.L. 1949, c. 559, Sec. 1; S.L. 1951, c. 594, Sec. 1; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-102. - Trustees. 
That any person, firm or corporation designated by the board of examiners at any duly convened meeting shall be the trustee of said pension fund, and shall pay the beneficiaries thereof on the first day of each and every month any monies in his or its possession that such beneficiary or beneficiaries may be entitled to as set out in the succeeding paragraphs of this Act. Such trustees shall serve at the will of the board of examiners and shall be paid for his or its services out of said pension fund such compensation as shall be agreed upon between him or it and said board of examiners, but for each six (6) months' period not in excess of one-fifth of one per cent ( 1/5 of 1%) of the market value of all securities and cash held under the provisions of this Act, such market value to be determined, and such compensation to be paid at the end of each six (6) months' period; provided, that such compensation shall not amount to less than $50 for any six (6) months' period. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Sec. 2; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-103. - Age of retirement; eligibility for benefits. 
That any person who is a full time paid member of the High Point Fire Department, as shown by the records of the City of High Point, at the time of the ratification of this Act, and has, or shall have reached the age of 60 years, shall be eligible for retirement from service in the fire department of the City of High Point and to receive the benefits of retirement set out in this Act. In the event a full time paid member of said department shall reach the age of 65 years he may be retired at the pleasure of the board of examiners hereinafter provided for; and if any full time paid member of said department reach the age of 70 years he shall be automatically retired. Any member of said department who has become eligible for retirement shall be entitled to retirement benefits at any time he voluntarily or involuntarily severs his employment as a full time paid member of said department. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Sec. 3; S.L. 1945, c. 293, Sec. 3; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-104. - Computation of benefits. 
Any full time paid member of said department who retires, or is retired, under the provisions of section 4-103 of this Act, shall receive monthly for the remainder of his life from said pension fund an amount equal to one-twelfth of one per cent ( 1/12 of 1%) (or such multiple thereof as each valuation of the pension plan shall indicate is sound) of the total salary that he has received for his period of service, or the last 20 years thereof, whichever is the shorter (in lieu of the foregoing, a member as of his retirement date, may elect to have a benefit or equivalent value to his life benefit paid to him over a five (5) year period only or to prior death), which said sum shall be paid monthly by the trustee of said pension fund; provided, however, that any persons who have retired under the provisions of this Act, or attained the age of 60, prior to July 1, 1957, shall receive in lieu of the amount set forth above an amount equal to 60% of the amount which they were receiving, or would be entitled to receive if they were retired, prior to July 1, 1957. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Sec. 4; S.L. 1943, c. 575, Sec. 1; S.L. 1945, c. 293, Sec. 4; S.L. 1951, c. 594, Sec. 2; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-105. - Disability benefits. 
That in the event any full time paid member of the High Point Fire Department shall hereafter become, in the opinion of the board of examiners, disabled and is found by the board of examiners to be unable to work as a fireman, he shall receive each month from said pension fund an amount not to exceed $50 or whatever portion thereof the board of examiners in its sole discretion shall find he is entitled to receive, after taking into consideration the nature and extent of his disability, his income and compensation from all other sources, whether received directly or indirectly, and his ability to earn any income from any other source; provided, however, that such disability benefits shall cease six (6) months after the person disabled reaches his 50th birthday, unless the person so disabled has not received in disability benefits an amount equal to all his contributions to the pension fund and in that event the disability benefits shall continue to such time that he has received an amount equal to the amount which he has contributed to said pension fund. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Secs. 5, 6; S.L. 1943, c. 575, Sec. 2; S.L. 1945, c. 293, Secs. 5, 6; S.L. 1951, c. 594, Secs. 3, 4; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-106. - Refunds of contributions; beneficiary coverage; reemployment. 
If any full time paid member of said department shall sever his connection with said department, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, or by death, before eligibility for retirement, he shall be entitled to have refunded to him one half (½) of all money deducted from his salary which went into the said pension fund prior to July 1, 1957, and all money deducted from his salary which went into said pension fund after July 1, 1957. If he is later re-employed in said department he shall forfeit the time accrued to him under this pension plan unless he shall pay into said pension fund on or before the date of his re-employment begins the amount refunded him plus interest thereon at the rate of two and one-half per cent (2½%) per annum. In the event a person receiving retirement benefits under said pension fund dies, his beneficiary shall be entitled to receive one-half (½) of all money deducted from said deceased person's salary which went into the said pension fund prior to July 1, 1957, and all money deducted from his salary which went into said pension fund after July 1, 1957, less any benefits which said deceased person received prior to his death. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Sec. 7; S.L. 1951, c. 594, Sec. 5; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-107. - Board of examiners; composition. 
That the board of examiners shall consist of five members; that the Mayor of the City of High Point shall ex officio be the chairman of said board with all the privileges and duties of any other member; that one member shall be the chief of the fire department; that one member shall be elected by a majority vote of all full time members of the fire department; that one member shall be the city manager; that one member shall be the chairman of the law and public safety committee of the city council; that the member elected by the majority vote of the full time paid members of the fire department shall be appointed or elected for a term of three years. Vacancies must be filled in the same manner as provided in the original selection, except that upon the resignation or refusal to serve of any member, the city council shall appoint someone to fill his unexpired term. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Sec. 8; S.L. 1951, c. 594, Sec. 6; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-108. - Board of examiners; powers; meetings; procedures. 
That the said board of examiners is vested with authority to determine all matters affecting the administration of this Act, including the power and authority to determine the claims of firemen coming under the provisions of this Act, and the decision of a majority of a quorum of the board shall be final, and there shall be no appeal therefrom. The board may meet at any time upon the call of the chairman, or upon the call of any three (3) members if the chairman neglects or refuses to call a meeting. Two (2) days' written notice of the time and purpose of a meeting to determine the claims of firemen shall be given, but failure to give such notice shall not invalidate the proceedings at any such meeting, provided all members of the board are present. Two (2) days' oral notice of the time of the meeting shall be sufficient as to meetings held for any other purpose. The board shall designate someone who need not be a member of the board to act as secretary at its meetings, and it shall be his duty to give notice of all meetings. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum at any meeting except meetings to determine contested claims of firemen, in which event the three (3) members not connected with the fire department shall constitute a quorum. At any duly held meeting a majority vote of those present shall decide any matter coming before the meeting, but any member of the board who is employed in the fire department shall be disqualified from voting in the determination of his own claim for compensation. All claims of firemen for benefits under the provisions of this Act shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the claim and the relief demanded. All claims shall be filed with the chairman of the board of examiners within 60 days from the date on which the claim arose. Failure to so present a written claim within said 60 days' period, or acceptance of a refund of one half (½) of all money deducted from his salary which went into said pension fund, shall operate as a bar to the consideration and payment of said claim. 
As a condition prerequisite to the payment of benefits for disability under section 4-105 of this Act, the board of examiners may require the claimant: (1) to submit to any medical examinations by physicians the board may select which the board may consider advisable; (2) to produce for inspection by the board any records pertaining to the income or financial status of the claimant; (3) to answer such inquiries as the board may make into the financial status or income or physical condition of the claimant. Failure of the claimant to comply with these conditions shall operate as a bar to the payment of benefits hereunder so long as such noncompliance continues. Any fireman who prosecutes before the board of examiners a claim for benefits hereunder shall thereby forfeit his right to a refund of any payments by him into said pension fund. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Sec. 8; S.L. 1951, c. 594, Sec. 7; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-109. - Bond of trustee. 
That the trustee of the said pension fund shall be required to give bond with an indemnity company authorized to do business in the State of North Carolina, as surety, in a sum equal to the maximum amount calculated and expected to be in his possession as such trustee at any time within the fiscal year for which the bond is given; the condition of said bond shall be that said trustee shall faithfully keep, preserve, spend as herein provided, and account for all funds and property coming into his hands as such trustee; and the premium on such bond shall be paid by the City of High Point. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Sec. 9; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-110. - Investment of funds; payment of expenses. 
That if the said trustee of said pension fund is a commercial bank located in the City of High Point, having a trust department, then and in such event the said trustee is authorized and empowered to invest, and reinvest from time to time, all moneys coming into its possession belonging to said pension fund, except so much as the board of examiners shall from time to time decide is reasonably necessary for the prompt payment of claims and expenses, in such securities as the trustee, from time to time, in its sole discretion, shall select, and it is authorized and empowered, if it so desires, to commingle said funds with its diversified fund for retirement trusts, but if said trustee is some other person, firm or corporation, then and in such event its investment of all said moneys coming into his or its possession shall be limited to, and upon the same conditions as, those securities enumerated in Section 159-25 of the General Statutes of North Carolina of 1945, as amended. The board of examiners is authorized and empowered to pay out of this pension fund all expenses incurred in connection with the administration of this Act, including reasonable fees of an attorney employed by the fire department or the board of examiners to assist in having this Act amended from time to time, or to represent the fire department in connection with any contested claim for benefits under this Act, or for any other services rendered in connection with the administration of this Act. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Sec. 10; S.L. 1943, c. 575, Sec. 3; S.L. 1945, c. 293, Sec. 7; S.L. 1951, c. 594, Sec. 8; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-111. - Actuarial studies. 
At least every five (5) years after one thousand nine hundred fifty-seven, and oftener if deemed advisable, the board of examiners shall select an actuary of outstanding ability to study this Act and determine the highest amounts the fund can pay in the way of retirement and disability benefits, and the board is authorized and empowered, in its sole discretion, to increase or decrease proportionately from time to time the benefits herein provided, as said actuarial study may indicate can be soundly done. Provided, however, that in the event the board of examiners determines to increase or decrease the benefits herein provided that they shall also increase or decrease proportionately and on the same percentage basis the benefits then being paid to retired members. 
(S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-112. - Liquidation of assets on termination. 
If for any reason this pension plan is terminated, all funds and assets remaining in the hands of the trustee shall be liquidated in the order named and as follows: 
(1)  If any beneficiary has drawn benefits under this Act, the total amount of which is less than the total amount of his contributions, he shall be paid the difference between the total amount of his benefits received and the total amount of his contributions, if the fund is sufficient to make such payments. 
(2)  Thereafter to each full time paid member who has contributed under this Act and who is in the employment of the fire department at the time of termination and has not received benefits under this Act, shall be paid out of the fund an amount equal to the total amount of his contributions, without interest, if the fund is sufficient to make such payments. 
(3)  If the fund is not sufficient to make such payments, as set out in (1) and (2) above, then each beneficiary and full time paid member will be paid prorata, but in the priority as thus provided, the highest per cent of his contribution the fund can pay, less any benefits he may have received. 
(4)  If there is a balance remaining in the hands of the trustee after carrying out the above payments, it shall be used to continue this act in operation until the fund is exhausted, after which this Act shall be repealed as quickly as feasible. 
(S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-113. - Participation in other systems. 
This act is not intended to deprive the full time paid members of the fire department of the City of High Point of the right to also come under the provisions of any amendment to `An Act to Provide Old Age Security for Old and Incapacitated Teachers, and State Employees, to Provide for the Creation of a Retirement Fund Through Joint Contributions of Employers and Employees, and to Provide Machinery for the Proper Administration of This Law' which will permit cities at their own expense to participate in said retirement system, provided the City of High Point shall come under the provisions of any amendment to said Act. 
(Pub.-Local Laws 1941, c. 293, Sec. 11; S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-114. - Tax exempt status. 
The right of a person to a pension, or annuity, or a retirement allowance, to the return of contributions, the pension, annuity or retirement allowance itself, any optional benefit or any other right accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this Chapter, and the moneys in the various funds created by this Chapter, are hereby exempt from any State or municipal tax, and exempt from levy and sale, garnishment, attachment, or any other process whatsoever, and shall be unassignable except as in this Chapter specifically otherwise provided. Payments of pensions, annuities, retirement allowances, the return of contributions, or any other payments to persons, their beneficiaries or dependents under the provisions of this Act are hereby expressly exempt from State income or any other State tax. 
(S.L. 1957, c. 877, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 4-115. - Merger with state retirement system. 
Chapter 293, Public-Local and Private Laws of 1941, as amended by Chapter 877 of 1957 Session Laws, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following proviso: 
"Provided, that should 60% of the members of said pension fund elect to become members of the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System, by a petition duly signed by such members, the board of examiners shall have the authority to: 
"1.  Refund to all firemen not retired at the time the board of examiners determines to come under the provisions of this Act an amount equal to the amount paid into the firemen's pension fund by each such fireman to and including December 31, 1958. 
"2.  Transfer to the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System the total amount that the members of the fire department and the City of High Point would have contributed to the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System had the members of the fire department elected to become members of the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System on the same basis as other employees of the City of High Point on January 1, 1959. 
"3.  To continue to pay to existing pensioners of the pension system at the same rate, or if sufficient funds are available, at an increased rate not to exceed the maximum rate to which the pensioner may have been entitled at any time. Said rate, if increased, may, at the discretion of the said board of examiners, be retroactive to January 1, 1961. 
"4.  If sufficient funds remain in said pension fund, the board of examiners may pay to members of the fire department who have retired subsequent to July 1, 1957, a supplemental pension in an amount to be determined by said board, said amount not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per month." 
(S.L. 1959, c. 680, Sec. 1; S.L. 1961, c. 524, Secs. 1, 2) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to G.S. 118-6, a board of trustees of the firemen's relief fund composed of five (5) members is appointed, two (2) from the fire department, two (2) by the mayor and council and one (1) by the state insurance commissioner.  
CHAPTER 5 - Airport Authority 
 
Sec. 5-101. - Statement of findings. 
It is hereby found and determined as follows: 
(a)  The Greensboro-High Point Airport Authority (the "authority") was duly created under and pursuant to Chapter 98 of the 1941 Public-Local Laws of North Carolina, as amended by Chapter 601 of the 1943 Session Laws, Chapter 137 of the 1945 Session Laws, Chapter 1198 of the 1957 Session Laws and Chapter 793 of the 1969 Session laws; 
(b)  The authority as created pursuant to said Chapter 98 has been operating and continues to operate the Greensboro/High Point/Winston-Salem Regional Airport (the "airport"); 
(c)  Chapter 501 of the 1979 Session Laws, entitled "An Act to Revise and Consolidate the Charter of the City of High Point and to Repeal Prior Charter Acts," in repealing certain acts or portions of acts described therein as having served the purposes for which they were enacted or having been consolidated into said Chapter 501, included said Chapter 98 creating the authority; and 
(d)  It was not the intent of the General Assembly of North Carolina by the enactment of said Chapter 501 relating to the revision of the Charter of the City of High Point to repeal or modify in any respect the provisions of said Chapter 98 relating to the authority. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 1)  
Sec. 5-102. - Repealer. 
That the specific provision of Sec. 4 of said Chapter 501 purporting to repeal said Chapter 98 of the 1941 Public-Local Laws of North Carolina is hereby repealed. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 2)  
Sec. 5-103. - Creation of authority. 
There is hereby created the "Greensboro-High Point Airport Authority" (for brevity hereinafter referred to as the "airport authority", which shall be a body corporate and politic, having the powers and jurisdiction hereinafter enumerated and such other and additional powers as shall be conferred upon it by future acts of the General Assembly. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(a))  
Sec. 5-104. - Composition; members. 
The airport authority shall consist of five (5) members of whom two (2) shall be resident voters of the City of High Point, two (2) shall be resident voters of the City of Greensboro, and one (1) from Guilford County at-large. Upon the expiration of the terms of the present members of the airport authority in April, 1970, the City Council of the City of Greensboro shall appoint one (1) member to the airport authority for a term of three (3) years and the City Council of the City of High Point shall appoint one (1) member to the airport authority for a period of three (3) years. Thereafter each of said city councils shall appoint one (1) member for a term of three (3) years upon the expiration of the term of the member appointed by it. Upon the expiration of the term of the present members of the airport authority in April, 1970, the Guilford County Board of Commissioners shall appoint the at-large member for a term of three (3) years and shall appoint the two (2) other members, with one (1) of said two (2) members being appointed for a term of one (1) year and the other for a term of two (2) years. Thereafter, upon the expiration of the term of any member appointed by it, the Guilford County Board of Commissioners shall appoint all members to be appointed by it for terms of three (3) years each. Any of the foregoing to the contrary notwithstanding, the present members of the airport authority and their terms shall be as set forth in Section 6 [Section 0-00] of this Act; provided that following the respective expirations of the terms of such present members, the members of the airport authority shall be appointed and shall serve for the terms as provided in this section (b) [Section 5-104]. Any vacancy occurring among the membership of the airport authority shall be filled by appointment of a member for the unexpired term thereof, such appointment to be made by the city council or board of commissioners whose appointee creates such vacancy. Each of the members and their successors so appointed shall take and subscribe before the Clerk of the Superior Court of Guilford County, an oath of office and file the same with the Guilford County Board of Commissioners. All duly appointed members of the airport authority shall serve as such members until their respective successors have been duly appointed and sworn in the manner above set forth. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(b))  
Sec. 5-105. - Board of directors; compensation. 
The members of the airport authority, for the purpose of doing business, shall constitute a board of directors, which may adopt suitable bylaws, not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, for its management. The members of the board shall receive no compensation per diem or otherwise, but shall be allowed and paid their actual traveling, lodging, and meal expenses incurred in transacting the business and at the instance of the said airport authority. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(c))  
Sec. 5-106. - Powers of authority. 
The said airport authority shall constitute a body, both corporate and politic, and shall have the following powers and authority: 
(1)  To purchase, acquire, establish, construct, own, control, lease, equip, improve, maintain, operate, and regulate airports or landing fields for the use of airplanes and other aircraft, and all facilities incidental to the operation of such airports or landing fields, within the limits of Guilford County; and for any of such purposes, to purchase, acquire, own, hold, lease and/or operate real or personal property; 
(2)  To purchase real or personal property; 
(3)  To sue or be sued in the name of said airport authority, to acquire by purchase and to hold lands for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, or operating any airport within the limits of said county, and to make such contracts and to hold such personal property as may be necessary for the exercise of the powers of the said airport authority. The said airport authority may acquire by purchase, or otherwise, any existing lease, leasehold right or other interest in any existing airport located in the county of Guilford; 
(4)  To charge and collect reasonable and adequate fees, royalties, rents, or other charges for the use of property owned, leased or otherwise controlled or operated by said airport authority or for services rendered in the operation thereof; 
(5)  To make all reasonable rules and regulations as it deems necessary for the proper maintenance, use, operation, and control of any airport or airport facilities owned, leased, or controlled by said airport authority; to provide penalties for the violation of such rules and regulations; provided said rules and regulations and penalties be not in conflict with the laws of the State of North Carolina, and the rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration; 
(6)  To sell, or otherwise dispose of, any property, real or personal, belonging to the airport authority, but no sale of real property shall be made without the approval of the Board of County Commissioners of Guilford County; 
(7)  To purchase such insurance as the airport authority shall deem necessary; 
(8)  To authorize, deny or withdraw the right of any person, firm or corporation to construct, operate or maintain any airport or landing field within Guilford County. Said airport authority is further authorized and fully empowered to maintain and operate any airport or landing field jointly with any adjoining county or counties or jointly with other airport authorities operating under authorization from one or more adjoining counties of the municipalities therein; 
(9)  To deposit or invest and reinvest any of its funds as provided by the Local Government Finance Act, as it may be amended from time to time, for the deposit or investment of unit funds; 
(10)  To purchase any of its outstanding bonds or notes; 
(11)  To operate, own, lease, control, regulate, or grant to others the right to operate on any airport premises, restaurants, snack bars and vending machines, food and beverage dispensing outlets, rental car services, catering services, novelty shops, insurance sales, advertising media, merchandising outlets, motels, hotels, barber shops, automobile parking and storage facilities, automobile service stations, garage service facilities, motion picture shows, personal service establishments, and all other types of facilities as may be directly or indirectly related to the maintenance and furnishing to the public of a complete air terminal installation; 
(12)  To possess the same exemptions in respect to payment of taxes and license fees as provided for municipal corporations by the laws of the State of North Carolina. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(d))  
Sec. 5-107. - Local Government Revenue Bond Act powers. 
The airport authority is hereby declared to be a "municipality" within the meaning of the Local Government Revenue Bond Act having the power granted to municipalities therein. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(e))  
Sec. 5-108. - Property acquisition and disposal. 
The airport authority is hereby authorized and empowered to acquire from the county of Guilford, the cities of Greensboro and High Point, by agreement therewith, and such county and cities are hereby authorized and empowered to grant and convey, either by gift or for such consideration as it may be deemed wise, any real or personal property which now owns or may hereafter be acquired, and which may be necessary for the construction, operation, and maintenance of any airport or facilities of same located in the county of Guilford. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(f))  
Sec. 5-109. - Lands acquired and occupied for public purpose. 
Any lands acquired, owned, controlled or occupied by the said airport authority shall, and are hereby declared to be acquired, owned, controlled and occupied for a public purpose. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(g))  
Sec. 5-110. - Eminent domain. 
Private property needed by said airport authority for any airport, landing field, or facilities of same may be acquired by gift or devise, or may be acquired by private purchase or by the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the airport authority, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 40 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as amended. Aviation easements needed by the airport authority for any airport, landing field or facilities of same may likewise be acquired by gift, devise, or private purchase or by the exercise of the power of eminent domain by said authority, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 40 of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(h))  
Sec. 5-111. - Annual report; obligations imposed on county. 
The said airport authority shall make an annual report to the Guilford County Commissioners, setting forth in detail the operations and transactions conducted by it pursuant to this act. The said airport authority shall be regarded as the corporate instrumentality and agent for the County of Guilford for the purpose of developing airport facilities in the County of Guilford, but it shall have no power to pledge the credit of the County of Guilford, or any subdivision thereof, or to impose any obligation upon the County of Guilford or any subdivision thereof, except and when such power is expressly granted by statute. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(i))  
Sec. 5-112. - Rights reserved to authority. 
All rights and powers given to the counties or municipalities by the statutes of North Carolina, which may now be in effect or be enacted in the future relating to the development, regulation and control of municipal airports and the regulations of aircraft, are hereby vested in the said airport authority, and the County of Guilford may delegate its powers under the said acts to the authority and the authority shall have concurrent right with the County of Guilford to control, regulate and provide for the development of aviation in the County of Guilford. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(j))  
Sec. 5-113. - Personnel. 
The said airport authority is hereby authorized to employ such agents, engineers and attorneys and other persons whose services may be deemed by the airport authority to be necessary or useful in carrying out the provisions of this act. Members of the said airport authority shall not be personally liable, in any manner, for their acts as members of the airport authority, except for misfeasance or malfeasance. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 3(k))  
Sec. 5-114. - Reenactment of prior laws. 
To the extent that said Chapter 501 may have been effective in repealing said Chapter 98, if it did so, said Chapter 98 as amended by Chapter 601 of the 1943 Session Laws, Chapter 137 of the 1945 Session Laws, Chapter 1198 of the 1957 Session Laws and Chapter 793 of the 1969 Session Laws and as further amended by the provisions of The Local Government Revenue Bond Act, the same being Article 5 of Chapter 159 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, is hereby re-enacted, ratified, validated and confirmed in all respects as if said Chapter 501 had not repealed said Chapter 98, and the continued operation of the airport by, and the continued existence of, the authority are hereby ratified, validated and confirmed in all respects, in each case. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 4)  
Sec. 5-115. - Validation of authority actions. 
To the extent said Chapter 501 may have rendered invalid any acts of the authority otherwise lawful, if it did so, all actions taken by the authority since the enactment of said Chapter 501, to the extent that such actions would have been lawfully authorized as if said Chapter 501 had not been enacted, are hereby ratified, validated and confirmed in all respects. 
(S.L. 1979, c. 1078, (Second session, 1980), Sec. 5) 
Editor's note— Sections 6 through 8 of S.L. 1979, c. 1078 providing for initial membership of the authority, severability and effective date have not been included in this codification.  
CHAPTER 6 - Police and Fire; Additional Powers 
 
Sec. 6-101. - Auxiliary police and fire. 
The City Council may provide for the organization, recruiting, training, equipping, and appointing of auxiliary policemen and auxiliary firemen for the City of High Point. 
Duly appointed auxiliary policemen and firemen shall, while training and while performing duties on behalf of the city incidental to their appointment, be entitled to workmen's compensation benefits to the same extent as regular city employees. Compensation payments to auxiliary policemen shall be based upon the entrance salary of a regular city police patrolman at the time of the injury. Compensation payments to auxiliary firemen shall be based upon the entrance salary of a regular city fireman at the time of the injury. 
Auxiliary policemen and firemen shall not be entitled to remuneration for their services unless called into active duty by the city council because of an emergency, in which event they may receive such compensation for their services as shall be fixed by the council. Auxiliary policemen and firemen shall not be entitled to any benefits of compensation other than those provided by or pursuant to this section. This subsection shall not in any manner affect the rights of any person to benefits provided by the State of North Carolina or by Act of Congress for civilian defense workers or auxiliary policemen and firemen. 
The City of High Point shall be entitled to the same immunities with respect to the action of auxiliary policemen and auxiliary firemen in the performance of their duties or training or otherwise, to which it is entitled with respect to the actions of regular city policemen and firemen in the performance of their duties. 
(S.L. 1965, c. 309, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 6-102. - Rescue squad. 
The governing body of any municipality in Guilford County is hereby authorized to create an organization within its police or fire department or both, to be known as a municipal rescue squad and to allocate sufficient funds to train and equip such an organization, for the purpose of providing emergency life saving and rescue service to persons within such municipality whose lives or property are imperiled. In the event it shall be deemed advisable, the governing body of such municipality is hereby authorized to provide such emergency life saving and rescue services by contracting with any incorporated, nonprofit volunteer or community rescue squad for such purposes. 
The Board of County Commissioners of Guilford County is hereby authorized to participate with any municipality in Guilford County electing to provide such services by sharing the expenses thereof in such amounts as said board shall deem advisable, provided that when Guilford County shall make any appropriation as herein allowed, the services, facilities and equipment of such agency or corporation shall be available to any person at any place in Guilford County requiring them. 
Any expenditure made under this Act is hereby declared to be a necessary expense and for a public purpose. 
(S.L. 1957, c. 525, §§ 1—3)  
LOCAL ACTS DISPOSITION TABLE 
Date 	Subject 	Disposition 
1941 Public-Local Laws, Chapter 98 	Airport authority 	See 5-114 
1941 Public-Local Laws, Chapter 293 	Firemen's pensions 	4-101 et seq., 4-114 
1943 Session Laws, Chapter 601 	Airport authority 	See 5-114 
1943 Session Laws, Chapter 575 	Firemen's pensions 	4-104, 4-105, 4-111 
1945 Session Laws, Chapter 137 	Airport authority 	See 5-114 
1945 Session Laws, Chapter 293 	Firemen's pensions 	4-101, 4-103 et seq., 4-111 
1949 Session Laws, Chapter 559 	Firemen's pensions 	4-101 
1951 Session Laws, Chapter 594 	Firemen's pensions 	4-101, 4-104 et seq., 4-111 
1955 Session Laws, Chapter 314 	Animal shelter 	1-101 et seq. 
1955 Session Laws, Chapter 496 	Police pensions 	3-101 et seq. 
1955 Session Laws, Chapter 1235 	Police pensions 	3-101 
1957 Session Laws, Chapter 525 	Rescue squad 	6-102 
1957 Session Laws, Chapter 825 	Police pensions 	3-101 
1957 Session Laws, Chapter 877 	Firemen's pensions 	4-101 et seq. 
1957 Session Laws, Chapter 1198 	Airport authority 	See 5-114 
1959 Session Laws, Chapter 133 	Police pensions 	3-101, 3-103, 3-105 
1959 Session Laws, Chapter 680 	Firemen's pensions 	4-115 
1961 Session Laws, Chapter 524 	Firemen's pensions 	4-115 
1965 Session Laws, Chapter 309 	Police and fire reserve 	6-101 
1969 Session Laws, Chapter 793 	Airport authority 	See 5-114 
1971 Session Laws, Chapter 761 	Police pensions 	3-101, 3-103, 3-104 
1973 Session Laws, Chapter 282 	Police pensions 	3-101, 3-104 et seq. 
1975 Session Laws, Chapter 691 	Police pensions 	3-101 et seq. 
1977 Session Laws, Chapter 247 	Police pensions 	3-104 
1979 Session Laws, Chapter 501 	Charter; amendments to general laws 	Charter, 2-101, 2-102 
1979 Session Laws, Chapter 1078 	Airport authority 	5-101 et seq. 
 
Date 	Section 	Disposition 
1981 Session Laws, Chapter 290 	1 	Charter, 6.3a, b 
1983 Session Laws, Chapter 180 	1 	Charter, 5.1—5.3 
1987 Session Laws, H.B. 524 	1       Rpld 	Charter, §§ 5.1—5.4 
1987 Session Laws, H.B. 625 	1 	3-109 
1987 Session Laws, Chapter 223 	1 	Charter, § 2.4 
1987 Session Laws, H.B. 2296 	1 	Charter, § 8.14(3) 
1987 Session Laws, H.B. 2297 	1 	Charter, § 9.5(a), (b) 
1991 Session Laws, H.B. 244 	3 	Charter, § 2.2 
1993 Session Laws, Chapter 275, H.B. 398 	1 	Charter, § 7.1 
  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 1 - Use and Construction of the Code 
 
Sec. 1-1-1. - How code designated and cited. 
The provisions of the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances of the City of High Point, North Carolina 1982," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 1-1) 
State Law reference— Admission of Code in evidence, G.S. 160A-79.  
Sec. 1-1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(1)  City. The words "the city" shall mean the City of High Point. 
(2)  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
(3)  Council. The words "the council" shall mean the council of the City of High Point, North Carolina. 
(4)  County. The words "the county" shall mean the respective counties of Guilford, Randolph and Davidson, North Carolina, except as otherwise provided. 
(5)  Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
(6)  In the city or within the city shall mean any territory, the jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its regulatory power, has been conferred by general or special law. 
(7)  Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
(8)  May. The word "may" is permissive. 
(9)  Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
(10)  Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
(11)  Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
(12)  Owner. The word "owner" when applied to buildings or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
(13)  Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
(14)  Personal property includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
(15)  Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
(16)  Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
(17)  Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
(18)  Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
(19)  Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(20)  Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
(21)  State. The words "the state" shall mean the State of North Carolina. 
(22)  Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
(23)  Tenant. The words "tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land whether alone or with others. 
(24)  Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
(25)  Writing. The words "writing" and "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
(26)  Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Rules of construction, G.S. 123; computation of time, G.S. 1-593.  
Sec. 1-1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of the sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 1-3)  
Sec. 1-1-4. - Criminal penalty, not exclusive remedy; continuing violations. 
(a)  In accordance with G.S. 160A-175, and unless this code of ordinances provides otherwise, violation of any provision shall be a misdemeanor as provided in G.S. 14-4, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. An ordinance may provide by express statement that the maximum fine or term of imprisonment to be imposed for its violation shall be some figure or number of days less than the maximum penalties prescribed by G.S. 14-4. 
(b)  By express statement, an ordinance contained herein may provide for its enforcement by other remedies, as authorized in G.S. 160A-175, including the imposition of civil fines, the ordering of appropriate equitable relief, including injunctions, or a combination of remedies. 
(c)  An ordinance may provide, when appropriate, that each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
State Law reference— Violation of city ordinances a misdemeanor, G.S. 14-4; enforcement of ordinances, G.S. 160A-175.  
Sec. 1-1-5. - Severability of parts of code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since they would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this code of any unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 1-5)  
Sec. 1-1-6. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 1-6)  
Sec. 1-1-7. - Amendments to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this code of ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any parts thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until such time that this code of ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of High Point, North Carolina, 1982, is hereby amended to read as follows: ___________." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of High Point, North Carolina, 1980, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:" The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 1-7)  
Sec. 1-1-8. - Altering code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-4 hereof. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 1-8)  
Title 2 - GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  
CHAPTER 1 - City Council[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Mayor and council, Charter, Art. II; elections, Charter, Art. III. 
 
ARTICLE A - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 2-1-1. - Appointments to be by ballot upon request. 
All appointments by the city council shall be by ballot, if requested by any two (2) members present, and a majority vote of all members present shall be necessary for any appointment; provided, that this requirement of voting by ballot may be suspended by a majority vote of the city council on motion duly made; and provided further, that all ballots be marked and made available for public inspection as required by G.S. 143-318.13.  
Sec. 2-1-2. - Applications and petitions to council to be in writing. 
All applications and petitions to the city council shall be presented in writing and shall be subject to any motion which any councilman may think proper to make. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-27)  
Secs. 2-1-3—2-1-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Meetings, Rules, Procedures[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal council meetings, G.S. 160A-68 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-1-11. - Regular meetings. 
There shall be held regular meetings of the city council at the city hall twice each month at a time as the city council may determine. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-13)  
Sec. 2-1-12. - Special meetings; notice; business to be considered. 
Special meetings of the city council may be called by the mayor, city manager or by any two (2) members of the city council at any time to consider only those matters as shall be mentioned in the call for the meeting, and written notice of which shall be given to each member of the city council; provided, that public notice shall be given of the special meeting as required by G.S. 143-318.12. 
State Law reference— Calling special meetings, G.S. 160A-71.  
Sec. 2-1-13. - Adjournments. 
Any regular or special meeting of the city council, and any adjourned meeting thereof, may adjourn to any time prior to the next regular meeting date as may be fixed by the city council. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-15)  
Sec. 2-1-14. - Mayor to be presiding officer; mayor pro tempore. 
The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore, or in the absence of both, any member of the city council who may be designated (a quorum being present) shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, adjourned or special meeting. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum. He shall decide all questions of order subject to appeal to the city council. On every appeal he shall have the right in his chair to assign his reason for his decisions, and any member of the council may state the grounds for his appeal. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-16) 
Cross reference— Presiding officer, Charter, Sec. 2.3; selection and duties of mayor pro tempore, Charter, Sec. 2.4.  
Sec. 2-1-15. - Adjournment in absence of quorum. 
If a quorum of the council is not present, the mayor may send for absentees, and if a quorum fails to attend, the meeting shall stand adjourned to any time as may be agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-20) 
Cross reference— Quorum of council, Charter, Sec. 2.5(c).  
Sec. 2-1-16. - Rules of order. 
Except as may be provided otherwise by rule or resolution of the city council in any particular instance, Robert's Rules of Order, current edition, shall govern the parliamentary procedure of the city council.  
Sec. 2-1-17. - Motions; to reconsider. 
No question decided by the city council may be reversed at any subsequent meeting except by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the members of the city council. A motion to reconsider a vote shall not be in order except at the same or any adjourned meeting to that at which the vote is taken, or upon notice by one voting with the majority that a motion will be made to reconsider at the next regular meeting. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-22)  
Sec. 2-1-18. - Same; to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall have precedence and shall be acted upon without debate. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-23)  
Sec. 2-1-19. - Committees; standing and special; mayor to appoint members; reports. 
With the advice and consent of a majority of the city council, the mayor may appoint standing and special committees, and may require those committees to make investigations of a special or general nature and to file a written report with the city council at a subsequent regular meeting. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-24)  
Sec. 2-1-20. - Same; duties. 
The city council may, by resolution, prescribe the duties of all special and standing committees. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-25)  
Sec. 2-1-21. - Keeping of minutes; petitions, etc., to be filed in minute book. 
A complete and accurate account of all proceedings of the city council shall be kept by the city clerk. Every resolution or order adopted, or made by the council, and every petition submitted to it, that has not been set out in full in the minutes, shall be filed in an exhibit book, the proper reference shall be made thereto in the minutes. The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the mayor and city clerk. 
(Code 1958, § 2-34)  
Sec. 2-1-22. - Official action by city council. 
Official action by the city council can only be taken at a regular, special, or continued meeting of the city council, which includes continued public hearings and properly scheduled or called meetings denominated "Committee of the Whole". No standing or special committee of the city council shall have the power to act for the city council regardless of the number of city council members on the committee or present. 
(Ord. No. 6105/04-02, § 1, 1-5-04)  
Secs. 2-1-23—2-1-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C - Ordinances[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Use and construction of code, title 1. 
 
Sec. 2-1-31. - Written form; majority vote required for approval; form. 
All proposed ordinances shall be submitted in writing and adopted only by a majority vote of the members of the council. They shall be approved as to form by the city attorney before the city council may take any action on the same. 
(Code 1958, § 2-28)  
Sec. 2-1-32. - Confinement to one subject; title. 
All ordinances shall be confined to one (1) subject, except revenue ordinances, and the substance of each ordinance shall be expressed clearly in the title. 
(Code 1958, § 2-29)  
Sec. 2-1-33. - Dealing with franchises. 
Ordinances dealing with the granting of franchises shall not be passed finally on the day of introduction. No resolution to alter or repeal any rule or ordinance of the council, enact any new ordinance, grant any franchise or special privilege, shall be offered at any other than a regular meeting, except by a three-fourths (¾) majority of those present; and shall at the next or subsequent regular meeting, receive a majority vote of the entire city council before its adoption. 
(Code 1958, § 2-30)  
Sec. 2-1-34. - When effective. 
All ordinances enacted by the city council shall be in force and effect on the date of final passage, unless some other effective date is specified therein.  
Sec. 2-1-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6798/11-06, adopted Feb. 7, 2011, repealed § 2-1-35 which pertained to notice of passage and derived from § 2-32 of the 1958 Code.  
Sec. 2-1-36. - Official copy. 
A true copy of any ordinance or resolution, which has been duly enacted by the city council, and has been signed by the city clerk, and the official seal of the city has been attached thereto, shall be known and recognized as an official copy of any ordinance or resolution of the city. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-33) 
State Law reference— Filing true copies of ordinances in book, G.S. 160A-78.  
CHAPTER 2 - Administrative Organization[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— City manager, Charter, Sec. 4.1 et seq.; city clerk, Charter, Secs. 4.1, 4.2. 
 
Sec. 2-2-1. - Departments/divisions established. 
The administrative organization of the city shall be divided into the following departments/divisions which are hereby created: 
(1)  Central engineering; 
(2)  Central services; 
(3)  Communications services; 
(4)  Economic development; 
(5)  Electric; 
(6)  Finance; 
(7)  Fire; 
(8)  General government; 
(9)  Internal audit; 
(10)  Inspections; 
(11)  Law; 
(12)  Library; 
(13)  Management information services; 
(14)  Parks and recreation; 
(15)  Personnel; 
(16)  Planning and community development; 
(17)  Police; 
(18)  Public works; 
(19)  Theatre; 
(20)  Transportation; 
(21)  Water and sewer. 
(Ord. No. 89-35, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-2-2. - Bureaus; divisions; functions and duties of departments. 
The departments of the city shall consist of those bureaus, divisions and employees which shall perform the functions and duties as prescribed by this code or by administrative directive of the city manager.  
CHAPTER 3 - Boards and Commissions[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation commission, Sec. 7-1-1 et seq.; library board of trustees, Sec. 7-4-1 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, Sec. 9-2-1 et seq.; housing board of adjustments and appeals, Sec. 9-1-111 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A - Human Relations Program and Commission[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , adopted Aug. 27, 2015, repealed Art. A and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. A, §§ 2-3-1—2-3-10, pertained to the human relations commission and derived from §§ 2-51—2-60 of the 1958 Code; Ord. No. 01-74, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 2001; and Ord. No. 6233/05-24, § 1, adopted March 10, 2005. 
 
Sec. 2-3-1. - Policy; established program; commission. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its general police powers and its governmental authority in the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare, to encourage understanding and good will between all persons; to promote and develop mutual respect among all citizens toward each other; and to work for the elimination of discriminatory practices. 
Whereas under authority granted in G.S. 160A-492, the city hereby establishes a human relations program for the achievement of its policy and there is hereby established a commission to be known as the human relations commission ("commission"), which shall be appointed, organized and function in an advisory role for city council as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Sec. 2-3-2. - Purpose: human relations program. 
The human relations program is devoted to: 
(i)  The study of problems in the area of human relations; 
(ii)  The promotion of equality of opportunity for all citizens; 
(iii)  The promotion of understanding, respect and goodwill among all citizens; 
(iv)  The provision of channels of communication among the races; 
(v)  Dispute resolution; 
(vi)  Encouraging the employment of qualified people without regard to race; and 
(vii)  Encouraging youth to become better trained and qualified for employment. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Sec. 2-3-3. - Commission; composition, terms of members and compensation. 
(a)  Membership. The human relations commission shall be selected for membership in the following manner. The mayor shall nominate one (1) member, city council members will make additional eight (8) nominations, one (1) to be made by each of the six (6) ward representatives and one (1) to be made by each of the two (2) at large council representation. All nominees shall be confirmed by the approval of the city council. All nominees must reside within the City of High Point and in the event any nominees are not approved by city council, the person making the original nomination shall submit an alternate nomination. There is no requirement that the commission membership have representation from all wards. The city council will endeavor to create a composition for the commission that fairly represents the social, economic, gender and ethnic composition of the population of the city. The city council may in its discretion appoint five (5) high school and two (2) college/university student representatives from high schools and/or colleges and universities located within the City of High Point ("student representatives"). Such student representatives shall be non-voting members of the commission. City council shall appoint one (1) member of city council to act as the liaison to the commission. The appointed liaison shall attend the commission meetings and keep city council informed as to the activities of the commission. 
(b)  Terms. The term of office for each Commission member shall be as follows: 
(1)  All members will serve a two-year staggered term; 
(2)  No member shall serve more than three (3) consecutive terms; 
(3)  Each member shall hold office until the qualification and appointment of his/her successor or until one (1) year has lapsed since the expiration of the term for which the member was appointed, whichever first occurs; 
(4)  In order to establish staggered terms the original voting members of the commission shall be appointed as follows: 
a.  Three (3) members for a one-year term; 
b.  Three (3) members for a two-year term; and 
c.  Three (3) members for a three-year term. 
d.  Thereafter, each newly appointed voting member shall serve for a two-year term. 
(c)  Compensation. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. The commission shall be furnished secretarial, clerical and support staff by the city manager to assist in its organizational efforts. The commission shall recommend an annual budget to the city manager which budget shall include staff support provided by the manager, materials and supplies as are necessary for the proper function of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Sec. 2-3-4. - Officers. 
The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson, each of whom shall serve for one-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Sec. 2-3-5. - Committees. 
Council may, as necessary and upon request from the commission, appoint or approve the appointment of committees related to specific human relations problems. These committees shall be composed of adult residents of the city that are not members of the commission and chaired by a member of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Sec. 2-3-6. - Meetings; open meetings. 
The commission shall hold meetings as necessary at dates and times as may be fixed by the commission. All commission meetings are open meetings, open to the public and shall abide by all applicable laws, regulations and policies. The commission shall work with the city clerk to assure each meeting is properly noticed. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Sec. 2-3-7. - Quorum. 
A quorum shall consist of a simple majority of the current membership. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Sec. 2-3-8. - Rules of procedure. 
The commission shall adopt any rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties, which shall be reported to the city council and filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Sec. 2-3-9. - Functions and duties of the commission. 
The human relations commission shall serve as an advisor to the city council with respect to human services and human rights. Specifically as approved by city council, the commission may: 
(1)  Promote mutual understanding and respect for the purpose of the elimination of discriminatory practices in the city; 
(2)  Evaluate socio-economic human relations needs; 
(3)  Develop plans and analyses for human service needs; 
(4)  Advise city council on the establishment of human relations, goals, objectives, policies and standards; 
(5)  Monitor the trends and activities in human relations in the city; 
(6)  Conduct council-approved programs within the community about good human relations practices and laws, regulations, policies and programs affecting equal rights and opportunities for all persons; 
(7)  Advise city council with respect to assistance to be provided to established organizations in the area of human relations; 
(8)  Receive or gather information and attempt to conciliate and otherwise process complaints and inquiries concerning human relations and human rights that are made to the city staff assigned to support the commission; 
(9)  Make such recommendations to the city council as it deems necessary to fully implement the policy of this article; 
(10)  Establish a subcommittee of its members which shall have the authority to attempt conciliation or mediation or both as to any complaint; 
(11)  Perform such other related duties as may be requested by city council; 
(12)  Encourage youth to become better trained and qualified for employment; and 
(13)  Provide biannual reports to city council that contains a six-month work plan for desired programs, goals. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Sec. 2-3-10. - Fair housing. 
The human relations commission may address fair housing matters in accordance with G.S. 160A-499.2 and any city ordinances adopted under such authority, however the commission shall not function in those areas in which the city council has expressly legislated. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Sec. 2-3-11. - Human relations department. 
The purpose of the human relations department is to furnish support and assistance to the commission. All employees of the human relations department are considered employees of the city and shall be hired, appointed, terminated and/or removed in the same manner as other city employees hired by the city manager and shall perform all duties under the supervision of the city manager or his/her designee. It shall be the duty of the human relations employee(s) to: 
(1)  Perform the administrative work of the commission and to carry out its recommendations as approved by the city council; and 
(2)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the city manager and his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 7169/15-52 , 8-27-15)  
Secs. 2-3-12—2-3-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Historical Commission[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Historic properties commissions, G.S. 160A-399.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-3-21. - Creation; appointment; term; vacancy; salaries. 
An historical commission is hereby created for the city, and the commission shall consist of a chairman and not less than six (6) nor more than 16 other persons who shall be appointed by resolution by the city council of the city and the city council shall designate the terms of years for which each member of the commission shall serve and their successors shall be appointed by the city council to serve for such terms as shall be determined in such resolution. In case of a vacancy in any of the terms of the members of the commission, the persons appointed to fill vacancies shall be appointed only for the unexpired term. They shall serve without salary. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-63)  
Sec. 2-3-22. - Duties and powers. 
The duties and powers of the historical commission shall be: 
(1)  To bring together those people interested in history, and especially in the history of High Point and the surrounding territory; 
(2)  To discover and collect any material which may help to establish or illustrate the history of the area: its exploration, settlement, development, and activities in peace and in war and its progress in population, wealth, education, arts, science, agriculture, manufacturing, trade, and transportation; 
(3)  To collect printed material, such as histories, genealogies, biographies, descriptions, gazetteers, directories, newspapers, pamphlets, catalogs, circulars, handbills, programs, and posters; manuscript material such as letters, diaries, journals, memoranda, reminiscences, rosters, service records, account books, charts, surveys, and field books; and museum material such as pictures, photographs, paintings, portraits, scenes, aboriginal relics, and artifacts and other material objects illustrative of life, conditions, events, and activities of the past and the present; 
(4)  To provide for the preservation of such material and for its accessibility, as far as may be feasible, to all who wish to examine or study it; 
(5)  To cooperate with officials in insuring the preservation and accessibility of the records and archives of the area and of its cities, towns, villages, and institutions, and to undertake the restoration, reconstruction and maintenance of historic buildings; 
(6)  To erect and maintain historic monuments, and markers; 
(7)  To disseminate historical information and arouse interest in the past by publishing historical material in the newspapers or otherwise; by holding meetings with pageants, addresses, lectures, papers, and discussions; by marking historic buildings, sites, and trails; and by using all news media to awaken public interest; 
(8)  To maintain and supervise museum properties, the acquisition of materials, artifacts and items to be used therein, and to advise and recommend in regard to construction of future museum structures; 
(9)  To acquire, restore, supervise and maintain historic dwellings or sites in the area that have been or will be acquired in the future; 
(10)  To accept and receive monies through donations, membership drives, and otherwise and to expend and disburse the same for the purposes and objects of the commission in its discretion; 
(11)  To accept and receive artifacts and properties by donation, purchase, loan or otherwise and to properly control, preserve, and display the same for the enjoyment and education of the general public, which artifacts and properties shall be used and interpreted in the discretion of the commission; and 
(12)  To work with and in conjunction with any duly qualified nonprofit historic corporation and/or society to carry out these duties, objectives and powers. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 2-64)  
Secs. 2-3-23—2-3-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C - Citizens Advisory Council 
 
Sec. 2-3-31. - Creation; purpose. 
(a)  A citizens advisory council ("CAC") of the City of High Point, North Carolina is hereby created. 
(b)  The purpose of the CAC is to provide two-way communication between city council and the citizens of High Point. It shall serve as a forum to hear and screen citizen concerns and priorities and also serve as an advisory body to the city council to study, advise and recommend on concerns of the city and its citizens. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-32. - General scope. 
Meaningful citizen involvement is based on the effectiveness of local government and residents to work toward mutually shared goals and priorities; a clear understanding of how priorities are established and how priorities, level of services and financial resources interrelate. It is clearly understood that the CAC has no official legislative or directive function in city government. In harmony with provisions of the city charter, it is understood that the city council is the only authorized legislative body in the city and that the city manager is the single administrative authority for directing the implementation by city staff of programs and policies as determined by the city council. The CAC shall be an advisory body to the city council and no other power or duties are to be implied herein. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-33. - Functions of CAC. 
The functions of the CAC shall be as follows: 
(1)  Relationship of CAC and city council. The CAC may have a role in advising city council in the setting of priorities for the city. 
(2)  Communications between city council and citizens. The CAC shall encourage and establish effective and adequate means of two-way communications between citizens of the community and the city council. 
(3)  Receiving of petitions and requests. The CAC shall serve as a body for the receiving of requests and petitions on behalf of citizens for further consideration. (This in no way is intended to prevent citizens from taking requests, concerns and petitions directly to city council.) 
(4)  Public hearings. The CAC shall organize and conduct at least one (1) public hearing per year in cooperation with the city council for the citizens of High Point. 
(5)  Reports to city council. The CAC shall report to city council quarterly on its activities through a written performance report prepared by staff and approved by the CAC. 
(6)  Duties and responsibilities generally. The CAC shall advise city council on the establishment of a communications network between citizens and city council; to hear the concerns and petitions of citizens and receive petitions from throughout the community and to forward them with or without recommendation to city council for council's consideration. The CAC shall also provide input for the city's community development program, by way of goal formulation, identification of community development target areas and establishment of programs and funding priorities by forwarding recommendations to the city council. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-34. - Composition. 
The CAC shall be composed of nine (9) members. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 1, 4-6-89; Ord. No. 00-128, § 1, 12-21-00; Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-35. - Members; selection procedure. 
(a)  The nine (9) members of the CAC shall be nominated by the mayor and each member of city council (one (1) each). All nominees shall be appointed with confirmation or approval of the city council. 
(b)  If a nominee is not accepted by city council, the person making the original nomination shall submit an alternate nomination. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 2, 4-6-89; Ord. No. 00-128, § 2, 12-21-00; Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-36. - Term of office. 
The term of office for each member shall be as follows: 
(1)  All members will serve a two-year term, beginning June 1. 
(2)  No member shall serve more than three (3) consecutive two-year terms; partial terms of office of less than a full two-year term shall not be considered a two-year term and shall not apply to the term limits of this section. 
(3)  The term of office for those members appointed by the mayor and those appointed by the councilpersons representing wards 2, 4, and 6 shall expire in even numbered years (effective May 2018). 
(4)  The term of office for those members appointed by the at large representatives and those appointed by councilpersons representing wards 1, 3, and 5 shall expire in odd numbered years (effective May 2019). 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 3, 4-6-89; Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-37. - Removal of members. 
(a)  A member of the CAC shall be removed by the council for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Ceasing to be a citizen of High Point. Any CAC member who removes his/her residence from the City of High Point during his/her term shall automatically cease to be a member of the CAC on the date of his/her move from the city. 
(2)  Ceasing to be a citizen of a ward. Any member nominated by a ward councilman or as a CAC ward representative who moves his/her residence from the ward shall automatically cease to be a member of the CAC on the date of his/her move from the ward. 
(b)  City council may consider removal of a member whose conduct brings discredit to the CAC, city council or City of High Point. 
(c)  Absenteeism. City council may consider removal of a member for excessive absenteeism. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 4, 4-6-89; Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-38. - Method of filling vacancies. 
A vacancy on the CAC shall be filled by city council as set forth in section 2-3-35. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-39. - Standing sub-committees. 
Sub or ad hoc committees shall be formed as needed. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-40. - Work plan. 
Each sub-committee shall report on its accomplishments at each meeting of the CAC. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-41. - Chairmen of standing sub-committees. 
Chairmen of standing sub-committees shall be selected by the chairman of the CAC. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-42. - Officers. 
(a)  Chairman. A chairman shall be elected by the CAC from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be for one (1) year and the chairman shall be eligible for re-election for one (1) consecutive term. The chairman shall preside at all CAC meetings and decide all matters of order and procedure, subject to CAC by-laws and procedures, unless directed otherwise by a majority of the CAC in session at the time. The chairman shall appoint any committees found necessary to consider any matters properly before the CAC or to perform any of its duties with the approval of the CAC. 
(b)  Vice-chairman. A vice-chairman shall be elected by the CAC from among its members, in the same manner and for the same term as the chairman. The vice-chairman shall serve as acting chairman in the absence of the chairman or when requested to do so by the chairman, and at this time the vice-chairman shall have the same powers and duties as the chairman. 
(c)  Secretary. A secretary shall be elected by the CAC from its members in the same manner and the same term as the chairman. The secretary, subject to the direction of the chairman and the CAC, shall keep all records, and be responsible for all correspondence of the CAC. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and hearing, every resolution acted upon by the CAC and all votes of the CAC upon any matter, indicating the names of members absent or failing to vote. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-43. - Executive committee. 
(a)  The executive committee of the CAC shall consist of the officers of the CAC and the chairmen of the standing sub-committees. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The executive committee shall have the authority within the scope of these by-laws: 
(1)  To implement policy and make decisions in the administration of the program; 
(2)  To perform any of the duties of the CAC in situations calling for immediate action or attention; and 
(3)  To perform any other duties and functions as the CAC may from time to time authorize; 
(c)  The CAC can rescind, revoke or modify any action of the executive committee, unless action has been approved by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-44. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the CAC shall be held each month on a date, time, and place approved by the CAC. 
(b)  Special meetings. Special meetings shall be called by the chairman or vice-chairman with the approval of the executive committee. Adequate notice shall be given of the business to be discussed. The chairman shall call a special meeting upon request of the mayor without approval of the executive committee. No published notification of special meetings is required. 
(c)  Sub-committee meetings. All sub-committees shall meet as often as required to carry out their assigned responsibilities. 
(d)  All meetings of the CAC shall be open to the public. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-45. - Members at large. 
All members of the CAC shall perform their duties and responsibilities as requested by the chairman and serve on at least one (1) or more of the standing CAC sub-committees. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-46. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Quorum. The CAC shall not conduct any official business unless a quorum is present. 
(b)  Voting procedure. Unless otherwise specified in the by-laws and procedures, the affirmative vote of a majority of those members present and voting shall be necessary to pass a motion (providing a quorum is present). The chairman shall be entitled to vote on any matter coming before the CAC. 
(Ord. No. 91-71, § 1, 11-21-91; Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-47. - Conduct of meetings. 
The order and conduct of the meetings may be in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, Revised at the discretion of the CAC. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-48. - Rules of procedure. 
The CAC shall adopt any rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties, which shall be reported to the city council, and filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 91-71, § 2, 11-21-91; Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-49. - Meetings, quorum and voting. 
Meetings of the executive committee can be called by the chairman, vice-chairman, or by any two (2) voting members of the committee for a specific date, time and place. The presence of at least a majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of a majority of voting members shall be necessary to pass a motion. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-50. - Minutes. 
The executive committee shall record minutes of each executive committee meeting and shall furnish, within a reasonable time, copies of those minutes to each CAC member. The minutes of the CAC shall be submitted to the council by the next meeting of the council. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Sec. 2-3-51. - Staff support. 
Staff assistance will be made available from the department of community development as requested by the chairman. 
( Ord. No. 7328/17-70 , 9-18-17)  
Secs. 2-3-52—2-3-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE D - Joint Historic Properties Commission 
 
Sec. 2-3-56. - Purpose. 
The historical heritage of Guilford County is one (1) of its most valued and important assets. Conservation of historic properties will stabilize and increase the values in their areas and strengthen the overall economy of the county and state. By means of listing regulation and acquisition of historic properties Gibsonville, Greensboro, Guilford County, High Point and Jamestown seek within their respective zoning jurisdictions: 
(1)  To safeguard its heritage by preserving any property therein that embodies important elements of its cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history; and, 
(2)  To promote the use and conservation of such property for the education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of the county and state as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-57. - Creation. 
There is hereby established by authority of Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 3B of the North Carolina General Statutes, the Guilford County Joint Historic Properties Commission, hereafter referred to as the historic properties commission or commission, to consist of eleven (11) members with four (4) appointed by the Guilford County Commissioners, three (3) appointed by the High Point City Council, one (1) appointed by the Gibsonville Town Council and one (1) appointed by the Jamestown Town Council. 
The commission shall serve without monetary compensation. In establishing the commission and making appointments to it, the above-named board and councils may seek the advice of such state or local historical agencies, societies or organizations as it may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-58. - Representation. 
All members of the historic properties commission shall be residents of Guilford County, and each shall reside within the jurisdiction of the board appointing them representative. A majority of the members shall have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history or architecture. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-59. - Tenure. 
Members of the historic properties commission shall serve overlapping terms of four (4) years. Initially, two (2) appointees by the county, and one (1) appointee each from Gibsonville, Greensboro, High Point and Jamestown shall be for two (2) years. A member may be reappointed for a second consecutive term, but after two (2) consecutive terms, a member shall be ineligible for reappointment until one (1) calendar year has elapsed from the date of the termination of his or her second term. This requirement may be waived if, the city council determines that the removal of an individual or a number of individuals made ineligible by this requirement would be detrimental to the functioning of this joint historic properties commission. Appointments to any vacancy shall be for the remainder of the term of the vacant position for which the appointment is made. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-60. - Attendance of meetings. 
Any member of the historic properties commission who misses more than three (3) consecutive regular meetings or more than one-half the regular meetings in a calendar year without excuse granted by the commission shall lose his or her status as a member of the commission, and shall be replaced or reappointed by the appropriate governing board or council pursuant to Sections 2-3-57 and 2-3-59 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-61. - Meetings. 
The historic properties commission shall hold meetings regularly at least once each month unless there is not sufficient business to warrant a meeting; but not more than sixty (60) days shall expire without a regular or special meeting of the commission. All meetings shall be held in accordance with the North Carolina Open Meetings Law, G.S. Chapter 143, Article 33C. Reasonable notice of the time and place thereof, shall be given to the public. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-62. - Rules of procedure. 
The historic properties commission shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its business, and an annual written report shall be prepared and submitted to the Guilford County Board of Commissioners, the Gibsonville and Jamestown Town Councils, and the Greensboro and High Point City Councils. Such report shall include a comprehensive and detailed review of the activities, problems and actions of the commission as well as any budget requests or recommendations. The commission shall keep a record of its members' attendance and of its resolutions, findings, and recommendations which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-63. - Quorum and vote required for recommendation. 
Six (6) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The concurrence of at least a majority of those members present will be required before any recommendation or action is made on any matter considered. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-64. - Private interest of members. 
No members of the commission may discuss, advocate or vote on any matter in which he has a separate, private or monetary interest, either direct or indirect, and no member may discuss before a governing board or council, any matter which has been, is, or will be considered by the commission on which he serves, and in which he has a separate, private or monetary interest, either direct or indirect. Any member who violates this provision may be subject to removal from the commission. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-65. - Commission powers. 
The historic properties commission is authorized and empowered to undertake such actions reasonably necessary to the discharge and conduct of its duties and responsibilities as outlined in this article. 
(1)  Recommend to the Guilford County Board of Commissioners, the Gibsonville and Jamestown Town Councils, and the Greensboro and High Point City Councils, buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects within the corresponding zoning jurisdiction to be designated by ordinance as "historic properties." 
(2)  Acquire by any lawful means the fee or any lesser included interest, including options to purchase, to any such historic properties, to hold, manage, preserve, restore and improve the same, and to exchange or dispose of the property by public or private sale, lease or otherwise, subject to covenants or other legally binding restrictions which will secure appropriate rights of public access and promote the preservation of the property. 
(3)  Restore, preserve and operate such historic properties. 
(4)  Recommend to the board or council that designation of any building, structure, site, area or object as a historic property be revoked or removed. 
(5)  Conduct an educational program on historic properties within its jurisdiction. 
(6)  Cooperate with the state, federal and local governments in pursuance of the purposes of this article. The commission when authorized by the local governing board and councils may contract with the state, or the United States of America, or any agency or with any other organization provided the terms are not inconsistent with state or federal law. 
(7)  Enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, upon private lands for examination or survey thereof. However, no member, employee or agent of the commission may enter any private building or structure without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(8)  Act as, establish or designate a group, body or committee to give advice to property owners concerning the treatment of the historical and visual characteristics of their properties such as color schemes, gardens and landscape features and minor decorative elements. 
(9)  Take steps, during the period of postponement of demolition or alteration of any historic property, to ascertain what the local governing board or councils can or may do to preserve such properties including consultation with private civic groups, interested private citizens, and other public boards and agencies, and including investigation of potential acquisition by the local board or councils when the preservation of a given historic property is clearly in the interest of the general welfare of the community and such property is of certain historic and architectural significance. 
(10)  Propose to the local governing boards and councils changes to this or any other ordinance and propose new ordinances or laws relating to historic properties or relating to a total program for the protection and/or development of the historic resources of Guilford County, the municipalities therein and its environs. 
(11)  Communicate with other boards or commissions or with agencies of the local government or other governmental units to offer or request assistance, aid, guidance or advice concerning matters under its purview or of mutual interest. 
(12)  Publish information about, or otherwise inform the public of any matters pertinent to its purview, duties, organization, procedures, responsibilities, functions or requirements as its budget may allow. 
(13)  Report violations of this ordinance, the zoning ordinances or the building code with respect to historic properties to the zoning enforcement officer of the governmental jurisdiction within which the historic property is located. 
(14)  Accept funds granted to the commission for preservation purposes from private individuals and organizations. 
(15)  Organize itself and conduct its business. 
(16)  Any other powers as allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-66. - Designation of historic properties; adoption of an ordinance of designation. 
Upon compliance with the procedures set out in section 2-3-69 of this article, the Guilford County Board of Commissioners, the Gibsonville and Jamestown Town Councils, and the Greensboro and High Point City Councils may adopt and from time to time, amend or repeal an ordinance designating one (1) or more historic properties. The ordinance shall describe each property designated therein, the name or names of the owner or owners of the property, those elements of the property that are integral to its historical, architectural and/or archaeological value, including the approximate area of surrounding land, and any other information the appropriate board or council deems necessary within the authority of this article. For each building, structure, site, area or object designated as a historic property, the ordinance shall require that the waiting period set forth in section 2-3-70 of this article be observed prior to its demolition, material alteration, remodeling or removal. For each designated historic property, the ordinance shall also provide for a suitable sign on the property that the property has so been designated. If the owner consents, the sign shall be placed upon the property. If the owner objects, the sign shall be placed on a nearby public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-67. - Criteria for designation. 
No property shall be recommended for designation as a historic property unless it is deemed and found by the historic properties commission to be of special significance in terms of its history, architecture, and/or cultural design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or association. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-68. - Inventory. 
An inventory of all properties of historical, architectural and archaeological significance has been completed for Guilford County, High Point, Jamestown, Greensboro and Gibsonville. The inventory shall serve as a guide for the identification, assessment, and designation of historic properties. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-69. - Required procedures. 
No ordinance designating a historic building, structure site, area or object nor any amendment thereto may be adopted, nor may any property be accepted or acquired by the historic properties commission or the local board or council until the following procedural steps have been taken: 
(1)  The historic properties commission shall prepare and adopt rules of procedure, and prepare and adopt principles and guidelines, not inconsistent with this ordinance, for altering, restoring, moving or demolishing properties designated as historic. 
(2)  The historic properties commission shall make or cause to be made, an investigation and report on the historic, architectural, educational or cultural significance of each building, structure, site area or object proposed for designation or acquisition. Such investigation or report shall be forwarded to the Division of Archives and History, North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources. 
(3)  The department of cultural resources, acting through any employee designated by the Secretary of the North Carolina Historical Commission shall either upon request of the department or at the initiative of the historic properties commission be given an opportunity to review and comment upon the substance and effect of the designation of any historic property pursuant to this article. Any comments shall be provided in writing. If the department does not submit its comments or recommendations in connection with any designation within 30 days following receipt by the department of the investigation and report of the commission, the commission and any city or county governing board shall be relieved of any responsibility to consider such comments. 
(4)  The commission and the local board or council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance of designation. Reasonable notice of the time and place thereof shall be given. 
(5)  Following the joint public hearing, the local board or council may adopt the ordinance of designation as proposed, adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the proposed ordinance. 
(6)  Upon adoption of the ordinance of designation, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property shall be given written notification of such designation by the local board or council insofar as reasonable diligence permits. One (1) copy of the ordinance and each amendment thereto shall be filed by the commission in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Guilford County. Each historic property designated in the ordinance shall be indexed according to the name of the owner of the property in the grantee and grantor indexes in the register of deeds office, and the commission shall pay a reasonable fee for filing and indexing. In case of any property lying within the zoning jurisdiction of Gibsonville, Greensboro, High Point or Jamestown, a second copy of the ordinance and each amendment thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the city, county or town clerk, and be made available for public inspection at any reasonable time. 
A third copy of the ordinance and each amendment thereto shall be given to the town, city or county building inspector depending upon the zoning jurisdiction in which the property is located. The fact that a historic property shall be clearly indicated on all tax maps maintained by the town, city or county for such period as the designation remains in effect. 
(7)  Upon adoption of an ordinance of designation or any amendment thereto, it shall be the duty of the commission to give notice thereof to the Guilford County Tax Supervisor. The designation and any recorded restriction upon the property limiting its use for preservation purposes shall be considered by the tax supervisor in appraising it for tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-70. - Required waiting period. 
A property which has been designated as a historic property as herein provided may be materially altered, restored, moved or demolished only following the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the historic properties commission in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 3A of the North Carolina General Statutes. Certificates of appropriateness for designated properties located in historic districts shall be issued and processed by the local historic district commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition of a designated building or structure, or the destruction of an object may not be denied. However, the effective date of such certificate may be delayed for a period of up to 180 days from the date of approval. The maximum period of delay (180 days) shall be reduced by the commission where it finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be deprived of beneficial use of or return from such property by virtue of the delay. During such period the historic properties commission may negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building, structure or object. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-71. - Certain changes not prohibited. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property that does not involve a change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or removal of any such feature when a building inspector or similar official certifies to the commission that such action is required for the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-72. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-3-73. - Criteria for commission review. 
To provide guidelines to owners of historic properties; to provide reasonable standards to assist the historic properties commission in its review, during the waiting period required by section 2-3-70 of this article, of an owner's proposed demolition, material alteration, remodeling or removal of a historic property; and, to provide reasonable standards to assist the commission in determining whether to recommend the revocation or removal of historic property designation on account of a change in a property which has caused its historical significance to be lost or substantially impaired; the commission shall adopt criteria for review which shall be submitted to the local board or council for its approval prior to the commission's review of an owner's application for a certificate of appropriateness and prior to the commission's recommendation of revocation or removal of designation. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-74. - Conditions to certain approvals; authentic restoration reconstruction or rehabilitation. 
In the event that the historic properties commission, in reviewing an owner's application for a certificate of appropriateness during the waiting period required by section 2-3-70 of this article, shall find that a building or structure for which a building permit is required is to be an authentic restoration or reconstructing of a building or structure which existed at the same location but does not meet zoning requirements said building or structure may be authorized to be restored or reconstructed at the same location where the original building or structure was located provided the board of adjustment authorizes such restoration or reconstruction and no use other than that permitted in the district in which it is located is made of said property. Such conditions as may be set by the historic properties commission and the zoning board of adjustment shall be conditions for the issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-75. - Data to be submitted for review and action; required data. 
The historic properties commission shall require data as are reasonably necessary to determine the nature of the owner's proposed actions, which are made known to the historic properties commission when the owner submits the application for a certificate of appropriateness and during the waiting period required by section 2-3-70 of this article. The owner's application for a certificate of appropriateness shall not be considered complete until such required data has been submitted. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-76. - Files to be kept. 
All of the data required shall be filed with the Guilford County Manager or his designee, who shall cause said data to be submitted to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-77. - Record of action taken by the commission. 
The commission shall maintain a file containing records of all written notices of proposed actions submitted to the commission, reasons underlying all actions, drawings submitted for review and subsequent amendments. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-78. - Authority to acquire historic properties. 
When such action is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a designated historic property, the Guilford County Joint Historic Properties Commission may negotiate at any time with the owner for its preservation as allowed by N.C.G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-79. - Receipt and expenditure of funds. 
The town, city or county governing board is authorized to make appropriations to the historic properties commission established pursuant to this article in any amount that it may determine necessary for the expenses of the operation of the commission, and may make available any additional amounts necessary for the acquisition, restoration, preservation, operation and management of historic buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects designated as historic properties, or of land on which historic buildings or structures are located, or to which they may be removed. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-80. - Staff and technical services. 
The commission may recommend to the local governing board, suitable arrangements for the procurement or provision of staff or technical services to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-81. - Ownership of property. 
All lands, buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects acquired by funds appropriated by a governing board or council shall be acquired in the name of the governing board or council. So long as owned by a city, town or the county, historic properties may be maintained by or under the supervision and control of the city, town or the county. However, all lands, buildings or structures acquired by the Guilford County Joint Historic Properties Commission from funds other than those appropriated by a city, town or the county, may be acquired and held in the name of the Guilford County Joint Historic Properties Commission, the city, town or the county, or both. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-82. - Article to apply to publicly owned buildings and structures. 
Designated historic buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects owned by the State of North Carolina or any of its political subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities shall be subject to the regulations imposed by this article, pursuant to the authority of North Carolina General Statute 160A-399.11. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-83. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever this article requires a longer waiting period or imposes other higher standards with respect to a designated historic property than are established under any other statutes, charter provision, regulation or ordinance, this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, charter provision, ordinance or regulation require a longer waiting period or impose other higher standards than are established under this article, such other charter provision, ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Sec. 2-3-84. - Remedies. 
In case any building, structure, site, area or object designated a historic property is about to be demolished whether as the result of deliberate neglect or otherwise, materially altered, remodeled or removed, except in compliance with this article, a city, town or the county or the Guilford County Joint Historic Properties Commission, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful demolition, material alteration, remodeling or removal, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 4-6-89)  
Title 3 - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION  
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Purchasing and contracting, Charter, § 9.5. 
 
Sec. 3-1-1. - Sale of real and personal property owned by municipality. 
(a)  The sale of all personal property belonging to the city shall be made by the financial services director or his/her designee under the direction of the city manager where the value of the property is less than the amount established by North Carolina General Statute Section 160A-266 as amended from time to time and pursuant to law under the direction of the council where the value of the personal property exceeds that amount. The financial services director or his/her designee shall have the authority to declare such property surplus, set its fair market value, and convey title. 
(b)  The city shall be authorized to utilize electronic advertisement in providing public notice of city surplus personal property sales under authority of North Carolina General Statute Section 160A-270 as amended from time to time. 
(c)  The disposal of surplus personal property shall be conducted in accordance with North Carolina General Statute Section 160A-270 as amended from time to time. 
(d)  The sale of real property belonging to the city shall be made by the financial services director or his/her designee as directed by the council, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(e)  Reports of all sales of real and personal property shall be made to the city council. 
(Code 1958, § 2-12; Ord. No. 6393/06-79, § 1, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 3-1-2. - Official depositories. 
The city council shall designate and approve by resolution official depositories of the city as may change from time to time. The financial services director is authorized to deposit public funds with any financial institutions compliant with North Carolina General Statute Section 159-30 as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1958, § 2-12.1; Ord. No. 92-42, § 1, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 6393/06-79, § 1, 11-6-06)  
CHAPTER 2 - Revenue and Taxation  
ARTICLE A - General Provisions 
 
Secs. 3-2-1—3-2-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Business Registration[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , adopted March 6, 2017, repealed the former Art. B, §§ 3-2-11—3-2-38, and enacted a new Art. B, §§ 3-2-11—3-2-21, as set out herein. The former article pertained to privilege license taxes and derived from Code 1958, §§ 12-1—12-22; Ord. No. 86-40, § 1, 9-4-1986; Ord. No. 87-47, § 1, 6-18-1987; and Ord. No. 95-47, § 1, 6-1-1995. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy privilege license taxes, G.S. 160A-211. 
 
Sec. 3-2-11. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to require businesses located within the city limits of High Point to register with the city in order for the city to have up to date records for the uses of buildings within the city, the commercial purposes of business, to assist with fire and police protection, and for the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of High Point. This article is for regulation purposes only. Complying with registration requirements of this article does not excuse a person from any other requirements or regulations placed upon them or their business by any other ordinance or statute. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Sec. 3-2-12. - Business registration required. 
Every person desiring to operate a business, trade, employment, profession, or seeking to do so through an agent operating within the city, unless otherwise provided by law, shall make application in writing to the customer service director, in which shall be stated the definite place where the business, trade, employment, or profession is to be exercised; the name and resident address of the applicant; the nature of the business, trade, employment, or profession; number of years applicant has prosecuted the business, trade, employment, or profession in this city; and such other information as may be required by the customer service director. The required information shall be accompanied by the registration fee prescribed in this article. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Sec. 3-2-13. - Separate registration for each location; no transfer. 
If a person shall operate businesses at two (2) or more separate locations, a separate city registration for each location of the business shall be required. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Sec. 3-2-14. - Application to customer service director. 
(a)  The customer service director shall be the duly authorized agent of the city for the issuing of all city business registrations. Application for business registration under this article shall be submitted to the customer service director prior to commencing business within the city. The application shall be on a form provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the payment of the prescribed registration fee. Any other fees under this article shall also be collected by the customer service director. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application for business registration with the fee prescribed by this article the customer service director, if satisfied that the information is correct and complete, shall issue a city registration certification to the applicant and register the business, trade, employment, or profession in the name of and at the place set out in the application unless otherwise provided. 
(c)  If the customer service director shall refuse to issue a registration certification to an applicant due to the information provided being incomplete, inaccurate, or because of failure to pay the registration fee at the time of application, upon request by the applicant, the customer service director shall provide a written statement for why the application for business registration was refused. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Sec. 3-2-15. - Registration fee and year established. 
The business registration fee imposed and the rates specified in this article shall apply to the businesses registering on and after the first day of May of each year and shall be paid annually. The registration year shall run from May 1 through April 30. The registration fee shall be at the rate adopted by city council as may be modified from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Sec. 3-2-16. - Duty to post certification; permit inspection. 
A business shall post the registration certification conspicuously in the place of business registered. Each person who conducts business in the city shall permit an agent of the city to inspect the business premises during normal business hours to determine the nature of business conducted and compliance with registration requirements. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Sec. 3-2-17. - Exceptions to business registration. 
Businesses and practices that hold a license issued by an occupational licensing board of the State of North Carolina shall be exempt from the business registration requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Sec. 3-2-18. - Business registration non-transferable. 
A business registration certification is non-transferable and each new business must register with the city even if the business is occupying a space previously occupied by a registered business. The business registration fee shall not be refunded if a business closes or moves location during a registration year. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Sec. 3-2-19. - Duplicate registrations. 
A business may request a duplicate registration certification if they are unable to post one due to their current certification becoming lost or illegible. The customer service director may issue a duplicate registration to a currently registered business upon receipt of a $5.00 administrative fee. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Sec. 3-2-20. - Enforcement of article; remedies. 
Violation of any requirement set forth in this article shall subject the person, business, trade, employment, or profession to a civil penalty in the amount of $25.00. Civil penalties shall be in addition to the amount of the annual registration fee. Violations of this article include: 
(a)  Failure to register a business with the city customer service director prior to transacting business within the city limits of High Point or failure to register a business annually with updated information and payment of registration fee. 
(b)  Failure to provide accurate and complete information on a business registration application. 
(c)  Failure to register multiple locations of a business within the city limits of High Point. 
(d)  Failure to post a city issued registration certification. 
(e)  Failure to allow inspection of the business by the city during normal business hours for the purpose of confirming compliance with this article. 
The city may bring suit or utilize any other lawful means to collect registration fees and associated penalties imposed under this article. Violations of this article shall not impose upon the violator any criminal penalty or citation under G.S. Ch. 14. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Sec. 3-2-21. - Appeal. 
Any business who is assessed a civil penalty for violation of this article may appeal to the city manager's office. The appeal must be in writing and submitted within 30 days of the notice of violation to the business by the city. The written appeal should expressly state what hardship prohibited the business from complying with the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 7277/17-19 , 3-6-17)  
Secs. 3-2-22—3-2-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C - Vehicle Lease or Rental Taxes 
 
Sec. 3-2-39. - Levy of tax; gross receipts derived from retail short-term or rental of motor vehicles. 
(a)  Tax on gross receipts derived from retail short-term motor vehicle leases or rentals. The City of High Point hereby imposes and levies a tax on one and one-half (1½) percent of the gross receipts from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the general public, as authorized by G.S. 160A-251.1. 
(b)  Administration. The city through the Guilford County Tax Collector will administer and collect from operators of leasing and rental entities the tax levied hereby. The county tax collector may promulgate additional lawful rules and regulations necessary for the enforcement, implementation and collection of the tax. 
(c)  Payment of taxes and filing of returns. The taxes levied hereby are due and payable to the county in monthly installments on or before the 15th day of the month following the month in which the tax accrues. Every entity required to collect the tax shall, on or before the 15th day of each month, prepare and render a return to the county. The county shall design, print, and furnish to all such entities the necessary forms for filing returns and instructions to insure the full collection of the tax. These tax proceeds shall be placed in a segregated account by the collecting entity and are the property of the city. A return filed for this purpose is not a public record as defined by G.S. 132.1 and may not be disclosed except as provided by law. 
(d)  Penalties. In case of failure or refusal to file a return or pay the tax for a period of 30 days after the time required for filing the return or paying the tax, there shall be an additional tax, as a penalty, of five (5) percent of the tax due, with an additional tax of five (5) percent for each additional month or fraction thereof until the tax is paid. The Guilford County Board of Equalization and Review, for good cause shown, may consider appeals and adjust any penalty or additional tax imposed hereunder. 
(e)  Misdemeanor for willful violation. Any person, firm, corporation or association who willfully attempts in any manner to evade a tax imposed herein or who willfully fails to pay the tax or make and file a return shall, in addition to the penalties provided by law and herein, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. 
(f)  Delegation of powers. The county tax collector shall exercise the powers authorized to the city by G.S.160A-215.1(f) with the county board of equalization and review exercising the powers of the tax review board. 
(Ord. of 6-15-00)  
ARTICLE D - Wholesale Home Furnishings Showroom Tax 
 
Sec. 3-2-40. - Levy of tax. 
There is hereby levied a privilege license tax on every person engaged in the business of operating a wholesale home furnishings showroom in the city. A person is engaged in the business of operating a wholesale home furnishings showroom if the person does either of the following during the tax year: 
(1)  Uses or holds out for use as a wholesale home furnishings showroom, on a permanent or temporary basis, his or her own property. 
(2)  Leases or otherwise provides his or her property to another for use as a wholesale home furnishings showroom on a permanent or temporary basis. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 5-17-01)  
Sec. 3-2-41. - Rate. 
The rate of tax is $0.15 per square foot, and is based on the floor surface area of the wholesale home furnishings showroom used or held out for use. In the case of an ongoing business, the tax is based on the floor surface area used or held out for using during the previous fiscal year of the city. In the case of a new business, the tax is based on the floor surface area used or held out for use during the tax year. There is a minimum tax of $250.00 per location. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 5-17-01; Ord. No. 6369/06-54, § 1, 6-19-06)  
Sec. 3-2-42. - Tax is lien. 
A tax levied under this section becomes a lien on the real property where the wholesale home furnishings showroom is located. The penalties provided in G.S. 105-236 apply to a tax levied under this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 5-17-01)  
Sec. 3-2-43. - Use of tax. 
The city shall use the net proceeds of the tax only for furniture market promotion and visitor assistance. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 5-17-01)  
Sec. 3-2-44. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply: 
(1)  Floor surface area. Gross interior wall space, which may include not only the showroom but also any ancillary areas such as aisles, hallways, stairwells, escalators, elevators, eating and drinking areas, restrooms, and common areas. 
(2)  Furnishings merchandise. Furniture of any kind, including both home and office furniture, furnishings accessories and decorative items of any kind. The term may include lamps, lighting fixtures, pictures, wall coverings, art objects, artificial plants or flowers, rugs, carpets, floor coverings, giftware, kitchenware, and pottery. 
(3)  Furniture market promotion and visitor assistance. Activities and expenditures to promote the International Home Furnishings Market in the city and to assist visitors who attend it. The term may include advertising and other promotional activities, transportation and parking, housing facilitation, buyer registration, and administration of these activities. 
(4)  Net proceeds. Gross proceeds less the cost to the city of administering and collecting the tax, as determined by the finance officer, not to exceed three (3) percent of the first $500,000 of gross proceeds collected each year and one (1) percent of the remaining gross receipts collected each year. 
(5)  Wholesale home furnishings showroom. Real property used or intended for use for the display of furnishings merchandise for the purpose of sale, or exhibition to solicit orders for sale, to resellers of furnishings. 
(6)  Fiscal year of the city. July 1 through June 30. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 5-17-01)  
Title 4 - GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 06-35, adopted April 17, 2006, repealed title 4, personnel administration, in its entirety. Ordinance No. 07-98, adopted Nov. 5, 2007, enacted new provisions for this title to read as herein set out. Formerly, this title consisted of ch. 1, §§ 4-1-1—4-1-6, 4-1-11—4-1-14, 4-1-21—4-1-42, 4-1-51—4-1-60, 4-1-71—4-1-84, 4-1-91—4-1-103, 4-1-111—4-1-120, 4-1-131—4-1-134, 4-1-141—4-1-144, 4-1-151—4-1-157, and 4-1-161. Formerly, ch. 1 pertained to general provisions regarding personnel administration system and derived from the 1958 Code; an ordinance adopted June 21, 1979; the 1982 Code; an ordinance adopted Aug. 5, 1982; Ord. No. 83-49, adopted July 21, 1983; Ord. No. 85-31, adopted May 16, 1985; Ord. No. 85-50, adopted Sept. 5, 1985; Ord. No. 87-27, adopted April 2, 1987; Ord. No. 87-59, adopted July 16, 1987; Ord. No. 88-6, adopted Feb. 18, 1988; Ord. No. 88-98, adopted Nov. 17, 1988; Ord. No. 91-40, adopted June 6, 1991; Ord. No. 93-56, adopted June 3, 1993; Ord. No. 95-23, adopted March 2, 1995; Ord. No. 95-95, adopted Nov. 2, 1995; Ord. No. 95-100, adopted Nov. 16, 1995; Ord. No. 96-69, adopted Nov. 7, 1996; Ord. No. 97-71, adopted Sept. 4, 1997; and Ord. No. 99-56, adopted July 15, 1999. 
 
CHAPTER 3 - Boards and Commissions  
ARTICLE A - Fair Housing[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7187/16-07 , § 1, adopted Jan. 19, 2016, repealed Art. A and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. A, §§ 4-3-1—4-3-13, pertained to the human relations commission and derived from Ord. No. 6503/07-98, §§ 2—14, adopted Nov. 5, 2007. 
 
Sec. 4-3-1. - Procedures. 
The manager will establish a procedure for addressing citizens' concerns relating to fair housing issues. 
(Ord. No. 7187/16-07 , § 1, 1-19-16)  
Title 5 - PUBLIC SAFETY  
CHAPTER 1 - Law Enforcement[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal law enforcement, G.S. 160A-281 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A - Police Department 
 
Sec. 5-1-1. - Composition of department. 
The police department shall be composed of the director of police services (who shall serve as chief of police) and such other personnel, as may be authorized from time to time by the city council.  
Sec. 5-1-2. - Auxiliary police. 
(a)  Pursuant to and subject to the provisions of article XIII, chapter 160A, of the General Statutes of North Carolina, the director of police services of the city is authorized to establish and maintain a volunteer organization of auxiliary police officers to be designated as the "High Point Police Reserve," whose members, when called upon for active duty, shall be clothed with all the power and charged with all the duties of regular members of the police department of the city. The director of police services may prescribe through appropriate rules, regulations and/or orders the duties and responsibilities of such auxiliary officers and the day to day operation of the police reserve organization. 
(b)  Such police officers shall be subject to the orders and directions of superior officers when on active duty as are the regular members of the police department of the city. They shall take and subscribe the oath required by General Statutes 166-12. 
(c)  Such police officers shall receive no compensation for general service as an auxiliary police officer from the city. This subsection shall not prevent employment of members of the High Point Police Reserve as temporary paid police employees when so ordered by the director of police services. 
(d)  Such police officers shall be required to be examined and certified under the provisions of the General Statutes established for the examination and certification of law enforcement officers. 
(e)  The "High Point Police Reserve" may adopt by-laws not inconsistent with the provisions of this section or the rules, regulations and general orders of the police department. 
(f)  Such police officers may be called to active duty during an emergency or on special occasions when regular police officers of the city require their assistance and shall be subject to call of the director of police services for training at other times. The director of police services is authorized to determine when the services of volunteer police officers are required. 
(g)  No member of the auxiliary police organization shall hold a rank or wear insignia indicative of rank corresponding with that of supervisory or command officers of the regular police department. All uniforms and equipment shall conform to the standards established by the director of police services. 
(h)  Members of the auxiliary police organization are prohibited from carrying firearms in a concealed manner, either while performing duties on behalf of the city or while off-duty, unless specifically authorized by the director of police services and in furtherance of some specific police purpose. 
(i)  In addition to the duties herein prescribed for volunteer police officers, they shall perform all duties imposed upon them by the provisions of Chapter 166 of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
(j)  While undergoing official training and while performing duties on behalf of the city pursuant to orders or instructions of the director of police services of the city, auxiliary police officers shall be entitled to all powers, privileges, and immunities afforded by law to regularly employed police officers, including benefits under the North Carolina Workmen's Compensation Act.  
Sec. 5-1-3. - Traffic bureau. 
(a)  The police department is hereby designated as a traffic bureau pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 9.2 of the city charter. 
(b)  The director of police services or his designated city agent is authorized to accept a plea of guilty and to otherwise handle the following violations within the city: 
(1)  Unlawful parking in a restricted handicapped space; 
(2)  Parking over the specified time limit; 
(3)  Parking during restricted hours where official parking control devices are posted; 
(4)  Parking within 25 feet of an intersection (N.C.G.S. 20-162); 
(5)  Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(6)  Protrusion beyond designated parking space; 
(7)  Parking within 15 feet of entrance to alley, driveway or private road; 
(8)  Parking so as to obstruct sidewalk or crosswalk; 
(9)  Parking within 50 feet of bridge, railroad underpass or overhead bridge; 
(10)  Parking within 50 feet of railroad grade crossing; 
(11)  Parking between edge of roadway and property line; 
(12)  Prohibited parking in city-operated parking lots; 
(13)  Parking left side of vehicle to curb on two-way street; 
(14)  Double parking; 
(15)  Protrusion into street more than eight (8) feet; 
(16)  Parking of vehicles in excess of three-quarter-ton rated capacity on streets in residential districts in violation of sections 9-3-241 and 10-1-206(a)(11); 
(17)  Parking in a controlled residential parking area over the amount of time without a valid residential parking permit; 
(18)  Parking upon a median strip; 
(19)  Parking in the following restricted zones: 
a.  Commercial loading zone; 
b.  Passenger loading zone; 
c.  Bus stop; 
d.  Taxicab stand; 
(20)  Parking in a prohibited zone. 
(Ord. No. 91-73, § 1, 11-21-91)  
Sec. 5-1-4. - Director of police services; powers; supervision of department; promulgating rules and regulations. 
The director of police services shall have the immediate direction and control of the force; subject, however to such policies as the city council may adopt and such rules, regulations and orders as the city manager may prescribe.  
Sec. 5-1-5. - Appointment of members. 
The members of the police force shall be appointed by the director of police services.  
Sec. 5-1-6. - Oaths. 
Each member of the police force shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe an oath that he will faithfully and without fear or favor perform the duties of his office, and such oath shall be filed and preserved in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 5-1-7. - Departmental rules and regulations. 
The director of police services, in consultation with the city manager may prescribe rules and regulations for the government of the police department and the conduct of the personnel thereof. Such rules and regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Secs. 5-1-8—5-1-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Parking Enforcement[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles, Sec. 10-1-54, 10-1-196 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-1-21. - Parking tickets—Numbering; records; investigation and report on records; authority to issue. 
The director of police services shall cause all parking tickets to be serially numbered, and shall cause the records of the issuance and disposition of parking tickets to be so maintained that they can be accounted for. The city auditor shall periodically investigate the records of the police department for the purpose of determining the disposition of the parking tickets and shall report the result of his investigation to the city council.  
Sec. 5-1-22. - Same—Disposition. 
When the owner of a vehicle or his agent appears before the official designated on a parking ticket within the designated time and desires to settle for the charge, the official shall accept payment as provided by law. In the event that the owner or his agent does not appear or does appear but desires to contest the charge, the official shall notify the officer who issued the parking ticket so that appropriate action may be taken.  
Sec. 5-1-23. - Handicapped vehicle parking. 
Parking shall be permitted for the physically handicapped as defined by state law in those areas designated for the physically handicapped by the use of a sign or device set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and clearly marked for the spaces provided. It shall be a civil violation to park or leave standing any vehicle in a space designated for physically handicapped persons when such vehicle does not display the distinguishing license plate or placard as provided in North Carolina General Statutes, section 20-37.6 and where appropriate signs or symbols giving notice thereof, are erected marking the designated parking space. 
(Ord. No. 92-45, § 1, 5-7-92)  
Sec. 5-1-24. - Infraction defined; sanctions. 
An infraction is a noncriminal violation of law not punishable by imprisonment, but instead shall be subject to the civil penalties fixed by title 5, chapter 1, article C, entitled "Parking Violations," sections 5-1-41 and 5-1-42 of the Code of Ordinances. (Except civil noise violations—$25.00). 
(Ord. No. 92-45, § 1, 5-7-92)  
Sec. 5-1-25. - Violation of local ordinances regulating parking of vehicles. 
If any person shall violate an ordinance of this city regulating the operation or parking of vehicles, he shall be responsible for an infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 92-45, § 1, 5-7-92)  
Sec. 5-1-26. - Removal of parking tickets. 
No person may remove a parking ticket from a vehicle or permit it to be removed, except for the purpose of answering the charge for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 92-45, § 1, 5-7-92)  
Sec. 5-1-27. - Alteration of parking tickets. 
No person may alter a parking ticket, and no person may have in his possession an unlawfully altered ticket. 
(Ord. No. 92-45, § 1, 5-7-92)  
Sec. 5-1-28. - Illegally parked vehicles; notice; manner of placing ticket on vehicles. 
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinances of this city or by state law, the official finding that vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the city, for the driver to answer the charge against him within 48 hours, during the hours and at a place specified in the notice. The officer shall send one (1) copy of such notice to the traffic bureau of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-45, § 1, 5-7-92)  
Sec. 5-1-29. - Failure to comply with notice attached to vehicle. 
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the laws or ordinances of this city does not appear in response to a notice affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of 48 hours, the police department shall send to the owner of motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed a notice of warning or shall call him by telephone, informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event such a letter or telephone call is disregarded action will be taken pursuant to title 5, chapter 1, section 5-1-41 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 92-45, § 1, 5-7-92)  
Sec. 5-1-30. - Prima facie proof. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging violation of any law or resolution governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle was parked in violation of such law or regulation, together with the proof that the defendant was at the time of such parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall be prima facie proof of the fact that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where and for the time during which the violation occurred. 
(b)  The foregoing provision as to prima facie proof shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed in sections 5-1-28 and 5-1-29 has been followed. 
(Ord. No. 92-45, § 1, 5-7-92)  
Secs. 5-1-31—5-1-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C - Parking Violations[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-72, adopted Nov. 21, 1991, and Ord. No. 92-44, adopted May 7, 1992, amended the Code by deleting provisions designated as Art. C, §§ 5-1-41—5-1-45, of Title 5, Ch. 1, which pertained to motor vehicle registration and derived from Code 1958, § 19-85. Ord. No. 92-46, § 1, adopted May 7, 1992, amended Ch. 1 of Title 5 by adding a new Art. C set out below. 
State Law reference— Municipal levy of license or privilege tax on resident motor vehicles, G.S. 20-97. 
 
Sec. 5-1-41. - Civil penalty. 
(a)  Except for handicapped vehicle parking and violations of section 10-1-156, for each violation as set forth in section 5-1-3 there shall be a fixed civil penalty charge in the amount of $50.00. For unlawful parking in a restricted handicapped space, there shall be a fixed civil penalty charge in the amount of $100.00. For unlawful parking pursuant to section 10-1-156 in an area dividing a street into two (2) or more sections, there shall be a fixed civil penalty charge in the amount of $50.00. When the owner of a vehicle, or his agent, makes proper payment of a parking ticket within seven (7) days following the date of issuance of the ticket, the obligation thereunto shall be discharged. If such charge has not been paid within the seven-day period as herein set out, the parking violation shall be deemed to be delinquent and subject to the additional penalties provided for in subsection (b). The parking violation shall have stated thereon that payment is due within seven (7) days from date of issue to avoid an additional penalty of $50.00 and court costs. 
(b)  The city tax collector may accept payments in full and final settlement of the claim or claims, right or rights of action which the city may have to enforce such penalties by civil action in the nature of the debt. A failure to pay the penalty within the prescribed time shall subject the offender to a civil action in the nature of debt for the stated penalty plus an additional penalty in the amount of $50.00, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the court. However, in the event the offender desires to make payment after the civil action has been commenced but prior to trial disposition, a penalty of $25.00 in addition to the one imposed for payment within seven (7) days shall apply in such cases. Acceptance of the additional penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all claims or right of action arising out of contended violations. 
(c)  A violation listed in section 5-1-42 shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable under North Carolina General Statutes, section 14-4, but instead shall be subject to the civil penalties fixed by subsection (a) of this section and the civil remedies provided by North Carolina General Statutes, section 160A-175. Any properly designated city official is authorized to take legal action in the nature of a civil suit for the collection of a debt when the civil penalty, including the delinquent civil penalty, has not been paid. 
(d)  The civil penalties imposed by this section and the proceeds therefrom, as collected by payment, civil action or otherwise, shall belong to the city and shall be paid into the general fund of the city under such conditions as prescribed by the annual budget. 
(e)  Each hour a vehicle is parked in the same space following the issuance of a parking ticket shall constitute a separate violation subject to the issuance of a new parking ticket and additional civil penalty to be applied to such vehicle. 
(f)  The moving of a parked vehicle from one (1) restricted space to another restricted space in the same block is deemed to be one (1) continuous parking period for the purpose of determining overtime parking violations. 
(g)  To remove or erase chalk mark from tire or tires shall be deemed a violation and subject to civil penalty as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 92-46, § 1, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 00-81, § 1, 8-17-00; Ord. No. 7225/16-45 , 7-18-16)  
Sec. 5-1-42. - Issuance of parking tickets. 
(a)  When one of the following violations has occurred, the law enforcement officer or other city official designated by the chief of police detecting the apparent violation is authorized to record the state and registration number of the vehicle involved, and to place a parking ticket in or on the vehicle involved, or to serve the ticket if the owner or operator is present: 
(1)  Parking over the specified time limit; 
(2)  Parking during restricted hours where official parking control devices are posted; 
(3)  Parking within 25 feet of an intersection (North Carolina General Statutes, section 20-162). 
(4)  Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  Protrusion beyond designated parking space; 
(6)  Parking within five (5) feet of entrance to alley, driveway or private road; 
(7)  Parking so as to obstruct sidewalk or crosswalk; 
(8)  Parking within 50 feet of bridge, railroad underpass or overhead bridge; 
(9)  Parking within 50 feet of railroad grade crossing; 
(10)  Parking between edge of roadway and property line; 
(11)  Parking of vehicles on a public street in excess of one (1) ton rated capacity in violation of section 10-1-158. 
(12)  Prohibited parking in city-operated lots; 
(13)  Parking left side of vehicle to curb on two-way street; 
(14)  Double parking; 
(15)  Protrusion into street more than eight (8) feet; 
(16)  Parking in a controlled residential parking area over the amount of time without a valid residential parking permit; 
(17)  Parking upon a median strip; 
(18)  Parking in the following restricted zones: 
a.  Commercial loading zones; 
b.  Passenger loading zones; 
c.  Bus stop; 
d.  Taxicab stand; 
e.  Handicapped vehicle parking; 
(19)  Parking in a prohibited zone; 
(b)  The foregoing violations are to be considered a part of, but not limited to, title 5, entitled "Public Safety," chapter 1, entitled "Law Enforcement," and title 10, entitled "Transportation and Traffic," chapter 1, article D, entitled "Powers and Duties of the Police Department," and may be enforced under either of these sections by authority of law enforcement officers and other city officials designated by the chief of police. 
(c)  Only law enforcement officers and other city officials designated by the chief of police may issue and serve parking tickets. Parking tickets shall be served by placing them on motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 92-46, § 1, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 6334/06-21, § 1, 3-23-06)  
Secs. 5-1-43—5-1-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE D - Burglar and Robbery Alarms[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 92-117, adopted Oct. 15, 1992, added Article F to Chapter 1 of Title 5 herein. Said Art. F has been redesignated as Art. D at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 5-1-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Alarm system means any electronic or mechanical device which emits any signal (electronic, visible, audible, silent, recorded or otherwise) which is designed, intended or used to detect an unauthorized entry into a building, structure, or premises, or to signal an attempted robbery, burglary or holdup. "Alarm" shall be deemed to include any device which initiates a telephone call and delivers a recorded message to any emergency telephone number assigned to the 911 communications center or by which a third party telephones any emergency telephone number and requests enforcement services on the basis of having received an automatic signal from a subscriber of an alarm service. 
(b)  Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of High Point or his designee or agent. 
(c)  False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the subscriber, his employees or agents, and signals purposely activated to summon police personnel in non-emergency situations unless law enforcement response was cancelled by the alarm user or his agent before police personnel arrive at the alarm location. A false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been activated by adverse weather conditions, a failure in the electrical power to the alarm or other condition beyond the control of the alarm user. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the High Point 911 Communications Center to test the system. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the chief of police, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. 
(d)  Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity owning or leasing an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
(e)  Alarm contractor means any person, corporation, proprietorship, partnership or other organization engaged in the business of selling, leasing, installing, maintaining, and/or monitoring alarm systems installed on the premises of another for the purpose of protection of such premises. 
(f)  Alarm program administrator means any person, corporation, proprietorship, partnership or other organization that the City of High Point may engage from time to time to administer its false alarm program, collect associated alarm user fees or civil penalties, or perform any task granted to the chief of police under article D of this title. 
(g)  Permit year shall mean the one-year period beginning on the date when an alarm user registers an alarm system under this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-117, § 1, 10-15-92; Ord. No. 93-20, § 1, 3-4-93; Ord. No. 6584/08-69, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 7256/16-76 , 12-5-16)  
Sec. 5-1-47. - Permits and alarm system registration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to operate an alarm system within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit by registering their alarm system with the alarm program administrator. The application for a permit shall be filed on a form or in a manner provided by the chief of police or his designee and administered by the alarm program administrator, who will in turn send a copy of the permit to the office of City of High Point 911 Communications Center. False alarms for unregistered alarm users are subject to an additional $100.00 civil penalty per occurrence. 
(b)  At the time of filing the initial registration and permit application, an application fee of $10.00 shall be paid by the alarm user to the alarm program administrator to cover the cost of registering the alarm system and issuing and maintaining the permit. Permits in effect on the date of the adoption of this article will remain in effect until the end of the permit year. If an alarm user has one (1) or more alarm systems protecting two (2) or more separate structures having different addresses, a separate permit shall be required for each address. 
(c)  Permits shall be renewed through the alarm program administrator upon the application of a permit holder at any time before the end of the alarm user's current permit year. An applicant shall request renewal in a manner provided by the chief of police or his designee and state any changes applicable to his initial application for a permit. Upon application for renewal, the alarm program administrator shall issue the applicant a renewal permit covering the new permit year. There shall be an annual charge of $10.00 to renew a valid permit. If the permit has been suspended under this article, the alarm user must file an application for a new permit and pay the application fee. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued, reissued after suspension, or renewed if the alarm user owes any civil penalties under this article. 
(e)  No permit will be issued for an alarm system which initiates a telephone call and delivers a recorded message to any emergency telephone number assigned to the 911 communications center or the High Point Police Department. Such alarms are not allowed under this article. 
(f)  No permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. 
(g)  Whenever the information provided on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the city within 30 days of the change. A violation of this subsection shall subject the alarm user to a civil penalty of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 92-117, § 1, 10-15-92; Ord. No. 93-20, § 1, 3-4-93; Ord. No. 6584/08-69, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 7256/16-76 , 12-5-16)  
Sec. 5-1-48. - False alarm—Civil penalties. 
(a)  First and second false alarms: If within any permit year, the police department responds to two (2) false alarms at the same premises or location, the alarm program administrator shall send a notice to the alarm user informing him of the false alarm(s) and encouraging the prevention of future false alarms. 
(b)  Third and fourth false alarms: If within any permit year, the police department responds to a third or fourth false alarm at the same premises or location, the alarm user shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00, billed and collected by the alarm program administrator for any such alarm(s). Provided, after the third false alarm only, the civil penalty may be waived by the chief of police or his designee upon written evidence from a person or company licensed by the North Carolina Alarm Systems Licensing Board certifying that the false alarm was caused by electronic or mechanical malfunction of the alarm system and that the alarm system has been repaired. 
(c)  Excessive false alarms: If within any permit year, the police department responds to more than four (4) false alarms at the same premises or location, the alarm user will be subject to the following civil penalties: 
Fifth—seventh false alarm: $100.00 
Eighth—ninth false alarm: $250.00 
Tenth and additional false alarm: $500.00 
In addition to civil penalties, if within any permit year, the police department responds to more than nine (9) false alarms at the same premises or location, the alarm user's permit shall be suspended. Law enforcement may discontinue response to alarm signals that may occur at the premises of suspended or unregistered alarm users until such time as the chief of police is satisfied that the alarm user has corrected issues which have resulted in false alarms and a new permit has been issued. 
(d)  Any false alarms occurring within seven (7) days of installation of a new alarm system for which a permit has been issued shall not be considered false alarms for the purposes of the assessment of civil penalties. 
(e)  Continuing alarms: An alarm user or his representative shall reset an alarm when notified by the police department, alarm program administrator, or 911 communications center that such alarm has been activated. All audible alarms shall be equipped with an automatic reset device that will reset and cease to sound the alarm after no more than 30 minutes of continuous activation. When an alarm activates continuously for a period of 60 minutes from the time an officer initially responded to the alarm due to the failure of the alarm user or his representative to reset the alarm, it shall be deemed a false alarm and each subsequent 60-minute period or portion thereof that the alarm continues to be activated shall be considered a separate false alarm. The alarm user shall be subject to a civil penalty for such continuing alarm at a flat rate of $10.00 for each false alarm as defined herein, not to exceed $100.00 for any 24-hour period. The absence of direct notice to the alarm user or his representative of the activation shall not constitute a defense to these fees if the police department or 911 communications center is not reasonably able to contact such person due to the failure of the alarm user to conform to the provisions of section 5-1-51 of this article. Nothing in this section shall preclude civil penalties for failing to update permit information under section 5-1-47. Civil penalties imposed under this subsection shall be collected by the alarm program administrator. 
(Ord. No. 92-117, § 1, 10-15-92; Ord. No. 93-20, § 1, 3-4-93; Ord. No. 6584/08-69, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 7256/16-76 , 12-5-16)  
Sec. 5-1-49. - Authority to waive penalty. 
The chief of police or his designee shall have the authority to waive any penalty charged to an alarm user when such alarm user submits to the chief of police or his designee adequate evidence that the alleged false alarm was not actually false as defined in section 5-1-46(c). 
(Ord. No. 92-117, § 1, 10-15-92; Ord. No. 93-20, § 1, 3-4-93; Ord. No. 6584/08-69, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 7256/16-76 , 12-5-16)  
Sec. 5-1-50. - Liability for payment of civil penalties. 
Notwithstanding any contractual agreement between an alarm contractor and an alarm user, the alarm user shall be liable for payment of any civil penalty due the City of High Point under section 5-1-48. 
Any city employee authorized by the chief of police may issue to the alarm user a civil penalty citation giving notice of the violation of this article. Each citation issued shall impose upon the alarm user a civil penalty as prescribed by this article which shall be paid to the City of High Point within 30 days of receipt in full satisfaction of the assessed civil penalty. The failure of an alarm user to pay any civil penalty assessed under this article within 90 days from the date of the invoice or citation shall result in the suspension of the permit and discontinuance of police response to alarm signals that may occur at the premises described in the alarm user's permit until payment is received and a new permit issued. 
Upon suspension of the permit for any reason, notice to the alarm user will be sent by registered mail or delivered in person and any civil penalties owed by the alarm user under this article may be collected according to Chapter 105A of the North Carolina General Statutes (Setoff Debt Collection Act). 
(Ord. No. 92-117, § 1, 10-15-92; Ord. No. 93-20, § 1, 3-4-93; Ord. No. 6584/08-69, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 7256/16-76 , 12-5-16)  
Sec. 5-1-51. - Obligations of alarm contractors and alarm users. 
(a)  Each alarm user in the city shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises where the alarm system is maintained and shall furnish to the police department and the alarm program administrator the name(s) and telephone number(s) of the person(s) currently authorized and able to deactivate the alarm system. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an alarm contractor or alarm user to activate an alarm system without first obtaining a permit from the City of High Point, registering the alarm system with the alarm program administrator, and notifying the chief of police and the alarm program administrator of the name(s) and telephone number(s) of those person(s) authorized and able to deactivate the alarm systems. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to provide an adequate number of responsible persons to permit notification of an activation at any time and to keep this information current. 
(d)  Alarm registration and permitting does not create a contract, duty, or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response by the High Point Police Department. By submitting an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that an emergency service response may be influenced by factors such as the availability of emergency units, priority of calls, weather or traffic conditions, emergency situations, staffing, prior response history, and other factors. 
(Ord. No. 92-117, § 1, 10-15-92; Ord. No. 93-20, § 1, 3-4-93; Ord. No. 7256/16-76 , 12-5-16)  
Sec. 5-1-52. - Severability. 
In the event that any provision of this article is held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, such provision shall be a nullity and shall not affect the continuing validity of the remaining provisions. 
(Ord. No. 92-117, § 1, 10-15-92; Ord. No. 93-20, § 1, 3-4-93)  
CHAPTER 2 - Fire Prevention and Protection[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal fire protection, G.S. 160A-291 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A - Fire Department[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Following fire apparatus responding to fire, Sec. 10-1-112; driving over fire hose, Sec. 10-1-113. 
 
Sec. 5-2-1. - Composition. 
The fire department shall be composed of the chief of the fire department, and such other personnel as may be authorized from time to time by the city council.  
Sec. 5-2-2. - Fire department; fire chief; duties and responsibilities generally. 
The fire chief shall have immediate direction and control of the fire department, subject however, to the supervision of the city manager and such rules, regulations and orders as the city manager may prescribe; and through the fire chief, the city manager shall promulgate all orders, rules and regulations for the government of the entire fire department. In case of disability of the chief of the fire department, or inability to perform his duties by reason of sickness, absence from the city, or other cause, the deputy chief shall act as the chief during such disability. The fire department shall be charged with the duty and responsibility for fire protection services, selected emergency rescue services related to life safety, performing duties as may be required in protecting life and property from loss in hazardous situations or disasters, and such other duties as may be required by the city manager and city council. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-29)  
Sec. 5-2-3. - Background investigations of applicants for the fire department. 
(a)  Each applicant to the fire department shall furnish a classifiable set of fingerprints to the police department. 
(b)  The police department is authorized and directed to conduct criminal records checks on each applicant for employment by the fire department. A factual summary of the criminal records check of each firefighter applicant shall be compiled and transmitted to the fire chief. 
(c)  The criminal records check shall include records of all arrests and dispositions as an adult. Criminal history records shall include arrest and disposition data on file in the National Crime Information Center, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Department of Defense, and all other federal, state and local law enforcement agencies. 
(d)  The fire department is authorized and directed to conduct a background investigation on each applicant for employment by the fire department.  
Sec. 5-2-4. - Oath of office; uniforms. 
The chief of the fire department and all personnel of uniform rank, including the fire marshall, shall be administered the oath of office upon employment with the High Point Fire Department, and for each rank that they may hold. The city manager shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for members of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 97-101, § 1, 12-18-97)  
Sec. 5-2-5. - Departmental rules and regulations. 
The fire chief, in consultation with the city manager, may prepare rules and regulations for the government of the fire department and the conduct of the personnel thereof. When such rules and regulations have been approved by the city manager, it shall be unlawful for any member of the fire department to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation.  
Sec. 5-2-6. - Fire protection and emergency services outside city limits. 
The chief of the fire department is hereby authorized and directed to render such fire protection service, as in his opinion can be reasonably rendered, to churches, federal, state, county and municipally owned properties, schools, hospitals, all auxiliary properties used in connection with the properties above referred to, and to render such other emergency services which are reasonable in response to request for mutual aid assistance. The chief of the fire department is likewise authorized to render such other emergency services as deemed necessary to protect lives in the vicinity of the City of High Point. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-27.1)  
Sec. 5-2-7. - Interfering with firemen and fire apparatus. 
No person shall interfere with a fireman in the discharge of his duty, or hinder him in the performance of his duty; nor shall any person other than members of the fire department, loiter about any fire station, or change, handle or meddle in any manner with any fire engine or any other fire apparatus. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-20)  
Sec. 5-2-8. - Authorized persons riding on trucks of fire department. 
No person other than a bona fide member of the fire department shall mount any fire engine, or apparatus before it leaves the station or while on its way to or from a fire, or at any other time, unless by permission of the driver or officer in command of the engine, or other apparatus. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-21)  
Sec. 5-2-9. - Standard good-practice requirements. 
Standards of the National Fire Protection Association relating to the subjects covered in this chapter shall be considered as standard good-practice requirements, and for purposes of reference in connection with the enforcing of this chapter, a complete set of such current regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-32)  
Sec. 5-2-10. - Authority of chief of fire department to modify chapter. 
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Standards of the National Fire Protection Association upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, provided, that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.  
Sec. 5-2-11. - Enforcement of chapter. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department or his duly authorized agent to enforce the provisions of this chapter, provided, however, that the chief of the fire department may be called upon to inspect any construction, alteration, demolition or repairs of any building or structure under the provisions of this chapter which involve a fire hazard. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-35)  
Secs. 5-2-12—5-2-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Fire Prevention Code[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Fire limits established, Sec. 9-1-61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-2-21. - Adoption of fire prevention code. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion that certain code, known as and entitled the North Carolina State Building Code: Fire Code, 2018 Edition, and including the North Carolina State Building Code: Fire Code Appendices B, C, D, F, H, J and L. Not less than three (3) copies are on file in the office of the city clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated fully as if set out in length herein, and the provisions of the North Carolina State Building Code: Fire Code, 2018 Edition, shall control within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Amendments to the North Carolina State Building Code: Fire Code, 2018 Edition, which are adopted and published by the North Carolina State Building Code Council, shall be effective and incorporated herein at the time of the amendments' adoption, including Appendices B, C, D, F, H, J and L. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-1; Ord. No. 7230/16-50 , 8-1-16; Ord. No. 7437/18-66 , 8-20-18)  
Sec. 5-2-22. - Enforcement. 
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention, a division of the fire department of the city which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. The fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the chief of the fire department. The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-1.1)  
Sec. 5-2-23. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the City of High Point. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporate counsel" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the City of High Point. 
(c)  Wherever the words "chief of the bureau of fire prevention" are used in the fire prevention code, they shall be held to mean the fire marshal. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-1.2)  
Sec. 5-2-24. - Applicability of article. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as applying to the transportation of any article or thing shipped in conformity with the regulations prescribed by the interstate commerce commission or the North Carolina Corporation Commission, nor as applying to the military or naval forces of the United States, nor to the duly authorized authorities of any state of the United States. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-2)  
Sec. 5-2-25. - Fees; collection by chief of fire department. 
Any fees for permits or licenses pertaining to the fire department, fire prevention or fire protection required by this code shall be collected by the chief of the fire department or by some person authorized to so do by the chief and the license or permit shall be issued by the chief or the person authorized by him to do so. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-4)  
Sec. 5-2-26. - Modifications to fire prevention code. 
The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.  
Sec. 5-2-27. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the council within 10 days from the date of the decision of the appeal.  
Sec. 5-2-28. - New materials, etc., which require permits. 
The city manager, the chief of the fire department and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.  
Sec. 5-2-29. - Establishment of limits in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited. 
The limits referred to in section 12.5b of the fire prevention code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: under no circumstances shall such explosives or blasting agents be stored within the boundaries outlined in Article D, Sections: 9-1-61, 9-1-62, 9-1-63, of The City Code nor in any location not approved by the fire marshal.  
Sec. 5-2-30. - Establishment of limits in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited. 
(a)  The limits referred to in section 16.22a of the fire prevention code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited shall be approved by the fire marshal in each instance, until such time as the city council shall by ordinance or resolution establish permanent limits. 
(b)  The limits referred to in section 16.51 of the fire prevention code, in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited shall be established as follows: within any area prohibited by zoning ordinance or the fire marshal.  
Sec. 5-2-31. - Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted. 
The limits referred to in section 21.6a of the fire prevention code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, shall be established as follows: within any area prohibited by zoning ordinance or the fire marshal.  
Sec. 5-2-32. - Inspection required for tanks to be used for storage of flammable or combustible liquids. 
Before installation of any tank to be used for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids, the necessary permit shall be secured. Before any such installation is placed into operation, a notification shall be given to the chief of the fire department, who shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after receipt of such notification, inspect the installation and give approval or disapproval. In case of underground tanks, inspection shall be made prior to covering such tanks. Upon failure of the chief of the fire department to make the inspection within the specified time, the installation may be covered but shall be subject to inspection at the expense of the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-20, § 1, 3-15-79)  
Sec. 5-2-33. - Hazardous heating, cooking and lighting appliances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, install, or cause to be installed, or to use oil, liquefied gas, natural gas, or other similar appliances or equipment for heating, cooking or lighting purposes within the city, unless such appliances or equipment is approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories (UL), the American Gas Association or any other recognized association approved for label service and shall bear the label of testing of such association.  
Secs. 5-2-34—5-2-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C - Fire Hazards[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Smoking in theaters, Sec. 12-1-6. 
 
Sec. 5-2-41. - Burning trash within fire limits prohibited. 
No person shall burn, or cause to be burned, any trash, refuse, shavings, paper, leaves, litter or other material of any kind outside any house, or in any street, sidewalk, alley, lot or yard within the fire limits. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-8)  
Sec. 5-2-42. - Burning trash outside fire limits. 
Grass, weeds, trash or rubbish shall not be burned on any private lot outside the fire limits except within a safely constructed enclosure made of wire mesh or in a similar device, except upon written permission obtained from the chief of the fire department. The permit shall be granted on the basis that conditions and procedures prescribed in the permit will be followed, and shall comply with current requirements and regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).  
Sec. 5-2-43. - Bonfires; permit required. 
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, or shall knowingly furnish the materials for any such fire, or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on or in any street, avenue, road, lane or public ground unless a written permit so to do shall have been first secured from the chief of the fire department. The permit shall be granted on the basis that conditions and procedures prescribed in the permit will be followed, and shall comply with current requirements and regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).  
Sec. 5-2-44. - Fire extinguishers; required in establishments handling flammable materials. 
(a)  Hand or other portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in every store, factory, garage or other building where readily inflammable material is stored, handled, kept or sold. 
(b)  Automatic fire extinguishing equipment shall be installed in the exhaust system and cooking equipment used therewith in commercial, industrial, institutional and similar cooking applications. This shall not apply to installations for normal residential family use. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the fire marshal, prior to installation, for approval and shall include a final inspection after installation and before placed in operation. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-19)  
Sec. 5-2-45. - Same; approval by recognized testing association and fire department prerequisite to sale. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for sale, install or cause to be installed any type fire extinguisher or other similar appliance, equipment, material or agent for the extinguishment of fire within the city, unless such extinguisher, appliance, equipment, material or agent has been approved and bears the label of approval of the Underwriters' Laboratories (UL), or any other recognized testing association approved for label service. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department, or his appointed authority, shall have the authority to reject or approve the sale and use of any fire extinguisher or other similar appliances, equipment, material or agent that would create or cause to be created a life or health hazard or would in any way be detrimental to the well being of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-19.1)  
Sec. 5-2-46. - Tampering with fire alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a person as may be designated by the chief of the fire department, to remove, handle, or in any way tamper with, rearrange or readjust any of the fire alarm wires or other fixtures of the fire alarm system. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-22)  
Sec. 5-2-47. - Telephone alarm systems prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, sell, lease or use, or cause or allow to be installed, sold, leased, or used, within the corporate limits of the city, any fire or police telephone dial alarm device or system, which for the purposes of this section is defined as being or consisting of any mechanical, electrical or radio electronic device or system so made or designed as to automatically actuate or call the city fire or police departments' telephone or radio circuit and use a pre-taped or pre-recorded or programmed verbal message or signal, which operates through overhead or underground wires or by radio frequencies and which is set or programmed to directly dial, actuate, call or in any other manner make direct contact with any telephone line or radio circuit of the fire or police department. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-4. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the installation, sale, leasing or use of any alarm device so long as such device is not designed or programmed to dial, actuate, call or in any other manner directly contact by telephone or radio circuit the fire or police department on any telephone line or radio circuit assigned to those departments. Provided, that the person installing such alarm system shall notify the police and/or fire departments of each installation. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 15-39)  
Sec. 5-2-48. - False fire alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in a false fire alarm, damage, injure or deface any fire alarm box, signal, switch, plug, wire, or other apparatus connected with the fire alarm system. Authority is hereby given for paying a reward of $25 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of anyone violating the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-23)  
Sec. 5-2-49. - Fire hydrants; use of on private premises. 
It shall be unlawful to use water from fire hydrants installed on private property for any purpose other than for fire protection. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-24)  
Sec. 5-2-50. - Same; use of public hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to release water from any public fire hydrant, except city officials in the discharge of their duty fighting fire or flushing the hydrant unless approval is first obtained from fire chief and director of utilities. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 8-25)  
Sec. 5-2-51. - Delivery of flammable and combustible liquids. 
(a)  Delivery of class I and II flammable liquids by tank vehicles to any storage tanks shall be made by means of tight connections between the hose and the fillpipe. 
(b)  Owners or operators of all tank vehicles delivering class I and II flammable liquids to any storage tank shall file with the fire department, upon forms furnished by the fire department, an annual inspection report to determine whether the regulatory standard #385 of the National Fire Protection Association (N.F.P.A.), 1974 Edition, and the fire prevention code have been complied with. 
(c)  All tank vehicles delivering class I and II flammable liquids to any storage tank shall be marked with date of the last annual inspection or shall at all times carry a copy of the annual inspection report or have such inspection report readily available at their home office. 
(Ord. of 11-15-79)  
CHAPTER 3 - Emergency Management 
 
Sec. 5-3-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Emergency Management Ordinance of the City of High Point." 
(Code 1958, Sec. 7-1, as amended by Ord. of 11-15-79)  
Sec. 5-3-2. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to establish a city office of emergency management ("COEM") that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all of the community's resources to mitigate against, plan/prepare for, respond to and recover from natural or man-made emergencies or disasters. 
(b)  The COEM will be the coordinating agency for all activity in connection with the community's emergency preparedness. The coordinator of the COEM, as a staff official, will advise and provide recommendations to the city manager and the city council as to actions to be taken in responding to and recovering from the disaster situation. 
(c)  This chapter will not relieve any government department of its responsibilities or authority nor will it adversely affect the work of any volunteer agency organized for relief in emergencies. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 7-2, as amended by Ord. of 11-15-79; Ord. No. 6950/12-66, 10-1-12)  
Sec. 5-3-3. - Authority and references. 
This chapter is enacted under the authority of the following: 
(1)  G.S. Ch. 166A (as amended). 
(2)  G.S. Art. 36A Ch. 14 (as amended). 
(3)  Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, Public Law 93-288 (as amended) 42 U.S.C. 5121-5206, Title 44 CFR Emergency Management Assistance. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 7-3; Ord. No. 6950/12-66, 10-1-12)  
Sec. 5-3-4. - Policy and purpose. 
Because of the existing and ever present possibility of the occurrence of disasters of significant size and large scale destructiveness and in order to ensure that preparations of this community will be adequate to deal with such emergencies/disasters, and to provide for the general welfare, health and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this community, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary: 
(1)  To establish a city office of emergency management; 
(2)  To recognize the responsibilities of local government and the emergency powers conferred upon the local governing body by the North Carolina General Statutes; 
(3)  To provide for the exchange of mutual aid among neighboring cities and counties; and 
(4)  To recognize the importance or coordinating to the maximum extent all emergency management functions of this community with comparable functions of the county, state and federal governments, including their various departments and agencies, and of other localities as well as private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of all available resources for dealing with any disasters that may occur. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 7-4, as amended by Ord. of 11-15-79; Ord. No. 6950/12-66, 10-1-12)  
Sec. 5-3-5. - State of emergency declaration; curfew authorized. 
(a)  A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar public emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property. 
(b)  In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the City of High Point, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the mayor, or mayor pro tempore in the mayor's absence, is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the city, to place in effect any or all of the restrictions authorized herein and to take any action deemed necessary in accordance with the authorities cited above in section 5-3-3, including the authority to define and impose a curfew. 
(c)  The mayor/mayor pro tempore is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by declaration any part of such restrictions to any area specifically designated or described within the corporate limits of the city and to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law enforcement officers, firemen and other public employees; doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military personnel whether state or federal; on-duty employees of public utilities, public transportation companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting, and television broadcasting corporations operated for profit; and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health, and welfare needs of the people within the city. 
(d)  The mayor/mayor pro tempore shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the city council. 
(e)  During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the mayor/mayor pro tempore may impose by declaration any or all of the following restrictions: 
(1)  Prohibit or regulate the possession, transportation, sale, purchase, storage and use of gasoline and dangerous weapons and substances, and gasoline except lawfully possessed firearms (handguns, rifles, and shotguns) and ammunition; 
(2)  Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine, or intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off one's own premises; 
(3)  Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade march, vigil, or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any public property; 
(4)  Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, or any other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances; 
(5)  Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley, or roadway or upon any other public property, except by those in search of medical assistance, food, or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves or their families or some member thereof; 
(6)  Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of business, places of entertainment, and any other places of public assembly. 
(f)  Any declaration may be extended, altered, or repealed in any particular manner during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent declaration. 
(g)  During the existence of a declared state of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by any declaration authorized by this chapter. 
(h)  The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, words and phrases of this chapter are severable, and, if any word, phrase, section, paragraph, sentence, or clause shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by any valid judgment or decree or any court of competent jurisdiction, the constitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, words, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, or sections of this chapter. 
(i)  The violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any provision of any restriction imposed by any declaration authorized by this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.S. 14-4 and also be punishable as set forth in G.S. Ch. 166A. 
(Ord. No. 6950/12-66, 10-1-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6950/12-66, adopted Oct. 1, 2012, renumbered the former § 5-3-5 as § 5-3-6 and enacted a new § 5-3-5 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
Sec. 5-3-6. - Organization. 
There is hereby established a city office of emergency management (COEM) with a coordinator as the office head. The coordinator will be responsible to and supervised by the chief of the High Point Fire Department. The coordinator, as head of the office, shall be responsible and accountable for the emergency planning, administration, budgeting, organization and operation of emergency management functions of the community before, during and after disasters. The coordinator shall act as the local government's coordinator with the emergency management representatives of other counties and/or cities as well as those of state and federal governments. 
(Code 1982, Sec. 5-3-5, as amended by Ord. of 2-17-83; Ord. No. 6950/12-66, 10-1-12) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 5-3-5.  
Title 6 - PUBLIC SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6586/08-71, adopted Oct. 20, 2008, changed the title of title 6 from "public works" to "public services." 
 
CHAPTER 1 - Streets and Sidewalks[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Establishment and control of streets, sidewalks and public ways, G.S. 160A-296. 
 
ARTICLE A - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 6-1-1. - Display of merchandise on streets and sidewalks. 
No produce, merchandise, cooked provisions, poultry, fruits, vegetables or other commodity shall be kept exposed for sale in or upon any sidewalk, or the space in front of buildings used as a sidewalk, alley, gutter, or street of the city, nor shall any stand be placed thereon for such purpose, nor shall any such articles be exposed as samples on any of the alleys, sidewalks, or the space in front of buildings used as a sidewalk or street. This section shall not apply during the Downtown Merchant's Appreciation Day, which will be held semi-annually, subject to a permit issued by the city manager. 
(Code 1958, § 18-4; Ord. No. 79-45, 6-21-79) 
Cross reference— Produce peddlers, title 11, ch. 5, art. C.  
Sec. 6-1-2. - Distribution of handbills and commercial activity on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  As used herein, the term "handbill" means any printed or written matter, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, or paper; or any object of any description containing words or symbols thereon: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; or 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business, showroom, commerce service, commercial activity of any description; or meeting; performance, exhibition or event. 
(b)  It is unlawful to distribute, give away, hand out, deposit, or throw any handbill, or to engage in any commercial activity, within any part of the entire right-of-way of Commerce Street, including sidewalks, between Hamilton Street and Wrenn Street. The right-of-way of Commerce Street shall include that portion which overlaps the right-of-way of Wrenn Street or Hamilton Street. 
(c)  The prohibition of this section is effective during, and seven (7) days prior to, the dates of the semi-annual International Home Furnishings Market as published by the International Home Furnishings Market Authority. 
(Code 1958, § 18-5; Ord. No. 99-73, § 1, 9-13-99; Ord. No. 02-73, 8-15-02)  
Sec. 6-1-3. - Obstruction of streets and sidewalks with boxes, crates, bricks, etc.; breaking glass. 
No brick, stone, wood, or other substance obstructing the street shall be suffered to lie in the streets. No person shall place in any street, alley, nor upon any sidewalk, any boxes, casks, crates, barrels, or other obstructions; provided, however, building materials, earth or any other obstruction of like character, may, by permission of the city manager in writing, be allowed, under such restrictions as he may impose. It shall also be unlawful for any person to break or cause to be broken any glass on the streets. 
(Code 1958, § 18-6) 
Cross reference— Use of streets and sidewalks during construction and demolition, Art. C of this chapter.  
Sec. 6-1-4. - Impeding traffic on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful to impede or obstruct free pedestrian movement upon any sidewalk by any means or activity. 
(Code 1958, § 18-8; Ord. No. 02-73, 8-15-02)  
Sec. 6-1-5. - Location of awnings over streets and sidewalks. 
All awnings shall have a clear space of seven (7) feet from the lower edge of the awning to the sidewalk.  
Sec. 6-1-6. - Hedges within six inches of sidewalk declared nuisance; visibility at intersections. 
(a)  All trees, hedges, bushes, shrubbery, vines, etc., which encroach on a line drawn perpendicular to and six (6) inches from any sidewalk, or sidewalk pavement, or which obscure visibility at any intersection, are dangerous to clothing, inconvenient to pedestrians, and are a hazard to traffic and are hereby declared to be a nuisance. All such trees, hedges, bushes, shrubbery, vines, etc., shall be kept trimmed back or supported so as not to encroach in a perpendicular position nearer than six (6) inches to any sidewalk as herein specified. 
(b)  On corner lots no tree, hedge, bush, shrubbery, vine, fence, wall, sign or other similar object which constitutes a hazard to visibility for motorists using either street, as determined by the director of transportation after an engineering investigation, shall be planted or allowed to remain in the area inside a vision triangle bounded by the street curb lines or edge of pavement and a vision clearance setback line. The setback line connects points on each right-of-way line which are located a minimum distance of 25 feet back from the intersection of the two (2) right-of-way lines. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-1-4, and in addition, any person who, having been served an order to remove any violation shall fail to comply with such order within 10 days after such service, or shall continue to violate any provisions of this section named in such order, shall also be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00. Each day that a violation continues shall create a new offense. 
(Code 1958, § 18-11)  
Sec. 6-1-7. - Cleaning sidewalks; snow, sleet or ice. 
All persons owning or occupying property within the city limits, in front of which paved sidewalks have been laid, are required to clean and remove from sidewalks all snow, sleet, or ice within 12 hours after the same has fallen thereon.  
Sec. 6-1-8. - Encroaching on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall encroach upon the public right-of-way, street, or sidewalk of the city by erecting any window, stoop, fence, chimney, portable or permanent basketball goals and other sports equipment, portion of a building, any downspout, steam pipe, air conditioning unit, wall, mailbox, or any other obstruction over the sidewalks of the street lower than nine (9) feet above the sidewalk, except that this section shall not apply to awnings as provided for under section 6-1-5 and mailboxes as listed below. Failure by the property owner to remove such obstructions within 14 days' notice by the city may result in a penalty of $50.00 per day and/or removal by the city at the property owner's expense. 
(b)  Mailboxes with non-rigid supports, such as a single four (4) inch by four (4) inch wooden post or small diameter metal post with a strength no greater than a two-inch diameter standard strength steel pipe and embedded no more than 24 inches into the ground, are permitted in the right-of-way. Other types of mailboxes, such as those using brick, block, stone or any other type of rigid material are installed and exist at the risk of the owner. The city or any other person authorized to work in the right-of-way may remove any such mailbox without notice or compensation to the owner. In addition, the director of transportation is authorized to require the removal of any mailbox, upon 14 days notice to the owner, if the director of transportation determines that the mailbox creates a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Failure to remove a mailbox after being so notified shall subject the owner to a civil penalty of $50.00 for each day thereafter until the mailbox is removed. 
(c)  During the dates of the semi-annual High Point Market, as established by the High Point Market Authority, and for three (3) days prior to and three (3) days following, no furniture, accessories, merchandise, or samples shall be displayed or exposed for sale in or upon any sidewalk or public right-of-way. Items of decor, including without limitation, planters, potted plants, outdoor seating, decorative lighting, flowers, greenery, ("decorative items") may be allowed on the sidewalk and public right-of-way in front of buildings used as market showrooms subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A minimum of ten (10) feet of sidewalk or public right-of-way shall be open and clear at all times from the back of curb to provide unobstructed pedestrian access. 
(2)  In cases where the sidewalk is ten (10) feet or less, from the back of curb to the building, no items may be placed on the sidewalk, as it would obstruct pedestrian access. 
(3)  Attention shall to be given to safety issues related to the placement of decorative items to ensure that said items do not impede pedestrian traffic, create trip or fall hazards, or impede or obstruct the flow of vehicular traffic. 
(4)  The decorative items shall not impede ingress and egress of any building, fire exit, driveway, or loading dock. Decorative items shall not, at any time or for any purpose, be placed in any portion of a public street, parking space, or loading zone. 
(5)  Violations of subsection (c) or failure of a property owner to immediately remove decorative items upon notice from the city may result in the city removing said items. Any and all costs associated with removal by the city shall be borne by the property owner. The city accepts no responsibility for items the city removes and shall not guarantee the return or the care and condition of any decorative items removed. 
(Code 1958, § 18-13; Ord. No. 91-14, § 1, 2-7-91; Ord. No. 02-15, § 1, 2-21-02; Ord. No. 6506/07-101, § 1, 11-19-07; Ord. No. 7451/18-80 , 9-17-18)  
Sec. 6-1-9. - Removal of sand, dirt, sod, etc., from unpaved streets prohibited. 
No person shall remove any sand, dirt, sod or clay from any of the unpaved streets. 
(Code 1958, § 18-18)  
Sec. 6-1-10. - Hauling refuse; tracking mud. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled over the streets of the city any dirt, concrete, shingles, laths, trash, or other materials in a truck, trailer, or other vehicle, unless the truck, trailer, or other vehicle is constructed to prevent, and does prevent, the spilling of dirt, concrete, shingles, laths, trash, or other materials upon the streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a truck, trailer, or other vehicle under his control to track mud, in appreciable quantity, on the streets or sidewalks of the city from private property. 
(Code 1958, § 30)  
Sec. 6-1-11. - Obstructing flow of water or drainage in street prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to stop up, dam or in any way impede the flow of water or drainage in the street gutter or drainage ditch beside a street. 
(Code 1958, § 18-25)  
Sec. 6-1-12. - Construction of sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or contractor to lay or begin to lay sidewalks anywhere within the corporate limits before first having obtained a permit from the department of transportation. 
(b)  All work shall be performed in strict accordance with standard specifications, grades and details as required by the city and under the supervision of the city engineer. 
Cross reference— Procedure for installation of public improvements, city charter, art. VIII.  
Sec. 6-1-13. - Signs; erection or suspension across streets, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or suspend any sign or banner across any public street, avenue, boulevard or alley of the city. 
(Code 1958, § 18-17) 
Cross reference— Zoning requirements for signs, § 9-3-111 et seq.  
Sec. 6-1-14. - Poles and guy wires; painting; removal of wires from trees; boxing. 
All electric railway, light, power, telegraph and telephone companies whose poles are erected along any of the streets, shall be required to paint such poles in a manner satisfactory to the city council and all guy wires now connected with or attached to trees shall be removed, and all guy wires or braces entering the ground shall be properly boxed in the customary manner. 
(Code 1958, § 15-26)  
Sec. 6-1-15. - Oiling of streets. 
Oil shall not be used for road oiling, dust control, weed abatement, or other similar purposes that have the potential to release oil into the environment. 
Any person applying an approved type of dust control shall obtain from the department of public works a permit at least 48 hours prior to the application of said dust control. 
(Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 5-2-91)  
Sec. 6-1-16. - Sidewalk cafés. 
(a)  The transportation department is authorized to issue permits for the operation of sidewalk cafés in accordance with the following standards and regulations. No person shall operate a sidewalk café without such a permit. The transportation department is authorized to revoke such permits for noncompliance with the standards and regulations. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. No permit for the operation of a sidewalk café may be issued unless the application is complete and unless the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The sidewalk café must be associated with an operating restaurant. The sidewalk café must be operated under the same name as the restaurant and may not be open or operated at any time when the restaurant is not open for business. Sidewalk cafés may operate at any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. 
(2)  The operation of the sidewalk café must be clearly incidental to the associated restaurant business. The seating capacity of the sidewalk café may not be more than 50 percent of the interior seating capacity of the associated restaurant. 
(3)  The placement of tables, chairs, and other furnishings as shown in the drawing submitted with the site plan must be done in such manner that at least five (5) feet of unobstructed space (as measured from the nearest fixed obstruction(s) remains on the sidewalk or pedestrian way for the passage of pedestrians. No fire exits or lanes may be blocked and such must remain clear at all times. All applicable regulations pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act must be met. 
(4)  The restaurant seeking to operate the sidewalk café must front on and open onto the sidewalk or pedestrian way proposed for the sidewalk café. The placement of tables, chairs, and other furnishings may not extend beyond the sidewalk or pedestrian way frontage of the associated restaurant. With the written permission of the adjoining property owners and tenants the sidewalk café may extend onto the abutting property but may not extend beyond alleyways or vehicular entrances. 
(5)  The area designated for the sidewalk café shall be physically separated from the remaining sidewalk by visible barricades with a height of at least 36 inches and no more than 42 inches, with no trip hazards including but not limited to the base of the barricade. The barricades must be constructed of materials of a finished quality, including but not limited to wrought iron, planters, picket fences or velvet ropes. 
(6)  The barricades, tables, chairs and other furnishings used in the sidewalk café shall not be anchored and shall be of a type of street furniture that is easily movable. 
(7)  Except as elsewhere permitted by the Code, the operation or furnishing of the sidewalk café shall involve no permanent alteration to or encroachment upon any street, sidewalk or pedestrian way or to the exterior of the associated restaurant. 
(8)  The operation of the sidewalk café shall at all times be in accordance with the requirements of this subsection (b). At the direction of the city manager or his designee, any improperly placed or improperly sized furniture or barricade shall be moved. 
(9)  Each sidewalk café shall provide adequate trash receptacles for its patrons within the perimeters of the barricades. At the end of each business day and during operating hours the operator shall remove all trash and debris of any sort from the area within the barricade and between it and the curb, and in addition shall remove the sidewalk alongside and abutting properties any trash or debris originating as a result of the operation of the sidewalk café. 
(Ord. No. 6757/10-105, § 1, 8-16-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6757/10-105, § 2, provides that this § 6-1-16 is effective as to permitted sidewalk cafés notwithstanding §§ 6-1-1, 6-1-3, 6-1-4, and 6-1-8 of this Code.  
Secs. 6-1-17—6-1-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Excavation and Repair 
 
Sec. 6-1-31. - Permit to dig in streets. 
No person shall make any excavation or opening or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the director of transportation. Provided, that a permit shall not be required where such work is performed under a contract with the city but in the event that it becomes necessary to such work that a sidewalk or street must be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the director of transportation and the police department at least two (2) hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency.  
Sec. 6-1-32. - Application for permit; fees. 
All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in section 6-1-31, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose thereof and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee. The fee required for making any opening in any street or sidewalk shall be established by the city council and maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and transportation department.  
Sec. 6-1-33. - Indemnity agreement required of applicant; city's liability. 
Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in sections 6-1-31 and 6-1-32 herein agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations, excluding only the liability of the city for its sole negligence except in connection with general supervision of work performed by that person.  
Sec. 6-1-34. - Refilling of excavations, etc., required; failure to comply with section. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making the excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening and the refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and specifications issued by the director of public works or his duly authorized representative. Any person, firm or corporation, neglecting, refusing, or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where such neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the said director of public works or his authorized representative, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.  
Sec. 6-1-35. - Guard rails, signal lights, etc., at excavations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtain a permit under the sections of this article to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the same, sufficient to warn the public of such excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of the same.  
Sec. 6-1-36. - Supervision and inspection of work. 
All excavations and work in streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the director of public works, or an authorized representative, whose duty it shall be to inspect the same from time to time during the progress thereof. Upon the completion thereof, he shall make a final inspection and see that the street, sidewalk or public place is restored to a condition as good in all respects as before the excavation or work was made or done, and that all debris, materials, tools and equipment are removed therefrom. Any person refusing or failing to comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where such failure or refusal is continued after notice from the director of public works or designated official, every day's continuance shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.  
Sec. 6-1-37. - Fees to be paid into general fund. 
All fees collected under the provisions of this article shall be paid into the general fund.  
Secs. 6-1-38—6-1-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C - Use of Streets and Sidewalks during Construction or Demolition 
 
Sec. 6-1-51. - Compliance; protection of public; permit. 
(a)  The temporary use of any street or public property for the storage or handling of materials or of equipment required for construction or demolition of any structure, and the protection provided to the public shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall erect, alter, remove or demolish any building or structure without providing adequate barricades, walkways, lights or other suitable measures to insure the safety and protection of persons using public property. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation shall erect, alter, remove or demolish any building or structure or perform any other improvement without first obtaining a permit from the director of inspections authorizing such improvements. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 18-29(1))  
Sec. 6-1-52. - Allowable use of public property during construction. 
(a)  The amount of space and conditions under which public property may be used for construction or demolition purposes shall be determined by the director of transportation. 
(b)  An adequate walkway shall be constructed in conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  On streets where parking is permitted no barricade or fence shall extend more than seven (7) feet from the curbline. 
(d)  On streets where parking has been prohibited no barricade or fence shall be permitted to extend into or block completely any vehicular traffic lane. 
(e)  No building materials, fence, barricade or any obstruction of any kind shall be placed so as to obstruct free approach to any fire hydrant, fire alarm box, manhole, catch basin or so as to interfere with the passage of water in the gutter or ditch. 
(f)  Proper precaution shall be made during construction to prevent concrete, mortar washings, or any other material from entering a sewer. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 18-29(2))  
Sec. 6-1-53. - Where covered walkways are required. 
(a)  During the erection or demolition of any building exceeding one (1) story in height located a distance less than 15 feet from any street line, a roof covering for the entire length of the project shall be provided over the temporary or permanent sidewalk, from the time the construction or demolition extends above the first floor level until materials are no longer being used or handled on the front above such walk. 
(b)  Buildings having their exteriors altered or repaired in an extensive manner involving any hazard to pedestrians or motorists, shall be provided with a covered walk as required for new structures during erection. 
(c)  Where a covered walkway is not necessary as determined by the director of transportation, a temporary walkway shall be constructed as provided in section 6-1-56.  
Sec. 6-1-54. - Temporary fence. 
Buildings which are erected or demolished more than 15 feet from any street line and which are not required to have a covered walkway shall be provided with protection on both sides in the form of a substantial fence not less than six (6) feet high. The fence shall be solid for its full length except for such openings as may be necessary for the proper execution of the work. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 18-29(4))  
Sec. 6-1-55. - Barricade. 
(a)  Some type of physical barrier as provided by the director of transportation shall be placed on the side adjacent to the work site to protect pedestrians from injury. 
(b)  Traffic cones, rope, railing or other approved devices shall be placed on the side adjacent to vehicle traffic. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-29(5))  
Sec. 6-1-56. - Construction of walkways, fences and protective coverings. 
(a)  Before any construction work is commenced the owner or his agent shall construct a temporary walkway in conformity with this section. 
(b)  All fences, barriers, walkways or temporary structures of any kind located on streets or public property shall be constructed so as not to obstruct vision at the intersection of streets. 
(c)  Walkways shall be not less than five (5) feet wide, inside dimension, except that in congested areas or where the pedestrian traffic warrants, the director of transportation may require a walkway as wide as, in his opinion, is necessary for the safe and easy passage of pedestrians. 
(d)  Walkways shall be constructed in a safe and substantial manner and shall be maintained in that condition at all times. A smooth handrail of substantial construction, not less than three (3) feet high, shall be provided on both sides of the walkway. 
(e)  Roof coverings over walkways as required by section 6-1-53 shall be constructed of not less than one (1) layer of two (2) inch nominal dimension wood plank spanning not over three (3) feet between supports. The framework supporting the walkway covering shall be well braced and designed to support a minimum of 150 pounds per square foot but the top deck shall be designed to carry not less than 250 pounds per square foot. 
(f)  Suitable provisions shall be made for adequate lighting of the walkway under the covering at all times. A minimum of 60 watt white electric lights spaced at intervals of 10 feet or less shall be used for interval illumination of the walkway and shall be mounted from the ceiling of the structures. 
(g)  A minimum clearance of seven feet six inches (7'-6?) shall be maintained above the walkway. 
(h)  Each end of the walkway shall be so constructed as to channelize pedestrian traffic around the work site in a safe and uncongested manner. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-29(6))  
Sec. 6-1-57. - Walkways over excavated areas. 
When the area occupied by the sidewalk or temporary walkway is to be excavated, such walkway shall be made of boards not less than two (2) inches nominal dimension designed to support a load of not less than 150 pounds per square foot, provided with suitable ramps at each end. Such walkways shall be provided with a fence and handrails on each side. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 18-29(7))  
Sec. 6-1-58. - Storage of materials over walkways. 
Whenever roofs or walkways are used for the storing of materials, it shall be designed for the load to which it is to be subjected and a railing and footboard shall be installed so as to prevent the materials from spilling into the street. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 18-29(8))  
Sec. 6-1-59. - Walkways to be kept in repair. 
All barricades, fences, handrails and walkways shall be kept reasonably smooth and in good repair while construction or demolition work is in progress. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 18-29(9))  
Sec. 6-1-60. - Warnings lights required. 
(a)  Every walkway shall be kept well lighted continuously between sunset and sunrise with a minimum for 40 watt red electric lights spaced at intervals of 20 feet or less on the outer edge of the occupied space of the street. 
(b)  Hazardous markers shall be placed adjacent to and along the traffic side of the walkway. On the traffic approach end of the walkway a minimum of two (2) flashing amber lights shall be installed at approximately railing height. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 18-29(10))  
Sec. 6-1-61. - Clearing of sidewalks and streets. 
The owner or his agent, upon the completion of work on any building or structure, shall immediately remove all walkways, debris, or any other obstructions and shall leave such public property in as good a condition as it was before such work was commenced. 
(Code 1958, § 18-29(11))  
Sec. 6-1-62. - Stopwork orders. 
Upon notice from the director of transportation that work on any building or structure is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. 
(Code 1958, § 18-29(12))  
Secs. 6-1-63—6-1-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE D - Driveway Regulations[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-126, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 2, 1989, amended Tit. 6, Ch. 1, Art. D to read as herein set out in §§ 6-1-71—6-1-89. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. D, §§ 6-1-71—6-1-85, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 86-45, § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 1986. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
 
Sec. 6-1-71. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Access. Ingress and egress to property bordering on public roadways. 
(2)  Apron. The paved area between the gutter flow line of the roadway and the sidewalk section. 
(3)  Commercial driveway. A driveway providing vehicular access to property used for purposes other than residential. 
(4)  Corner clearance. The distance measured along the right-of-way line from the intersection of the projected right-of-way lines to the nearest edge of the driveway approach. 
(5)  Curb return. That section of radius or flare on a driveway between the gutter property. 
(6)  Driveway. An area on private property providing access for motor vehicles to a public right-of-way. 
(7)  Driveway angle. The acute angle between the driveway centerline and the curbline. 
(8)  Driveway approach. The improved area between the roadway of a public street and private property intended to provide access for motor vehicles to a well-defined area on private property. 
(9)  Driveway width. The width of the driveway measured at the right-of-way parallel with the roadway centerline. 
(10)  Frontage. The length of property adjoining the street right-of-way of a single property, tract, or development area between the side property lines. 
(11)  Outside sidewalk line. The line generally parallel to the right-of-way line and lying along the edge of the sidewalk section nearest the street right-of-way line. 
(12)  Residential driveway. A driveway providing vehicular access to property used for residential purposes. This includes driveways for single-family, duplex and triplex uses. 
(13)  Right-of-way. The land within legally defined property boundaries whose title rests with the city or state and is designated or intended for use as a public street or roadway. 
(14)  Side clearance. The distance measured along the street right-of-way line from the nearest side property corner to the nearest edge of the driveway approach. 
(15)  Sidewalk. An area on public or private property where pedestrians walk or stand, generally parallel to the edge of the street, roadway or face of curb. 
(16)  Sidewalk section. That portion of a driveway between the outside sidewalk line and the driveway apron. 
(17)  Service station driveway. A driveway providing access to property used as a service station for the retail sale of motor fuels. 
(18)  Spacing. The closest distance between two driveways, measured along the right-of-way line from edge of drive to edge of drive. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89)  
Sec. 6-1-72. - Conformance prerequisite to issuance of building permit. 
(a)  Driveway approaches hereinafter constructed in the city on public streets and roadways shall be designed and constructed in conformance with this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, cut, break out, or remove any curb along a street or alley except as authorized by the provisions of this article. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued for the erection, construction, reconstruction, or change in use of any building, structure, or land unless all driveway approaches are reviewed and approved by the director of transportation. 
(d)  Failure to construct any driveway approach(es) in conformance with the provisions of this article or failure to correct or remove any existing driveway approach(es) found to be nonconforming may result in the removal of the driveway approach(es) by the city, at the property owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89)  
Sec. 6-1-73. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person, firm, or corporation shall remove, alter, or construct any curb, driveway approach, gutter, pavement, or perform any other improvement in any public street or other property owned by or dedicated to the city without first obtaining a permit from the director of transportation authorizing such improvements. 
(b)  A driveway permit is required prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction, additions, or changes in use. 
(c)  Existing driveways shall not be altered within the right-of-way until a permit is obtained. The maintenance of driveways located in or on the right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Failure to secure a permit as described herein or failure to construct the driveway to city standards or failure to correct or remove existing nonconforming driveway approaches is a violation of the Code of Ordinances and a penalty of $50.00 per day may be imposed on the owner after a 30-day written notification has been given by the city engineer. If the driveway is not removed or brought into compliance within the 30 days, the person, firm, or corporation doing the original work shall be denied further permits to work on public streets within the city limits of High Point. 
(e)  In unusual circumstances minor variations of the minimum requirements may be permitted, based on sound traffic engineering principles, after an engineering investigation by the director of transportation and approved by the technical review committee. 
No variation in the number and/or width of driveways shall be permitted. 
(f)  Variations from the required number of driveways and width requirements of this article concerning incidental additions to existing developments may be permitted only upon approval by the city council upon each of the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed addition does not exceed 1,000 square feet; 
(2)  The addition is constructed to accommodate only space for current operations and not to accommodate expansion or change in nature of operations of the development; 
(3)  The addition does not increase any of the following: 
a.  Trip generation; 
b.  Number of employees; 
c.  Non-conformance with any other city ordinances; 
(4)  The existing driveway(s) and parking area meet current design standards and are in safe condition; 
(5)  No variation shall be allowed for any site before any other required review by the technical review committee and/or city council. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 90-108, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 96-87, § 1, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 6-1-74. - Submission of plans; information required. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued until there is filed with director of transportation for his approval two (2) copies of plans showing the location and dimensions of all proposed improvements. 
(b)  Additional plans may be required for driveway approaches to state highway system streets within the corporate limits. 
(c)  A minimum of three (3) working days shall be required for the initial review of the site plan by the director of transportation. 
(d)  Information that must be shown on plans submitted shall include: 
(1)  Location of the property, including street name and address; 
(2)  The character of the present and future property use and the current zoning; 
(3)  Location of all existing and proposed buildings; 
(4)  Pavement and right-of-way widths; 
(5)  For commercial and/or industrial facilities, the proposed location of off-street loading and unloading facilities; 
(6)  Interior parking arrangements and traffic circulation patterns, and number of spaces required; 
(7)  Location of existing utilities, retaining walls, storm drainage facilities, poles, and other physical features which affect the driveway location; 
(8)  All existing driveways, property lines, and driveways to be closed; 
(9)  All proposed driveways, including all parcels reserved for future development; 
(10)  Location of existing and proposed sidewalks, curbs, and wheelchair ramps on or adjacent to the property; 
(11)  Driveways on the opposite side of the street; 
(12)  All existing and/or required turn lanes and transition tapers; 
(13)  Proposed median openings with storage lanes and transition tapers; 
(14)  Location of all easements; 
(15)  North arrow; 
(16)  Scale, not greater that 1" = 10' or less than 1" = 40', 1" = 20' is preferred; 
(17)  Major developments may require a traffic study prepared by a transportation professional. Such studies shall include trip generation, existing and proposed traffic assignments, complete demographics of the development, and other information helpful in evaluating the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89)  
Sec. 6-1-75. - Permit fee. 
Fees for permits shall be fixed from time to time by the city council. A copy of the fee schedule is on file in the office of the city clerk and the city department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89)  
Sec. 6-1-76. - Inspections. 
Once the permit is duly issued, the supervisor on the driveway construction site shall keep the permit available for on-the-job inspection by authorized personnel of the city. 
Applicant shall request an inspection by the city engineer 24 hours in advance of any concrete pouring. 
The city engineer or his authorized representative shall have the authority to require the immediate stoppage of work not performed under the requirements of this article. 
In the event of failure to comply with the provisions of this article or the terms of the permit or, in the case of faulty workmanship or materials, the city may remove the noncomplying driveway at the property owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 90-108, 11-15-90)  
Sec. 6-1-77. - Width of driveway approaches. 
(a)  The width, in feet, of a driveway approach and curb return flare or radius shall be within the minimum and maximum limits as specified below: 
	Driveway Width, ft. 	Flare/Radius, ft. 
Land Use/Driveway Type 	Minimum 	Maximum 	Minimum 	Maximum 
Residential 				
  Single-family 	12  	20  	 1   	 3   
  Multifamily 	25  	35  	 1   	10   
Commercial/Industrial 				
  One-Way 	 15*  	35*** 	 5   	10   
  Two-Way 	25  	35  	 5   	10   
  Service station 	25  	35  	 5   	10   
Private street entrance 	22  	48  	30** 	30** 
Street type driveway 	25  	35** 	10   	30   
Public/Private Utility*** 	15  	25  	 5   	10   
 
 * One-way drive only; two-way minimum 25 feet. 
** Radius only. 
** For street-type drives with median, see section 6-1-79(b). 
*** In areas exempt from the off-street parking requirements, the director of transportation, following an engineering investigation, may increase the maximum width of driveway approaches to a maximum of 72 feet under the following conditions: 
- The driveway approach serves required loading docks that are internal to the structure and adjacent to the street right-of-way; and 
- The maximum individual loading dock width shall be 12 feet; and 
- The total width of the driveway shall not exceed the width of the number of required loading docks; and 
- The width increase requested will not adversely affect public safety. 
(b)  All driveway approach widths shall be measured at the street right-of-way line and the width of any driveway shall not increase when crossing the right-of-way except at properly designated curb returns. 
(c)  Radii for private street entrances and street-type driveways may exceed the maximums of this section, based upon sound traffic engineering principles and approval by the director of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 00-23, § 1, 1-6-00)  
Sec. 6-1-78. - Number and spacing of driveway approaches. 
(a)  Driveways shall be allocated and spaced as outlined below, per parcel, tract or development, provided all other requirements of this article are met: 
Number of Driveways Permitted 	Spacing, 
Inside Edge 
to Inside Edge 
1 	N/A 
2 	 30 
3 	100 
4 	100* 
 
 * (Upon approval of the city council subject to findings of fact pertaining to public safety such as traffic volumes, sight distance, street widths, zoning factors, etc. in accordance with driveway requirements as set out in policy guidelines. Approved by city council 10/6/94) 
(b)  The number, spacing, and location of driveways on major thoroughfares listed in Title 10, Article P, Schedule 20 are subject to the restrictions beginning in section 6-1-86. 
(c)  In areas exempt from the off-street parking requirements, driveway spacing may be reduced by the director of transportation following an engineering investigation, if the following conditions are met: 
- The driveway approaches serve required loading docks that are internal to the structure and adjacent to the street right-of-way; and 
- The spacing decrease requested will not adversely affect public safety. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 94-74, § 1, 10-6-94; Ord. No. 00-23, § 1, 1-6-00; Ord. No. 6642/09-42, § 1, 9-21-09)  
Sec. 6-1-79. - Driveway design. 
(a)  All driveway approaches shall be a concrete apron driveway section ("ramp" type), except that street type driveway entrances may be required to public or private developments that have parking spaces for 200 or more vehicles or when special conditions exist as determined by the director of transportation. 
(b)  Medians or islands may be permitted for street type driveways and private street entrances only, upon approval of the director of transportation and subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The raised median or island shall be constructed on private property to the rear of the right-of-way line; 
(2)  The minimum width of the median or island as measured nearest the right-of-way line (excluding the nose) shall be 15 feet; the minimum length shall be 50 feet; 
(3)  For street type driveways with a median or island, the combined width of pavement of the separated driveway segments shall not exceed 48 feet. 
(4)  Medians and islands shall not be permitted for ramp-type driveways. 
(c)  Ramp type driveway approaches may use either a standard drop curb opening or a curb radius from the street curb to the inside sidewalk line. If a curb radius is used: 
(1)  The top elevation of the curb radius must be held level with the elevation of the street curb; and 
(2)  The driveway apron must be raised to meet the elevation of the curbline at the inside sidewalk line. 
(d)  Driveway approaches shall cross the sidewalk area at the sidewalk grade established by the city engineer. 
(e)  The sidewalk shall be constructed separately from the driveway apron. 
(f)  The driveway angle shall be 90 degrees, unless engineering considerations dictate otherwise, as approved by the director of transportation. 
(g)  Where special pedestrian or vehicular hazards may be encountered, driveway approaches may be restricted to one-way operation. Such driveways shall be clearly signed and marked as one-way driveways using pavement arrows and directional signs. Failure to erect and maintain such signs or the failure to use these driveways in accordance with the signing and marking shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 90-108, 11-15-90)  
Sec. 6-1-80. - Location of driveway approaches. 
(a)  All driveway approaches shall have a minimum side clearance as specified below: 
Land Use 	Minimum Side 
Clearance, feet 
Single-family residential ..... 	 3 
All others ..... 	10 
 
(b)  All driveway approaches shall have a minimum corner clearance as specified below: 
Land Use 	Minimum 
Corner 
Clearance, feet 
Single-family residential .....
(attached and detached) 	50 
All others ..... 	60 
 
(c)  At street intersections where the radius is 60 feet or more, driveway approaches may encroach upon either end of the radius for a distance up to five (5) percent of the total length of the arc of the curb radius, thereby leaving at least 95 percent of the arc length of the radius free from driveway encroachment, provided that all other requirements of this article are met. 
(d)  No driveway approach shall be permitted to encompass any municipal facility, including but not limited to traffic signal standards, catch basins, fire hydrants, crosswalks, loading zones, utility poles, fire alarm supports, meter boxes, and sewer cleanouts. 
(e)  Landowners of adjacent property may, by written mutual agreement, construct a joint driveway to service both properties provided that all other requirements of this article are met with the exception of the side clearance restriction. 
(f)  The number, spacing, and location of driveways on major thoroughfares listed in Title 10, Article P, Schedule 20 are subject to the restrictions beginning in section 6-1-86. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 6164/04-62, § 1, 8-19-04)  
Sec. 6-1-81. - Use and protection of property. 
(a)  Rights-of-way of streets may not be used for private or commercial purposes. The area to which the driveway provides access shall be sufficiently large to store any vehicles using the driveway completely off the right-of-way and must be of sufficient size to allow the necessary function to be carried out completely on private property. 
(b)  Except for driveway approaches to residences, a six-inch raised curb shall be constructed a minimum distance of three (3) feet behind the street right-of-way line in the vicinity of street corners, sidewalk safety zones, entrance driveways and other points in such a manner as to prevent vehicles from crossing sidewalks other than by means of a driveway as herein prescribed, to prevent vehicular overhang on the right-of-way and to provide for proper drainage and control of water on private property. 
(c)  Parking areas and loading areas shall be constructed and properly curbed so that all movements to park and unpark, and load and unload will take place back of or within property lines. In the central business area, the director of transportation is hereby granted the authority to waive requirements set forth in this subsection after an engineering investigation and provided the following conditions are present: 
(1)  The area is within the parking exempt area of the city; 
(2)  The waiver requested arises from peculiar physical conditions not ordinarily existing in other areas of the city; 
(3)  Due to the nature or operation of the business on the applicant's property the requirements of subsection (c) above causes unnecessary hardship; 
(4)  The waiver requested is not against the public interest, safety, convenience, and general welfare; and 
(5)  The granting of the waiver will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners. 
(d)  Except as may be provided for under Title 9, Chapter 3, Article M, Signage Regulations, no part of the right-of-way or the area between the curb or edge of pavement and the property line shall be used to place private signs, fences, walls, post lights, or any other item. All such items shall be placed on private property in such a manner as not to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or visibility. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89)  
Sec. 6-1-82. - Specifications. 
All work done and all materials used in the construction of driveway approaches shall conform to the current "Standard Specifications for Concrete Sidewalk and Driveway Approaches, City of High Point," as established by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89)  
Sec. 6-1-83. - Existing driveway approaches. 
(a)  Existing driveway approaches shall not be relocated, altered, or reconstructed without a permit approving the relocation, alteration, or reconstruction and such driveway approaches shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  When the use or layout of any property is changed, making any portion or all of the driveway approach unnecessary, or when the driveway is nonconforming, the owner of the abutting property shall, at his expense, replace all necessary curbs, gutters and sidewalks, or correct all nonconforming features within 30 days after written notice from the director of transportation. Failure to do so may result in a penalty being imposed as described in section 6-1-73, subsection (d). 
(c)  City council may approve reduced corner and side clearances for an existing driveway not on a major or minor thoroughfare as designated in the latest adopted thoroughfare plan, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The property served by the existing driveway is not in a designated historic district but has at least one (1) coterminus property line with an existing designated historic district or a property on the National Historic Sites Register; and 
(2)  The existing driveway is critical to the use or reuse on the property of a structure(s) with significant historic value to the entire community and conformance with other requirements of this chapter would require removal of the driveway; and 
(3)  The use or reuse of structure(s) on the property will serve to maintain or enhance the historic significance of the structure; and 
(4)  The driveway must have less than 30 total (in and out) projected trips per day and the driveway is in good condition and owner agrees to maintain the driveway in a condition acceptable to city. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 99-82, § 1, 11-1-99)  
Sec. 6-1-84. - Protecting the public from injury. 
Whenever any person or firm shall do or undertake any of the items set forth in this article it shall be the duty of such person(s) or firm(s) to protect from harm and damage all persons or vehicles which may be using any street, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public area where such work is in progress. To that end, all persons or firms shall erect and maintain suitable barricades, signs, lights, flares and other appropriate warning devices at the proper locations where such work is in progress in accordance with the current policy and regulations for street construction and maintenance operations, City of High Point, as established by the director of transportation and in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89)  
Sec. 6-1-85. - Turn lanes, tapers, deceleration lanes. 
(a)  Turn lanes, tapers, and/or deceleration lanes may be required by the director of transportation where it is anticipated that the volume of traffic using the proposed driveway(s) or street(s) may significantly interfere with the flow of traffic on the abutting public street. Requests for turn lanes, deceleration lanes and transition tapers shall be considered as part of the driveway permitting process and must be shown on the submitted site plans, in addition to the other required site plan elements. Minimum turn lane specifications are: 
Minimum length: 100 feet 
Minimum taper: 150 feet 
(b)  The director of transportation may require additional side clearance to accommodate required turn lanes, deceleration lanes and/or tapers. 
(1)  The use or development requires 100 or more off-street parking spaces. The use or development will generate more than 50 entering trips during the peak hours of 7:00—9:00 a.m., 11:00 a.m.—1:00 p.m. and 4:00—6:00 p.m. through a single driveway. Data shall be based on the Institute of Transportation Engineers manual titled Trip Generation and based upon the highest land use permitted by the zoning classification as affected by any restrictions imposed by any conditional use permit, special use permit, or other legally enforceable restriction. 
(c)  The cost of all required turn lanes, deceleration lanes and transition tapers shall be paid for by the property owners. Property owners shall not be entitled to any claims or reimbursement for expenditures involved in construction on public rights-of-way. All constructed improvements required herein shall be the property of the City of High Point. 
(d)  Where property frontage is not adequate for construction or where existing utilities interfere with construction or where sight distance problems prohibit the placement of required turn lanes, tapers, and/or deceleration lanes, the owner and/or developer shall dedicate additional right-of-way for a future lane and pay to the city an assessment equal to the cost of constructing a deceleration lane, at the time the permit is issued. 
(e)  For requirements of turn lanes, tapers, and deceleration lanes on major thoroughfares refer to section 6-1-90. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 1, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 90-108, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 6642/09-42, § 1, 9-21-09)  
Sec. 6-1-86. - Requirements for major thoroughfares. 
The major thoroughfares or portions thereof to which the following sections apply are listed in Title 10, Chapter 1, Article P, Schedule 20. A copy of this schedule is on file in the office of the city clerk and the department of transportation. These requirements apply to all driveways except single family residential approaches constructed in the right-of-way along the major thoroughfare or along the intersecting side streets. Additional single family driveways may be permitted as described in section 6-1-78 if there are no sight distance or other safety concerns with the additional access. The requirements become effective on the date of designation by city council. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 2, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 90-108, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 6642/09-42, § 1, 9-21-09)  
Sec. 6-1-87. - Number of driveways permitted along major thoroughfares. 
The number of driveways allowed along a major thoroughfare is based on property frontage, pursuant to the following table: 
Property Frontage, F, in feet 	Number of Driveways Allowed 
  0 < F < 350 	1 
       F > 350 	2 
 
Two (2) driveways is the maximum number of driveways allowed per street frontage for any parcel, tract, or development, including access to any and all properties designated as outparcels or to be leased or sold for future development. The director of transportation may recommend to city council for their approval three (3) driveways provided the parcel has at least 1,000 feet of frontage and a traffic impact analysis is performed by a qualified engineer, at the property owner's expense, justifying an additional driveway. 
The number of driveways shall be further limited as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 2, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 90-108, 11-15-90)  
Sec. 6-1-88. - Location and spacing of driveways along major thoroughfares. 
(a)  All driveway approaches for both mid-block and corner lots along major thoroughfares shall have both minimum corner and side clearances as below: 
	Along Major 
Thoroughfare 	Along Side 
Street 
Corner clearance, feet 	250 	100 
Side clearance, feet 	 30 	 10 
 
No driveways shall be allowed along a major thoroughfare within 250 feet of any intersection, as measured from the intersection of the projected right-of-way lines, except for properties which cannot meet this restriction due to limited frontage within the desired corner clearance (see section 6-1-89(d)). 
Corner lots must have a minimum of 305 feet of frontage along the major thoroughfare before access can be permitted to the major thoroughfare. 
(b)  In cases where more than one (1) driveway approach is allowed by section 6-1-87, the driveways shall be spaced as follows: 
Number of Driveways 	Minimum Spacing 
2 	100 
3 	200 
 
**Where permitted under section 6-1-87. 
(c)  The minimum distance between the centerline of driveways into shopping centers and similar developments that generate high traffic volumes shall be 400 feet. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 2, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 90-108, § 11-15-90)  
Sec. 6-1-89. - Special provisions along major thoroughfares. 
(a)  Two (2) one-way driveways may be considered as a single driveway provided that: 
(1)  The minimum spacing between the two (2) driveway segments is 60 feet; 
(2)  The driveway segments are clearly signed and marked as one-way driveways, using pavement arrows and directional signs; 
(3)  The maximum combined pavement width of both driveway segments at the right-of-way line is 40 feet and the minimum width of a single segment is 15 feet; 
(4)  All other requirements of this section are met. 
(b)  For parcels, tracts, or developments which have previously met the requirements of this article, any subdivision of property, for sale or for lease, shall necessitate a reassessment of the number and location of driveway approaches for the entire parcel, tract, or development based on the original frontage measurements before an additional driveway permit may be issued. Any existing driveway approaches found to be nonconforming based on these requirements shall be removed or relocated at the property owner's expense prior to the issuance of a new driveway permit. 
(c)  No additional driveways, except as indicated above, will be permitted along major thoroughfares due to the subdivision of property, either developed or undeveloped. 
(d)  Any parcel, tract or development which is not a corner lot and which fails to meet the corner clearance requirement of section 6-1-88 (a) shall be allowed one (1) access point located as far as possible from the nearest intersection, but in no case less than 10 feet from the side property corner, as approved by the director of transportation. 
(e)  Any parcel, tract or development greater than 250 feet from the nearest intersection with less than 85 feet of frontage shall be allowed one (1) access point, the location and design of which shall be determined by the director of transportation. In no case shall side clearance be less than 10 feet. 
(f)  In the event that any property is affected by scenic corridor overlay zoning or any other zoning which includes access restrictions, the more restrictive of the two (2) regulations (the driveway ordinance or the zoning), shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 89-126, § 2, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 90-108, 11-15-90)  
Sec. 6-1-90. - Turn lanes, tapers, deceleration lanes on major thoroughfares. 
(a)  Turn lanes, tapers, and/or deceleration lanes are subject to the regulations in section 6-1-85 in addition to those regulations indicated below. 
(b)  Minimum turn lane specifications for major thoroughfares are: 
Minimum length: 100* feet. 
Minimum taper: 150* feet. 
* The storage length and taper may vary depending upon the existing roadway geometry, traffic conditions and the impacts of the proposed land use. 
(c)  Turn lanes, tapers, and/or deceleration lanes on major thoroughfares may be required by the director of transportation where it is anticipated that the volume of traffic using the proposed driveway(s) or street(s) may significantly interfere with the flow of traffic on the abutting public street. Requests for turn lanes, deceleration lanes, and transition tapers shall be considered as part of the driveway permitting process and must be shown on the submitted site plans, in addition to the other required site plan elements. 
(d)  Turn lanes for either or both left and/or right turns into a commercial or industrial site and residential subdivisions shall be required where there are high roadway and/or turn volumes of traffic, where the roadway speeds are moderate to high, or where needed due to limited sight distance. 
(e)  In the event any property is affected by scenic corridor overlay zoning or any other zoning which includes turn lane requirements, the more restrictive of the two (2) regulations (the driveway ordinance or the zoning) shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 90-108, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 6642/09-42, § 1, 9-21-09)  
Sec. 6-1-91. - Right-turn lanes. 
(a)  Dedication and construction of turning lanes to serve one (1) or more entrances into a development shall be required in any conditional use, special use, or driveway permit or subdivision approval for a use or development which is adjacent to a two-lane public street with average daily traffic (ADT) exceeding 5,000 vehicles per day, or a four-lane or larger public street with ADT exceeding 10,000 vehicles per day, of any one of the following conditions are also present: 
(1)  The use or development requires 100 or more off-street parking spaces. 
(2)  The use or development will generate more than 50 trips during the peak hours of 7:00 through 9:00 a.m., 11:00 a.m. through 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. through 6:00 p.m. through a single driveway. Data shall be based on the institute of transportation engineers manual titled Trip Generation and based upon the highest land use permitted by the zoning classification as affected by any restrictions imposed by any conditional use permit, special use permit, or other legally enforceable restriction. 
(3)  The use or development, as it may be affected by such restrictions, is reasonably expected to generate more than 25 truck (more than 13,000 G.V.W.) trips per day through a single driveway. 
(4)  The use or development, as it may be affected by such restrictions, creates special safety or traffic conditions due to limited sight distance and/or posted speeds in excess of 35 miles per hour along the adjacent public street. Such conditions shall be determined in writing by the director of the department of transportation. 
(5)  The use or development consists of at least 50 attached or detached residential dwelling units. 
(b)  Right-turn lanes shall be 12 feet in width plus a minimum thirty-inch curb and gutter. However, where ribbon pavement exists the improvements may be constructed to match. Right-of-way shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the back of the curb. 
(c)  For any use or development meeting the conditions set forth above, but having less than sufficient frontage on a public street to construct the turn lane, according to adopted city standards, then right-of-way sufficient to construct such future improvements shall be dedicated to the city and a fee shall be paid to the city equivalent to the cost of construction of a turn lane along such frontage. The fee shall be according to a schedule adopted by the city council, and shall be based on the current estimated cost for the city to have the lane installed. 
(Ord. No. 95-24, § 1, 3-2-95) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 95-24, adopted Mar. 2, 1995, added a new § 6-1-78. Inasmuch as provisions designated as such already exist in this Code, said section has been included herein as § 6-1-91 at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 6-1-92—6-1-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE E - Reimbursement Agreements 
 
Sec. 6-1-101. - Infrastructure reimbursement agreements. 
(a)  Pursuant to G.S. 160A-499, this section authorizes and sets forth the procedures and terms under which the city may approve reimbursement agreements with private developers and property owners for the design and construction of municipal infrastructure that is included on the city's capital improvement plan and serves the developer or property owner. For the purpose of this section, municipal infrastructure includes, but is not limited to, water mains, sanitary sewer lines, lift stations, stormwater lines, streets, curb and gutter, sidewalks, traffic control devices, and other associated facilities. 
(b)  The city manager, or designee, is authorized to negotiate municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreements with private developers and property owners pursuant to this section. In negotiating such agreements, the city manager, or designee, shall determine that either: 
(1)  The cost to the city will not exceed the estimated cost of providing for the municipal infrastructure through either eligible force account qualified labor or through a public contract awarded pursuant to G.S. 143-128 et seq., or 
(2)  The coordination of separately constructed municipal infrastructure with the associated private development would be impracticable. 
(c)  City approval authority for agreements under this section shall be governed by general city contracting authorizations and delegations. 
(d)  Reimbursements under this article, if any, may be paid from any lawful source if approved by the city council. 
(e)  A municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreement approved pursuant to this section shall not be subject to G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 8, unless the award of a contract for work would have required competitive bidding if the contract had been awarded by the city. If the city would have been required to follow G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 8, then the developer or property owner is required to comply with the requirements of G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 8. 
(f)  A municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreement approved pursuant to this section shall require the private developer or property owner party to comply with all of the city's rules, regulations and ordinances and be current on all debts, fees or taxes owed to the city. 
(Ord. No. 6990/13-22, 5-6-13)  
CHAPTER 2 - Solid Waste Collection and Disposal[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— This chapter is derived from an ordinance of the city council adopted June 18, 1981, which amended chapter 10 of the 1958 Code so as to rewrite the provisions thereof. Ordinance No. 91-57, adopted July 18, 1991, amended ch. 2 to read as herein set out. Formerly, ch. 2, §§6-2-1—6-2-18, pertained to garbage and refuse collection and disposal and derived from the 1982 Code; § 1 of Ord. No. 83-36, adopted June 2, 1983; and § 1 of Ord. No. 84-25, adopted April 5, 1984. 
 
Sec. 6-2-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(b)  The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this chapter: 
(1)  Ashes means refuse from the burning of wood, coal, paper, and/or other combustible material which has been wetted and cooled to the touch prior to collection. 
(2)  Blood and body fluids means liquid blood, serum, plasma, other blood products, emulsified human tissue, spinal fluids, and pleural and peritoneal fluids. Dialysates are not blood or body fluids under this definition. 
(3)  Bulk containers mean a metal container made of watertight construction with sliding doors opening on two (2) sides and hinged top, and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks. Containers shall be kept covered at all times. Hereinafter upon effective date of this section, all new bulk containers shall meet these specifications. 
(4)  Bulky item means the occasional items that are inappropriate or too large for compacting in the garbage truck such as white goods, stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, gas grills, wheelbarrows, bicycles, lawn mowers, sofas, box springs, carpet/padding, and other furniture and appliances. Bulky item collection is not intended to remove the entire contents of a property or house. No tires will be accepted. 
(5)  Business means a corporation, industry, company, retail, landlord, and/or other entity engaged in a for-profit endeavor. 
(6)  Central Business District means that section of the city bounded by Russell Street on the south, Elm Street on the west to Church, thence north along Main Street to Montlieu on the north and Hamilton Street on the east. 
(7)  City means the City of High Point. 
(8)  Collection means the act of removing solid waste from a point of generation to an approved disposal site. Collection shall be at the curb for garbage, yard waste, recyclables and bulky items. 
(9)  Commercial establishment means any retail, wholesale, institutional, religious, hotels, governmental or other nonresidential establishment at which solid waste may be generated. 
(10)  Commercial waste means solid waste generated from institutions and commercial concerns such as hotels, stores, etc. 
(11)  Construction or demolition when used in connection with "waste" or "debris" means solid waste resulting solely from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on pavement, buildings, or other structures, but does not include inert debris, land-clearing debris, or yard debris. 
(12)  Detachable container means a unit varying in capacity between 20 cubic yards and 40 cubic yards which is used for collecting, storing, and transporting building materials, commercial waste, industrial waste, hazardous refuse, refuse, or yard trash. The unit may or may not use an auxiliary stationary packing mechanism for compaction of materials into the container and may be of the open or enclosed variety. The distinguishing feature of the detachable container is that it is picked up by a specially equipped truck and becomes an integral part of the truck for transporting the waste materials to the disposal site. 
(13)  Flow control area is a designated geographic area within which the collection, transportation, storage, and disposal of all solid waste generated within said area shall be accomplished in accordance with a solid waste management plan. 
(14)  Garbage means all putrescible waste, that is solid waste capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances from odors and gases, such as kitchen wastes, offal and carcasses, including animal offal and carcasses and recognizable industrial byproducts, but excluding sewage and human waste. Offal, carcasses, and pet feces shall be securely bagged for collection. 
(15)  Generating facility means any facility where medical waste first becomes a waste, including but not limited to any medical or dental facility, funeral home, laboratory, veterinary hospital, and blood bank. 
(16)  Government or Governmental means any government, state, county or local government which operates separate and apart from the City of High Point. 
(17)  Group housing means apartments, condominiums, group developments. 
(18)  Hazardous waste means a solid waste, or combinations of solid wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: 
a.  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
b.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
(19)  Inert debris means solid waste which consists solely of material that is virtually inert and that is likely to retain its physical and chemical structure under expected conditions of disposal. 
(20)  Land clearing debris means solid waste (stumps, tree trunks, roots, dirt, large limbs, etc.) which is generated solely from land clearing activities. 
(21)  Lead acid batteries means any battery containing lead, acid, or both. 
(22)  Litter includes, but is not limited to, garbage refuse, waste material or any other discarded, used, or unconsumed substance which is not handled as specified herein. 
(23)  Loose leaves means tree/plant foliage that has fallen from trees/plants and has been placed along the street in rows or piles, not in bags, for collection. 
(24)  Loose tree limbs means large, heavy yard and/or tree trimmings or cuttings resulting from heavy pruning, tree or shrub removal, or plant breakage. These limbs have not been trimmed or cut to proper size, length, or bundled for collection. 
(25)  Material recovery facility is a state permitted solid waste management facility that receives recyclables within the designated flow control area The facility also processes removed recyclables for sale to recycling markets. 
(26)  Medical waste means any solid waste which is generated in the diagnosis, treatment, or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in the production or testing of biologicals, but does not include any hazardous waste identified or listed pursuant to this article, radioactive waste, household waste as defined in 40 Code of Federal Regulations, section 261.4(b)(1) in effect on July 1, 1989, or those substances excluded from the definition of solid waste in this section. 
(27)  Microbiological waste means cultures and stocks of infectious agents, including but not limited to specimens from medical, pathological, pharmaceutical, research, commercial, and industrial laboratories. 
(28)  Multi-family residential unit means any apartment, group of apartments or condominiums used for residential dwelling places. 
(29)  Nonresidential unit means any retail, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, religious, nonprofit organization, governmental or other unit not primarily used for residential purposes. 
(30)  Oil means any oil new or used which has been refined from crude oil or synthetic oil and, as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose due to the presence of impurities or loss of original properties, but which may be suitable for further use and is economically recyclable. 
(31)  Pathological waste means human tissue, organs and body parts, and the carcasses and body parts of all animals that were known to have been exposed to pathogens that are potentially dangerous to humans during research, were used in the production of biologicals or in vivo testing of pharmaceuticals, or that died with a known or suspected disease transmissible to humans. 
(32)  Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, unit of local government, state agency, federal agency, or other legal entity. 
(33)  Physical disability means a medical condition, verified by a registered physician, that makes an individual either physically unable to bring a rollout cart to the curbside for collection and/or that makes undertaking such an act clearly and seriously threatening to that person's health. 
(34)  Recycling means any process by which solid waste, or materials which would otherwise become solid waste, are collected, separated, or processed, and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
(35)  Recyclable material means those materials which are capable of being recycled can be marketed at a value greater than the costs associated with processing and shipping that material to a buyer, and which would otherwise be processed or disposed of as solid waste. Examples of recyclable materials are as follows: newspaper and accompanying inserts, magazines, chip board, corrugated cardboard, mixed and office paper (excluding sanitary products), telephone books, plastic bottles (#1 PET), plastic containers (#2 HDPE), steel cans, aluminum cans, glass containers, and yard waste (leaves, brush, grass clippings) and other materials determined to be recyclable by the public services director. 
(36)  Rental trash trailer program means city service to provide a large trailer rental for residential property owners, customers, and tenants for a larger quantity of bulky items to be disposed. Service is for a fee . 
(37)  Refuse means all non-putrescible waste. 
(38)  Regulated medical waste means blood and body fluids in individual containers in volumes greater than 20 milliliters, microbiological waste, and pathological waste that have not been treated. 
(39)  Rollout cart means a wheeled solid waste, yard waste, and/or recyclable receptacle compatible with city garbage collection equipment, and approved by the department of public services. 
(40)  Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original, intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
(41)  Sharps means and includes needles, syringes with attached needles, capillary tubes, slides and cove slips, and scalpel blades. 
(42)  Sharps container means a container manufactured and approved for the disposal of sharps. The container must be rigid, leak-proof when in the upright position, puncture-resistant, and shall be labeled with a water resistant universal biohazard symbol. 
(43)  Single-family attached housing is a project of one (1) or more residential structures, each containing two (2) or more attached single-family residences. 
(44)  Single-family dwelling means any dwelling place occupied by one (1) family. 
(45)  Sludge means any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste generated from a municipal, commercial, institutional, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, waste supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, or any other waste having similar characteristics and effects. 
(46)  Small dead animals means cats, dogs, small household pets, and other small animals of similar size weighing less than 100 pounds. Definition does not include livestock (cows, pigs, goats, horse). 
(47)  Solid waste means any hazardous or nonhazardous garbage, refuse or sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, domestic sewage and sludges generated by the treatment thereof in sanitary sewage collection, treatment, and disposal systems; and other material that is either discarded or is being accumulated, stored or treated prior to being discarded, or has served its original intended use and is generally discarded, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, institutional, commercial, and agricultural operations, and from community activities. The term does not include: 
a.  Fecal waste from fowls and animals other than humans. 
b.  Solid or dissolved material in: 
1.  Domestic sewage and sludges generated by treatment thereof in sanitary sewage collection, treatment and disposal systems which are designed to discharge effluents to the surface waters; 
2.  Irrigation return flows; and 
3.  Wastewater discharges and the sludges incidental to and generated by treatment which are point sources subject to permits granted under section 402 of the Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (P.L. 92-500), and permits granted under G.S. 143-215.1 by the Environmental Management Commission. However, any sludges that meet the criteria for hazardous waste under RCRA shall also be a solid waste for the purposes of this article. 
c.  Oils and other liquid hydrocarbons controlled under article 21A of chapter 143 of the General Statutes. However, any oils or other liquid hydrocarbons that meet the criteria for hazardous waste under RCRA shall also be a solid waste for the purposes of this article. 
d.  Any source, special nuclear or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. Par. 2011). 
e.  Mining refuse covered by the North Carolina Mining Act, G.S. 74-46 through 74-68 and regulated by the North Carolina Mining Commission (as defined under G.S. 143B-290). However, any specific mining waste that meets the criteria for hazardous waste under RCRA shall also be a solid waste for the purposes of this article. 
(48)  Special wastes means solid wastes that can require special handling and management, including white goods, whole tires, used oil, lead-acid batteries, and medical wastes. 
(49)  Tipping fee means the charge per ton approved by the city council for processing and disposal of solid waste as well as the capital and operation and maintenance costs associated with the materials recovery facility. 
(50)  Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering encircling the wheel of a motor vehicle as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(23). 
(51)  White goods include inoperative and discarded refrigerators, ranges, water heaters, freezers, and other similar domestic and commercial large appliances. 
(52)  Yard waste means solid waste consisting solely of vegetative matter which includes, but is not limited to, tree limbs, grass clippings, weeds, bush clippings, leaves, brush, and etc. resulting from regular maintenance of yards, gardens, and landscaping maintenance activities. Yard waste does not include entire trees, large tree trunks, stumps, or clearing activities. It also does not include any material generated by commercial tree companies. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08; Ord. No. 7391/18-20 , 3-5-18)  
Sec. 6-2-2. - Responsibility for solid waste removal. 
Responsibility for administration of residential solid waste removal shall lie with the public services department. Bulk containers, roll-off containers, or detachable containers shall be removed by private contractors. Persons desiring to collect bulk containers, roll-off containers, or detachable containers shall secure a permit from the public services department. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-3. - Containers required for solid waste removal. 
All householders and business proprietors shall provide the necessary receptacles as indicated by this chapter for solid waste subject to removal by the environmental services division of the public services department or private contractors. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-4. - Solid waste containers; size, type, etc. 
(a)  Rollout carts constructed so that they can be emptied by the lifting devices mounted on city trucks are required and shall be of a type and size approved by the department of public services. 
(b)  Bulk containers are authorized per the specifications as set forth by the director of public services. Distributors of bulk containers who wish to sell or lease such containers in the city are subject to approval by the director of public services and must have on file in the public services department a service and maintenance agreement for such containers. 
(c)  Twenty-to-40-yard detachable containers are authorized through private contractors. Such contractor must be approved by the director of public services. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-5. - Preparation of solid waste for collection. 
Solid waste materials are collected once per week beginning at 7:00 a.m. (with the exception of that area designated as the Central Business District, which must be placed at the curb by 5:00 a.m., the day of collection). Rollout carts, recycling containers, and yard waste which are not out when the truck passes, will not be collected until the next regularly scheduled pickup date. Rollout carts shall be removed from the curb the date they are serviced. Contractors, businesses, landlords, retail, etc. are responsible for the removal and disposal of their generated solid waste. 
(a)  All solid waste shall be placed in approved rollout carts. No loose bags of garbage shall be placed at the street and will not be collected. All bags must be contained in the approved rollout carts. It is recommended that all garbage be contained in bags as to prevent spillage during servicing. The city manager may authorize city crews to collect additional bagged solid waste on certain occasions during the year (such as Christmas) for a set time period, such as two (2) weeks after the holiday. The maximum number of rollout carts allowed for garbage service for any one (1) household is two (2) carts. 
(b)  Yard waste shall be placed at the curb in a city approved yard waste rollout cart, boxed, bagged in clear plastic bags, or secured in bundles weighing no more than 50 pounds and not exceeding a length of four (4) feet. Yard waste may not be mixed with any other types of solid waste. 
Loose tree limbs (LTLs) not conforming to yard waste requirements shall not be collected by the city. It is not the intent of the city to collect large portions of trees, entire tree(s), or lot clearing debris. Any tree trimming or removal performed at a multi-family residential unit or condominiums, or by a commercial company, business, landscaping company, or entities other than the property owner shall be responsible for the complete removal and disposal of all materials. 
In the event of a storm (ice, tornado, severe thunderstorm, etc.), the City Manager may authorize the collection of loose tree limbs for a set time period (i.e. four (4) weeks) for crews to remove all limbs placed at the curb as a result of storm cleanup. 
(c)  Loose leaves may be placed at the edge of the road (not in the road, ditchline or curbline) for loose leaf collection during the late fall and early winter each year (approx. November through January). Collection schedules will be advertised and published. No other yard waste shall be included or mixed with loose leaves (no sticks, brush, or bagged leaves/grass). 
(d)  Bulky items shall be placed at the curb free from overhead wires, trees and tree limbs, mailboxes, utility poles, vehicles, or other endangerments that would impede collection. This service is intended for the occasional disposal of a mattress, appliance, furniture items, carpet, or other like items from a property owner or tenant. The bulky item service is not intended as a cleanout/disposal for removing all items from a property. Bulky items service does not apply to any business. No tires will be collected by the city. Tires shall be disposed at the county tire facility. 
(e)  The city provides for the collection of recyclable materials and strongly encourages all residents to participate. Recyclable materials should be placed in a city-approved container. Acceptable materials are defined above and in city literature. Materials do not require sorting. Only recyclable materials should be placed in the containers. Mixing garbage, yard waste or other materials with recyclables will result in a notice of violation and no collection. 
(f)  Materials such as computers, monitors, TVs, batteries, chemicals, oils and other hazardous materials are not accepted as recyclable or solid waste and should not be placed in any container and will not be collected. These items may be recycled at the county's household hazardous waste recycling facility or other approved sites. Plastic bags (#2 LDPE) should be returned to retail stores for recycling and should not be included in weekly recycling collection. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-6. - Availability and extent of service. 
(a)  Rollout carts shall be serviced once per week with the exception of the Central Business District (CBD), which shall be serviced four (4) times per week. This service includes garbage, recyclables, bulky item, and yard waste. No customer shall have more than two (2) rollout carts for garbage service. The city reserves the right to suspend, delay, or alter the time of collection of one (1) or all services temporarily should snow, ice, storms, flooding, extreme heat/cold or other conditions make it unsafe for the public or employees during collection operations. 
(b)  As a courtesy, backdoor service is available for garbage and recycling on a once per week basis, provided that prior approval has been granted by the environmental service superintendent, upon verification of a valid medical reason by a medical doctor for those persons who are physically unable to place their rollout cart to the curb. The city also reserves the right to periodically verify the need to continue backdoor service to residents who have been approved to receive the service. The city reserves the right to continue or discontinue backdoor service. The director of public services or his designee shall have the authority to determine the proper location for rollout carts for disabled residents. 
(c)  Single-family attached housing (townhomes) shall be serviced as subsection (a) above, provided the city shall be held harmless against any and all claims for pavement damage resulting from rollout cart service, and provided the drives are designed for proper movement of solid waste collection vehicles. Developers, at their option, may request bulk container service. 
(d)  All locations, except for single-family dwellings, which generate more solid waste than can be serviced by two (2) rollout carts once weekly, shall be required to furnish a bulk container of the type approved by the director of public services, provided that such container can be installed and serviced. Solid waste collection service for this container shall be by private contractor. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 92-20, § 1, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-7. - Purchase of roll-out carts. 
Rollout carts for garbage, yard waste, and recycles shall be purchased from the city. All carts will carry a 10-year warranty against defects for materials and workmanship. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-8. - Interfering with collection practices. 
No person or persons shall interfere, meddle with refuse containers or in any way pilfer, scavenge, scatter the contents of, or place junk in any alley or street within the city limits or otherwise deter the normal solid waste collection process by tampering with solid waste containers unless by permission of the environmental services superintendent or his representative, nor shall any person place any hazardous waste in any collection receptacle. This applies to garbage, bulky items and recyclables. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-9. - Littering. 
Littering is prohibited. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to intentionally or recklessly throw, scatter, spill, sweep, or deposit or otherwise dispose of garbage, litter, debris, trash, or other materials 
(a)  On any property or private property not owned by him/her; 
(b)  In a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk, alley, storm drain, or other public or private property or place; or 
(c)  In any stream, creek, waterway, or body of water. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-10. - Medical waste. 
No medical waste shall be deposited or permitted to be deposited in the waste stream within the flow control area. The director of public services shall terminate solid waste collection services to any commercial establishment at which a violation of this section occurs. Such termination is not a penalty, but shall nevertheless be in addition to and not in lieu of the imposition of civil or criminal penalties for violation of this chapter. 
Sharps as defined above shall not be placed in the rollout carts, recyclable containers, or other containers for regular solid waste collection. All sharps items should be placed in an approved sharps container as defined above, but not placed in the regular solid waste stream. Residential customers may call the city's customer service division (336-883-3111) to schedule a pickup of the sharps containers free of charge. If a customer is found to repeatedly place sharps in the regular solid waste collection, the director of public services may discontinue solid waste service to the property and/or impose violation fines. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-11. - Responsibility to place solid waste for collection. 
It shall be the responsibility of each householder or storekeeper to place their solid waste for collection at the proper time and in the proper manner as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91)  
Sec. 6-2-12. - Dumping solid waste, etc., on open lots prohibited; exception for landfilling. 
No solid waste, yard waste, special waste, or other offensive material shall be dumped, thrown, or allowed to remain on any lot or space within the city limits. However, the owner of any lot or parcel of land desiring to conduct a fill operation shall apply for the appropriate permits, and any fill operation shall be conducted in accordance with all local, state, and federal rules, laws, and conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-13. - Replacement of roll-out carts. 
Replacement of rollout carts shall be the responsibility of the property owner, resident, or tenant. The environmental services superintendent shall have the authority to discontinue service when a container becomes unserviceable and advise the householder of same. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-14. - Removal of small dead animals. 
The city provides for the removal of small dead animals (less than 100 pounds). This service is provided five (5) days per week during normal business hours. Small dead animals shall be placed in a plastic bag and put in the rollout cart on the normal schedule collection day or scheduled through customer service (336-883-3111). Dead animals weighing 100 or more shall be removed and disposed of by the owner. The collection of small animals includes dogs, cats, birds, and other similar pets/animals. It does not include livestock, horses, pigs, goats, or similar animals. 
Dead animals already in the street or on the edge of the street, when the owner is not identified, will be scheduled for collection by the city upon notification of their existence. 
The city will provide dead animal collection to local veterinarians offices for a fee as set by the director of public services. Veterinarian offices shall call the city's customer service division (336-883-3111) to schedule a pickup of dead animals. The city will collect up to 10 animals, none exceeding 100 pounds, during a requested pickup. The veterinarian office is required to bring the dead animals to the truck. Veterinarian offices will be billed for the service per the established fee. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-15. - Rental trash trailer program. 
The rental trash trailer program provides residents, homeowners, and tenants with a means to remove larger quantities of bulky item materials or yard waste from the property to the landfill or compost facility for a fee. Upon request of a trailer and payment of fee (fee as set by the director of public services), the city will deliver a trailer to the property for a given time. Disposal and accepted material rules posted on the trailer must be followed. Failure to follow rules for the trailer will result in additional fees/fines, additional disposal costs, and/or refusal to accept materials. 
(Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6586/08-71, adopted Oct. 20, 2008, renumbered the former §§ 6-2-15—6-2-18 as 6-2-16—6-2-19 and enacted a new § 6-2-15 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
Sec. 6-2-16. - Ownership of all waste collected by public or private collectors. 
All solid waste collected in the city by public or authorized private collectors and all solid waste collected in the flow control area shall be delivered to the city landfill, compost facility, or material recovery facility unless otherwise specifically authorized by the director of public services. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-17. - Flow control area. 
(a)  All solid waste generated within the flow control area that is placed in the waste stream for disposal shall be collected, transported, stored, and disposed of by the city at permitted solid waste management facilities of the city in accordance with the solid waste management plan adopted by the DEHNR. The director of public services shall maintain a current map of the flow control area which shall be available for public inspection. 
(b)  The director of public services with the approval of the city manager is authorized to grant exceptions to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section in order to effectuate the intent of the solid waste management plan or to enhance or protect the operation of solid waste management facilities, so long as such exceptions are with the approval of DEHNR. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-18. - Penalty for violation. 
Items found in violation of this chapter will be tagged as such to notify the property owner, resident, or tenant of the issue(s). If the violation is not corrected, the city will take action to remedy the violation. The property owner, resident, or tenant may be fined as described below and will be charged the actual costs of cleanup and disposal. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor; shall also or alternatively subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $500.00; and shall also be subject to appropriate equitable remedies including but not being limited to injunctive relief. Each days' continuing violation shall constitute a separate offenses. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08)  
Sec. 6-2-19. - Commercial mattress disposal. 
No disposal of mattresses in the landfill from commercial establishments will be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 7391/18-20 , 3-5-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7391/18-20 , adopted March 5, 2018, added a new § 6-2-19 and renumbered the former § 6-2-19 as 6-2-20.  
Sec. 6-2-20. - Administration and enforcement. 
The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the public services department. 
(Ord. No. 91-57, 7-18-91; Ord. No. 6586/08-71, 10-20-08; Ord. No. 7391/18-20 , 3-5-18)  
CHAPTER 3 - Cemeteries[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority concerning cemeteries, G.S. 160A-341 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-3-1. - Supervision; employment of labor. 
The city cemeteries shall be maintained by a superintendent who shall perform such duties as shall be assigned to him by the director of public works.  
Sec. 6-3-2. - Opening of graves. 
The fees for opening of graves at the city cemeteries shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council.  
Sec. 6-3-3. - Opening graves; personnel authorized; notice required. 
No person shall dig any grave in a city cemetery other than those persons employed by the city under the supervision of the superintendent of cemeteries. The superintendent of cemeteries shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance of any funeral that a grave shall be dug.  
Sec. 6-3-4. - Specifications for vaults, monuments and markers. 
In any present or future development of any city cemetery, no person shall erect or have erected any brick or concrete aboveground vault. Burial vaults conforming to the specifications set by the department of public works shall be required for all burials. No person shall erect or have erected coping or border of any type around any grave or lot. All gravestones and markers shall be erected in accordance with the specifications set by the department of public works and shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent of cemeteries. Only one (1) family monument shall be permitted on any lot, with individual markers set flush with the ground for individual graves.  
Sec. 6-3-5. - Damaging cemetery property. 
No person shall damage, deface or destroy any building erected, any board, gravestone, tombstone, marker, monument, seat, bench chair, railing, enclosure or stakes in or around the cemetery, or the plots therein, or remove such things from the cemetery without the permission of the superintendent of cemeteries. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 6-6)  
Sec. 6-3-6. - Injuring or destroying flowers, shrubs, etc. 
The superintendent of cemeteries shall have control over the planting of flowers, bulbs, shrubbery, vines and trees in city-owned cemeteries, and it shall be unlawful to cut down, pull up, pluck or otherwise injure or destroy any of such flowers, bulbs, shrubbery, vines or trees planted in any plot in the cemetery or on the surrounding grounds, except under the direction of the superintendent. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 6-7)  
Sec. 6-3-7. - Excavating. 
No person shall excavate any earth in any cemetery or remove the same therefrom, except by the consent and under the direction of the superintendent of cemeteries, or some other officer legally authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 6-10)  
Sec. 6-3-8. - Driving in cemeteries. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle within a cemetery in this city, except upon the roadways and at a rate of speed not in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any cemetery in this city except for the purpose of attending funerals, visiting graves or for other cemetery business.  
Title 7 - PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS  
CHAPTER 1 - Parks and Recreation[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Recreation enabling law, G.S. 160A-350 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-1-1. - Parks and recreation commission. 
The parks and recreation commission is an established advisory board appointed by the city council. The commission shall consist of not less than seven (7) nor more than nine (9) members. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the city council in such manner that the terms will be staggered with three (3) vacancies occurring each year. The chairman of the parks and recreation commission shall be elected by the commission members. It is the responsibility of this commission to advise the city council and the parks and recreation department on public recreation concerns, including but not limited to, capital outlay, fees and charges, and programs. The parks and recreation commission shall also recommend to the city council rules and regulations for the operation of municipal public parks and recreation areas.  
Sec. 7-1-2. - Rules and regulations for the operation of municipal public parks and recreation areas. 
(a)  The city council shall establish rules and regulations for the operation of municipal public parks and recreation areas. It shall be unlawful for a person to violate any rule or regulation upon establishment by the city council. Changes in the rules and regulations shall become effective 10 days succeeding approval by the city council. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  The city council shall establish all rules and regulations pertaining to the use of High Point City Lake and Oak Hollow Lake and all city property adjacent thereto. Upon establishment it shall be unlawful for any person to use said lakes or adjacent city property not in accordance with the city lake management plan or as set forth in the rules and regulations concerning the use of city-operated lakes. A copy of the lake management plan shall be filed with the city clerk.  
Sec. 7-1-3. - Fees for operation of municipal public parks and recreation areas. 
The city council shall establish fees for the use of any or all of the municipal public parks and recreation areas. Upon establishment by the city council it shall be unlawful for any person to commence using any municipal public parks and recreation areas before payment of the fees except where provided for otherwise in the rules and regulations. Changes in the fees shall become effective 10 days succeeding approval by the city council. A copy of the fees shall be filed with the city clerk.  
Sec. 7-1-4. - Exceptions to the payment of established fees at municipal public parks and recreation areas. 
The director of parks and recreation, after advising the parks and recreation commission, and with the concurrence of the city manager, shall have the right to reduce or suspend the payment of established fees for the use of municipal public parks and recreation areas. These reductions or suspensions of fees and charges may apply to special events or certain community groups for the best recreation and park interest of the city.  
CHAPTER 2 - Library Board of Trustees[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, adopted April 1, 1982, repealed Ch. 2, §§ 7-2-1—7-2-9, pertaining to the library board of trustees, which derived from Code 1958, §§ 2-41, 2-42, 2-44, and enacted new provisions designated as Ch. 2, §§ 7-2-1—7-2-9, pertaining to similar subject matter, to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 7-2-1. - Appointment; term; vacancies. 
For the government of the public library of the city, a board of nine (9) trustees shall be appointed by the council. 
The trustees shall hold office for three (3) years from their appointment, and until their successors are appointed and qualified; provided, however, that the term of any board member serving as of [November 5, 1992,] the date of the adoption of this ordinance [No. 92-115] shall not be reduced. All vacancies shall be immediately reported by the trustees to the city council and be filled by appointment in like manner, and if an unexpired term for the residue of the term only. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 4-1-82; Ord. No. 92-115, § 1, 11-5-92; Ord. No. 6623/09-23, § 1, 6-4-09)  
Sec. 7-2-2. - Removal of trustees; compensation. 
The city council may remove any trustee of such library board for incapacity, unfitness, misconduct or for neglect of duty. No compensation shall be allowed any trustee. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 4-1-82)  
Sec. 7-2-3. - Election of officers. 
Immediately after appointment, the board of trustees shall organize by electing one (1) of its members as chairman, one (1) of its members as vicechairman and one (1) of its members as secretary. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 4-1-82)  
Sec. 7-2-4. - Adoption of bylaws, rules and regulations. 
The board of trustees shall adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for its own guidance and for the government of the library as may be expedient and conformable to law. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 4-1-82)  
Sec. 7-2-5. - Library personnel. 
The city manager shall appoint a library director to perform such duties as shall be included in the official job description of the library director. All library employees, including the library director, shall be subject to the city's personnel ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 4-1-82; Ord. No. 88-43, § 1, 6-16-88)  
Sec. 7-2-6. - Control of library building. 
The library board shall be considered custodian of library facilities and shall develop rules and regulations for their usage. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 4-1-82)  
Sec. 7-2-7. - Annual report to city council. 
The board of trustees shall submit an annual report to the city council, outlining operational activities of the library. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 4-1-82)  
Sec. 7-2-8. - Library materials. 
The board shall devise standards, policies and procedures for the selection and acquisition of all books, newspapers, magazines, films, recording and all other library materials, and shall be responsible for the implementation of such policies and standards. It shall in like manner, provide for the withdrawal or disposition of all library materials, and shall assume the final authority for the quality and character of such material. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 4-1-82)  
Sec. 7-2-9. - Use of services and materials. 
The board shall formulate and shall cause to be implemented rules and regulations governing the use of library materials, including the establishment of conditions, periods of use and fees. It shall cause to be devised and implemented, within budget limitations, such programs and services as will contribute to the enrichment of community life. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 4-1-82)  
Title 8 - PUBLIC UTILITIES  
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 8-1-1. - Public utilities consists of two departments: public services and electric utilities. 
There shall be a department head over each department. 
(Ord. No. 84-85, § 1, 12-6-84; Ord. No. 97-102(1), § 1(1), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-1-2. - Policies and procedures. 
Policies and procedures shall be established by the department of public services for each of these divisions with same to be approved by the city council as supplements to the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(1), § 1(2), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-1-3. - Departmental practices, procedures and standards. 
Practices, procedures and standards are to be established by the public services department for guidance in accomplishing the approved functions of the departments. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(1), § 1(3), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-1-4. - Definitions. 
Whenever the word "city" is used in this chapter, the same refers to and means water, sewer an/or public services; and whenever the word "consumer," "customer," "occupant" is used, the same refers to and means the applicant for or the consumer of electric, water or sewer services. "Applicant" refers to and means any person, group of persons, association, partnership, firm or corporation requesting facilities for the supply of water, sewer, or electric service from the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-85, § 1, 12-6-84; Ord. No. 97-102(1), § 1(4), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-1-5. - Records. 
Appropriate records shall be maintained on each customer.  
Sec. 8-1-6. - Application for service and final bill. 
The city reserves the right to require the applicant, before any service is delivered, to fill out an application and execute an agreement or contract for the purchase of electricity, water, and/or sewer service in the form used by the city unless other arrangements have been made. Whether or not a written agreement or contract is executed, the applicant, by accepting the service, agrees to be bound by the applicable schedule of rates and these policies and procedures as from time to time in effect. 
The service agreement or contract made to each individual customer shall not be transferable nor assigned without the consent of the city. 
Each new customer shall make formal application for service before using any service, or else the past bills may also be charged against the new customer's account. It shall be the duty of a customer to notify the city upon the vacating of the premises; and all bills, through the final bill, are to be paid immediately upon presentation.  
Sec. 8-1-7. - Deposits, securities, exceptions. 
Each new customer shall make a deposit or provide security to the city for utility bills as determined by the city in cases not covered by the requirements under policies and procedures. These deposits shall not bear interest. The words "new customer" as used in this section shall be construed to mean any new connection which has not heretofore existed, or any consumer whose services have been disconnected on account of failure to pay the utility bill, or any consumer whose meter has been vandalized, or any consumer moving from one location to another. Provided that when the city acquires facilities from other utilities, consumers or customers receiving service from these utilities at the time of transfer shall not be considered a new consumer within the meaning of this section.  
Sec. 8-1-8. - Meter reading and account billing intervals. 
Reasonable efforts will be made to read the meters monthly and the metered and non-metered accounts billed monthly.  
Sec. 8-1-9. - Bills. 
Delivery. 
The city will endeavor to deliver to the consumer by mail or messenger a monthly statement of the amount due for utility services furnished, but failure to receive such statement will not entitle the consumer to any delay in the settlement of each monthly account beyond the date when the bill is due and payable. All bills are net and are payable in accordance with established policies and procedures. 
Payment. 
(a)  If the consumer shall at any time default in the payment of any bill due the city, then the city shall have the right to terminate the contract, or at its option without terminating or in anywise voiding such contract, to discontinue, suspend or withdraw the supplying of services thereunder until all moneys then due shall have been paid. This option may be exercised by the city whenever and as often as any such default shall occur. 
(b)  It must be understood that payment must be in the hands of the city to be considered paid. A deposit placed in the night depository is considered in the next working day receipts (payments). 
(c)  Any check returned for nonsufficient funds will incur a returned check charge. Returned checks may result in discontinuance of service.  
Sec. 8-1-10. - Opportunity for hearing disputed bills. 
It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers by reason of non-payment of bill only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. Any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have the right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person and/or by counsel or other person of his choosing, and may present orally or in writing, his complaint and contentions. 
Water and sewer complaints shall be directed to the operations manager of the public services department. Electrical billing complaints shall be directed to the utility service superintendent. Both the operations manager of public services and the utility service superintendent shall be authorized to hold a service order to discontinue service in abeyance during the period of investigation. 
Both the operation manager of public services and the utility service superintendent shall be authorized to make final resolutions for their respective utilities, and order any billing adjustments. The customer will be notified of the results of the investigation and determination prior to adjustment or cutoff. 
The customer making the complaint shall thereafter have the right of further appeal to the city manager or his designee. Said appeal shall be made in writing within 48 hours of the resolution of the initial hearing. 
In the absence of the payment of the bill rendered or failure to use the hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified. 
(Ord. No. 89-20, § 1, 2-16-89; Ord. No. 97-102(1), § 1(5), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-1-11. - Liability of consumers as to meters, seals, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to install, maintain, alter or operate the city's meters, seals, or other property, or permit same to be done by others except for the city's authorized employees or agents. Damage caused by the consumer or his agent to the city's property shall be paid for by the consumer.  
Sec. 8-1-12. - Removal of city property. 
The city may remove its property at any time after the termination of the contract, or when the consumer violates any of these regulations, or if the consumer's property is attached or sold under mortgage, or the consumer otherwise dispossessed. Applicable city, state and federal laws, ordinances, policies and procedures and rules and regulations shall apply to all situations.  
Sec. 8-1-13. - Refunds. 
Refunds normally will be applied against a customer's account; however, by mutual agreement between the city and the customer, a check may be issued for the refundable amount.  
Sec. 8-1-14. - Discontinuance and restoration of services. 
The city reserves the right to discontinue any or all classes of service and disconnect its service connections and remove its property for any of the following reasons: 
a.  For repairs. 
b.  For want of supply. 
c.  For nonpayment of any bill. 
d.  For fraudulent representation in relation to consumption or utilization of electricity, water or sewer. 
e.  For violation of any of the conditions of the contract and applicable regulations and other state and federal laws. Prosecution may follow. 
f.  For the reason that the consumer's use of the service is detrimental to the city's service. 
g.  For failure of the consumer to maintain all his service lines and facilities in accordance with the laws of the state or the ordinances, rules and regulations policies and procedures and rules and regulations shall apply to all situations [and] the city's equipment. 
h.  It shall be unlawful for one customer to obtain utility services either directly or indirectly through another customer's service. Should a customer knowingly supply service in this manner, the customer's service may be discontinued until the condition is corrected, the necessary fees paid and other conditions of these ordinances, rules and regulations, and practices, procedures and standards are met.  
Sec. 8-1-15. - Restoration of services. 
Any customer who does not have an adequate deposit and whose service has been discontinued for nonpayment or is on the cut-off list and not cut must pay the delinquent amount of the bill, place a deposit as required, and pay cut-on fees as well as other costs, if any.  
Sec. 8-1-16. - City not liable for failure to supply services contracted for. 
In the event the city should fail to supply services contracted for, whether from causes beyond its control or accidents, the city shall not be liable for damages by reason of such failure.  
Sec. 8-1-17. - Administration of regulations. 
The department head will be responsible for the administration of the ordinances, policies and procedures, as they relate to the respective divisions of the public services department. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(1), § 1(6), 12-18-97)  
CHAPTER 2 - Water and Sewer  
ARTICLE A - Water 
 
Sec. 8-2-1. - Director of public services department; duties, compensation, composition of department. 
The head of the public services department shall be known as the "director of public services"; subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters, he shall manage and have control of the entire operation of the public services department, including metering, operation and control of city water lakes and reservoirs. He shall set the standards of quality and materials to be used in the construction and maintenance of the water and sewer system as well as all planning for the department. The director of public services shall perform such other duties relative to his department as may be required of him by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2), § 1(1), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-2. - Water division; responsibility. 
The water division shall be responsible for adequate maintenance of all water mains, both clear and raw water mains, and including house connections, the construction of all house connections, the maintenance and operation of all pump stations, plants, and reservoirs; and there shall be employed in the division an adequate number of employees to properly maintain and operate the facilities of this division.  
Sec. 8-2-3. - Water filtration plants; sewage treatment plants. 
The water filtration plants and the sewage treatment plants shall be operated under the supervision of the superintendent of plants who shall be responsible for their satisfactory operation. He shall be provided with adequate manpower and equipment to insure the plants comply with all rules, regulations, and laws.  
Sec. 8-2-4. - Construction of house connections. 
Construction of connection. Upon the approval of any application and the payment of the required fee, the city shall install water or sewer connection from the main to the back of the curb and shall be responsible for all excavations, laying of pipe, setting of meterbox, backfilling and pavement replacement.  
Sec. 8-2-5. - Separate water and sewer connections and meters required. 
(a)  Each building shall have a separate water meter and where practicable shall have a separate water lateral. In the event that one (1) lateral is used for two (2) buildings or used to serve two (2) or more meters for the same building a separate cut-off shall be provided for each meter. Each building shall have a separate sewer connection. 
(b)  In the case of group housing developments where more than one (1) building is involved, and where the ownership is in one (1) party, one (1) or more meters may be used for the entire project provided that: 
(1)  Bills will be rendered to the owner of the property only. 
(2)  The bill will be calculated by dividing the total consumption by the number of dwelling units served, calculating the individual bills based on the resultant consumption, and then multiplying the individual amount by the number of dwelling units. 
(3)  Should any portion of the development be sold the owners would be responsible for paying whatever additional costs would be involved in bringing the divided development into compliance with this article.  
Sec. 8-2-6. - Connections and meters to remain property of city. 
All meters, boxes, pipes and other equipment furnished and installed by the city in a water and sewer connection shall remain the property of the city. If, after an installation is completed, the property owner requests that a meter or lateral be changed in size and this request is approved by the director of public services, the property owner shall pay for the change of lateral as though it were a new connection and new meter. 
(Ord. No. 88-59, § 1, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 97-102(2), § 1(2), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-7. - Connection to be made by city only upon application. 
The construction of water or sewer laterals within the street right of way and the setting of meters shall be done only by the city, unless prior approval is obtained. The construction of such lateral or the setting of such meter shall be done only after the written application therefor has been approved.  
Sec. 8-2-8. - Application for connections. 
Persons desiring connections made with the city water mains shall make application to the director of public services or designated representatives stating for what purposes the water is to be used, and all applications shall be filed by him. In case of willful misrepresentation on the part of applicant, or any unreasonable waste of water, the city reserves the right to cut off the supply, and assess the applicant with additional cost, same to conform with the rates published. Said application shall be filed not less than 10 days before the proposed connection is desired. When the size of the service and the cost of the connection have been determined, the applicant shall deposit the previously determined cost thereof and shall be issued an approved application for the desired connection. The city shall have no responsibility for the design of a sprinkler or other fire protection system. Application for a connection to serve such a system shall be made exactly as outlined except that the size of the connection desired shall be placed upon the application. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2), § 1(2), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-9. - Disapproval of application. 
If, in the opinion of the director of public services, the water connection applied for will be of such size or character as to put too great a demand on any part of the system and disrupt the city's ordinary water service, he shall disapprove the application until such time as adequate means are provided to eliminate the unsatisfactory condition. If, at any time, changes are made by a consumer in his service requirements so as to create an unsatisfactory condition in the city's water service, the director of public services shall require the consumer to adopt remedial measures to eliminate the unsatisfactory condition. If the waste proposed to be discharged into the city's sewerage system is, in the opinion of the director of public services of such a nature or of such quantity as to overload the existing sewerage collection or treatment facilities, he shall disapprove the application and require the applicant to adopt remedial measures to eliminate the unsatisfactory condition. An appeal from the ruling by the director of public services may be made to the city manager and the city manager's decision shall be final. The city shall in no way be responsible for any cost or inconvenience caused by a change in service requirements after an application has been approved or by an installation before the application has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2), § 1(2), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-10. - City to tap all water connections. 
(a)  The city reserves the exclusive privilege of tapping the water mains for any and all connections, and, in cases where connections are made to mains located on the system will extend all service pipe to the curbing, where a meter box shall be placed over a meter yoke or meter installation, all of which shall be under the exclusive control of the city and remain its property. 
(b)  Meters are a part of the service in supplying city water, and will be set by the city according to the rules and regulations of the public services department. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2), § 1(2), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-11. - Charges for water and sewer connections. 
(a)  At the time for application for a service connection, a design study will be scheduled and made by division personnel to determine the cost of construction, materials, meter, valves and required appurtenances to furnish the service applied for. Payment of the determined cost is required prior to the start of any construction work by the water division. 
(b)  The applicant shall designate the location of the water and sewer tap back of curb and the city will honor this location to the maximum extent practicable. 
(c)  The applicant or customer is not to operate or disturb any part of the water service located on the city right-of-way except for the cut-off as provided. All fixtures within the owner's premises must be kept in repair by the customer or property owner. 
(d)  Charges for water connections shall be made and amounts paid to the city in advance as set forth in a rate schedule adopted by the city council.  
Sec. 8-2-12. - Service pipes to be provided with stops. 
Each water service pipe, one inch or below in size shall be provided with a gate valve and box to be located at a convenient location to turn off the water to prevent freezing of pipes, or in case of accident to water pipes or fixtures. This valve is for the convenience of the property owner.  
Sec. 8-2-13. - Inspection of plumbing and fixtures prerequisite. 
(a)  Water will not be turned on to any premises until the plumbing and fixtures have been inspected by the city and found to be in good and proper condition. No occupant of premises, upon which water has been introduced, shall permit water to be used, taken or received by any person other than the occupant or member or visitors of his family; provided, that this shall not be construed so as to prevent any person who has contracted for water on his own premises, and whose fixtures are out of order, from obtaining water from some other person, with the consent of the person occupying the premises. This arrangement shall be terminated after the fixtures have been repaired or within one (1) week. All plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the North Carolina Plumbing Code. 
(b)  Failure to repair plumbing fixtures or water and sewer service lines, after notification to repair has been given, shall be grounds for terminating water services to premises until such repairs are made. 
(c)  No persons other than the director of public services or his designated representative shall turn on the water to any premises. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2), § 1(2), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-14. - Adjusting and repairing water meters. 
(a)  After the tap and meter cost has been paid by the property owner, the public services department will keep the service in repair thereafter, without further expense to the property owner, except that in case of malicious damage or in case of damage caused by hot water being forced from the premises through the meter from boilers, range tanks, etc., the property owner or tenant shall pay the cost of repairs. 
(b)  No person, except a duly authorized employee of the city or authorized plumbers, shall turn the stopcock installed in each meter box; nor shall any person construct or have constructed any bypass around any meter except as may be installed and sealed by the city. The fact that water is cut on to any premises by anyone other than the city or its agents without the knowledge of either the city or the owner shall not relieve such premises of liability for such unauthorized use of water. 
(c)  No person or persons except the city will be allowed to adjust, turn off, remove or repair meters. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2), § 1(2), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-15. - Water for building purposes. 
(a)  Special permit required. No water shall be used for building purposes except under a special permit from the director of public services, and billing for such a permit shall be, according to rates fixed by the city for building purposes. 
(b)  Water for construction; no permanent service needed. Portable meters for connection to fire hydrants may be furnished by the city after an application has been filed and a deposit as set forth in fee schedule adopted by city council has been paid to the city. The applicant shall be responsible for any damage to the hydrant, meter, connections, etc., used in the installation and the cost of any such damage shall be billed to him. Any charges outlined in the rate schedule adopted by city council shall be charged in addition to the cost of the water used. After deducting the water charge, the city shall refund any balance of the deposit to the applicant as soon as the meter is removed and returned to the city stock in good working order. If the meter or hydrant is damaged in any way, the total cost of repairs shall be billed to the applicant. While in use, no wrench shall be used on the hydrant except an approved hydrant wrench furnished by the city. Additional requirements may be necessary at the request of the fire department. A service fee shall be charged to set or remove any portable meter at a rate set by city council. No meter shall be moved or set except by public services personnel. 
(c)  Single site building purposes. Water for single site building purposes shall be obtained through the water tap, service line and meter to service the future structure wherever permanent service will be provided. Billing will be at standard rate for water, including sewer charge. 
(d)  Multi-unit building purposes. Water for multi-unit building purposes shall be obtained through the water taps and service lines where the permanent service shall be provided. A portable meter shall be rented from the city by a licensed plumber or contractor for the established fees. The city will set the portable meter only in the existing boxes and yokes provided for permanent service. A service fee shall be charged to set or remove from the site the portable meter at a rate set by the city council per trip. The contractor or plumber shall notify the city meter shop, the location of any moved portable meter on the site. No meter shall be moved from the site except by city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 85-37, § 1, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 97-102(2), § 1(2), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-16. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Inspectors, meter readers or authorized employees of the city whose duty it may be to enter upon private premises to examine meters, pipes or other fixtures used in connection with the city's water service shall have free access at all reasonable hours to all parts of such premises for the purpose of inspection, meter reading, examination of fixtures, and observation of the manner in which water is used. In case any authorized employee is refused admittance to any premises for any such purpose or is hindered or prevented from making such examination, the water shall be turned off and shall not be turned on again until free access is given. 
(b)  In case such person finds that the water is wasted through any water or sewer facilities on account of negligence, for want of repairs, or for any improper cause, and if such waste is not immediately remedied, the water leading to such premises shall be turned off, and shall not be turned on again until such repairs are made; and the fees as prescribed in a rate schedule adopted by city council shall be paid before turning on water.  
Sec. 8-2-17. - All service connections to be provided with water meters. 
All water service connections shall be provided with standard, approved water meters. Meters to be purchased from the city by the property owner or consumer, in accordance with established charges and to be installed by the city and placed as near to the curb or property line of the property to be served as possible, and at all times to be under the control of the city; and the regular established and published meter rates for water as hereinafter provided shall be charged in every case.  
Sec. 8-2-18. - Testing meters and fixtures; charges. 
The city shall test or cause to be tested and make a thorough examination of water meter and all fixtures where so desired by the consumer under the following conditions: 
(1)  First: Should the test of meter and inspection prove the excessive bill to be caused by the water division, inaccuracy of the meter, or for any cause the fault of the water department, then the expense of said investigation shall be borne by the department. 
(2)  Second: Should the test and inspection prove to be the fault of the consumer or any person not connected with or in the employ of the water division, then the actual cost of said investigation is to be borne by the consumer making the protest and asking for the inspection, said actual cost to be fixed at a rate as set forth in a fee schedule adopted by city council for each case where the size of the meter is not larger than one inch, larger meters at actual cost plus 20% overhead and insurance cost.  
Sec. 8-2-19. - Procedure in case of delinquent consumer vacating premises. 
In cases where consumers have vacated the premises leaving unpaid water bills, they will not be furnished water elsewhere in High Point area until said water bills have been paid.  
Sec. 8-2-20. - Unauthorized turning on of water after turn-off by public services department. 
If the water has to be cut off from any premises by the city for the nonpayment of a bill or bills or for any other cause authorized by this chapter and if the water is afterwards turned on without the authority of the city, then the city has the authority to remove the meter or unauthorized device(s). 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(3), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-21. - Authorized meter removal, yoke removal, and other water-termination actions. 
The city is authorized to take the following action: 
(1)  Meter removal. The physical removal of the meter, after a turn-on by a customer after the turn-off by the public services department, is authorized. 
(2)  Unauthorized meter. A meter that has been assigned to designated service in the system but found in another service shall be removed by the city. 
(3)  Unauthorized devices. An unauthorized device (e.g. straight piece of pipe or nipple) used to obtain water service shall be removed by the public services department along with the yoke. 
(4)  Main cut. In order to stop a customer from installing unauthorized meter(s) and/or device(s) to obtain water, the water service may be cut at the main supplying water. 
(5)  Reconnection fees. Reconnection fees shall be charged and payment received in accordance with established fees and charges in effect at the time prior to any cut on. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(4), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-22. - Regulation of fire protection mains. 
When a fire protection (sprinkler) system is installed and connected to the city water system, the fire protection system shall be kept separate from all other water uses at all times. 
(1)  Whenever a fire protection system is proposed, the owner shall submit the required plans and specifications to the director of public services. The director shall prepare an "Application for Approval of Plans and Specifications for Water Supply Systems," and the completed packet shall be submitted to the environmental health section, division of health services, department of human resources, or its successor organization, for approval. After the environmental health section has approved the plans and specifications and returned them to the director of public services, he shall return one copy of the approved plans and specifications to the owner, and upon payment of a tap fee as set forth in a fee schedule approved by the city council, the appropriate tap shall be made onto the city water system. After the fire protection system has been installed, a certification from the installing contractor and owner shall be made that the fire protection system has been installed in strict accordance with the approved plans and specifications. Failure to comply with this certification will be grounds for discontinuance of the fire protection service. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to tap any portion of the fire protection system for any other purpose. No water shall be used in or about any industrial plant, place of business, private grounds, or residence, except such use as is supplied through regular meters, provided that where city water is desired or required through public or private hydrants or other connections not metered, the same shall be supplied only by the city and the regular charge for the estimated or metered amount of water thus consumed shall be made and collected as other water bills, with penalty for failure or refusal to pay. 
(3)  If it is detected that fire protection systems are being used for other purposes and if the practice is continued after notification to cease, the city will require the installation of metering devices to be installed at the owner's expense. 
(4)  No sprinkler system will be approved by the city using chemicals or other agents without the use of approved back-flow preventors to prevent the backflow of these alien substances. 
(Code 1982, § 8-2-22; Ord. of 10-21-82; Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-23. - Tampering with water fixtures. 
It shall be unlawful to turn on water, tamper with, obstruct, rearrange or interfere in any manner with any public or private fire hydrant, water meter or water connection on which city water pressure is maintained, or with any sewer connection or manhole or any pipe lines connected with the city water and sewer system.  
Sec. 8-2-24. - Trespassing on city facilities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the director of public services to enter upon or in any manner trespass upon the fences or grounds of the several water plants, waste water plants, pump stations and reservoirs located in various parts of the city, or to enter upon rights of way properly posted with signs forbidding trespassing or to tamper in any way with any of the machinery, fixtures, wires, hydrants or other utility equipment or property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-25. - Water rates. 
Rates of water consumed through meters approved by the city shall be as set forth by a rate schedule adopted by city council, a copy of which will be on file in the city clerk's office. 
(1)  Adjustment of bills upon failure or inaccuracy of meter. Refer to city council policy entitled "Water and Sewer Policy." 
(2)  Adjustment of excessive water and sewer bills due to concealed leaks. Refer to city council policy entitled "Water and Sewer Policy."  
Sec. 8-2-26. - Water outside corporate limits. 
(a)  No master meters shall be set for sale of water to be used beyond the corporate limits of the city and no line or lines owned by the city or by any other person shall be extended, expanded or enlarged except upon approval of the city council. Should such line or lines owned by any person other than the city, be hereafter enlarged or expanded, without permission, the furnishing of all water for such line or lines shall be discontinued until all requirements of this chapter are complied with. 
(b)  Any person residing outside the corporate limits of the city and seeking permission to tap on any water line presently located outside or inside the city limits, whether said line is controlled by a master meter or not, must first make written application to the city council and must, when requested, furnish any information concerning location, size and length of line to be tapped, connections to be made, and the number of customers already on the line, and any other information deemed necessary and requested by the public services department and must secure the approval of the director of public services and of the city council before such connection is made. 
Tap-on privileges shall be granted only to person whose property or properties abut said line, and then tap-on line shall be of sufficient length only to reach one family, firm or corporation unit, and in no instance to extend more than 1500 feet, without special permission of the city, as provided in this chapter. Any extension, alteration, or tie-on or tap-on so as to serve water to persons situate or not situate on property abutting water line is forbidden. Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. Should any person violate the provisions of this section, the city council shall revoke the permission to tap-on and shall disconnect any and all lines affected by such violation, and such disconnection shall remain in effect until the owner or owners comply with the regulations and provisions of this section. 
(c)  Rates outside corporate limits shall be as follows: Refer to rate schedule adopted by city council. 
(d)  Charges for water connections outside corporate limits of the city shall be by rate schedule adopted by the city council, plus an additional amount as set forth by city council per front foot of property if the connection is made to a line six inches in diameter or larger. Calculations will be based on a lot or a smaller tract as shown on an approved and recorded plat, or a recorded deed, or a frontage equivalent of 100 feet for a dwelling on an undivided tract of land. For other conditions the director of public services may determine the frontage or frontage equivalent in keeping with the spirit and intent of the assessment policy for similar conditions inside the city limits. Provided that water connection charges on lines installed under the agreement with Guilford County shall be the same rate for water connections inside the corporate limits. 
(c)  Property adjacent to a street in which the city has installed a new water line that is legally being served directly or indirectly by the city water system may be permitted to continue this service by the customer paying an amount of money in lieu of assessment as stated in this section. The customer must submit an application on a form provided by the city and pay to the city the required amount of money within 30 days after he has been notified in writing that the new lines have been installed. This notice will be mailed to the customer no later than 30 days after the line is ready for use. Failure on the part of the customer to comply with these requirements will cause his service to be discontinued, and the customer to be treated thereafter as a new applicant. Plats, deeds, or other information as required by the director of public services to determine the amount of payment shall be furnished by the applicant. 
(f)  A new applicant shall complete and submit to the director of public services the application form provided by the city and will furnish such plats, deeds, or other information as required to determine the amount of payment for the service. 
(g)  Any property owner desiring to connect to a water main laid under assessment, shall, in addition to the regular tap-on fee, pay an amount equal to his pro rata share of the assessment. 
(h)  Outside consumers shall be bound by all rules and regulations set forth in this chapter except as otherwise provided. All installations presently connected to lines carrying city water outside the city limits, regardless of ownership of the lines, shall be inspected by the inspection division of the city at the city's expense. 
(j)  An agreement shall be signed by the customer to abide by all pertinent laws, rules, regulations and contracts on file with the city clerk including the following conditions: 
(1)  Any unpaid water or sewer bill shall be and remain a lien upon the property served until fully paid. 
(2)  No deposit shall be required of an owner of any premise. Deposits shall be required of all tenants in accordance with a rate schedule adopted by the city council and applicable rules and regulations. 
(3)  No person may sell or offer for sale any water purchased from the city. 
(k)  Any installation which does not comply in every respect with the provisions of this chapter shall be disconnected immediately from city water service and may not be reconnected until such provisions are complied with and a certificate of compliance has been issued by the inspection division. 
(l)  In the event of reconnection without such certificate the customer and the owner of the line shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(m)  All installations hereinafter to be connected to lines carrying city water outside the city limits shall first be inspected by the city, or as per the applicable extension policy, at the expense of the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-27. - Water used without prior knowledge of department; premises charged for estimated amount used. 
Should any person use water without the knowledge of the public services department and afterwards it should come to their knowledge that water has been used, a bill will be made against the premises for the estimated amount of water used, or the quantity shown by the meter to have been used, and the water cut off and not turned on again until the bill has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-28. - Charges will accrue until department is notified to cut off service. 
Water being cut off by the owner or other than city employees, does not relieve the premises from paying water rates. Bills will be collected until the city is notified in writing or in person to shut off the water.  
Sec. 8-2-29. - Duty of occupant of premises when ordering water turned on. 
Parties ordering water to be turned on at their premises should be careful to have all pipes properly connected and faucets closed, so that the building or dwelling may not be flooded. The city will not be liable for any damages caused by flooding when faucets or openings are not closed.  
Sec. 8-2-30. - Fire hydrants; authorized users. 
(a)  Public fire hydrants and water therefrom are primarily for the use of the fire department to render fire protection service. The employees of the water division are to operate and use them, without special permission for inspection, repairs, cleaning mains of stale water and for water needed in the operation of the department and for no other purpose. 
(b)  The employees of the fire department are to operate and use them, without special permission, for inspection, repairs and fire protection and for no other purpose. 
(c)  Any person may shut off a fire hydrant opening in order to stop a gushing flow of water caused by an accident. 
(d)  No other person may use a public fire hydrant for any purpose, except by permission in writing, stating the purpose of such use, signed by the director of public services. 
(e)  Any person using or obtaining water from a public fire hydrant except as herein authorized, shall be assessed a penalty as set forth in a rate schedule adopted by city council in addition to the charge for water actually used or obtained. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-31. - Protection of public fire hydrants, water meters, meter boxes and valve boxes; duty of person causing damage. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to break, or in any way damage, or cause to be broken, or damaged, or to make inaccessible, any public fire hydrant, water meter, meter box, or gate valve box connected to the city water system. 
(b)  When and where any of the above mentioned structures are broken or damaged, by accident or otherwise, it shall be the duty of the person having had the accident, or caused damage to report the matter to the police department, fire department, or the public services department. Failure to make the report as above shall be unlawful. 
(c)  At any time a driveway may be constructed over an existing meter box, the water division shall, upon application, replace said meter box with a heavy duty meter box, at the expense of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-32. - Private fire hydrants to be used only in case of fire; penalty. 
Private fire hydrants or any other fire protection fixtures on unmetered services, located on private premises to secure lower insurance rates, and for fire protection, must not be used except in case of fire. Any person using or obtaining water from private fire hydrants or other fire protection fixtures on private premises, except in case of a fire, shall be assessed a penalty as set forth in a rate schedule adopted by city council in addition to the charge for water estimated used or obtained.  
Sec. 8-2-33. - Billing. 
The city will endeavor to deliver to the consumer by mail or messenger a monthly statement of the amount due for water furnished, but failure to receive such statement will not entitle the consumer to any delay in the settlement of each monthly account beyond the date when the bill is due and payable. All bills are net and payable at the office of the city collector any weekday during normal business hours. If not so paid, the gross rates provided in this chapter plus the appropriate fee as prescribed in a rate schedule adopted by city council shall then apply and service will be discontinued in accordance with city billing procedures.  
Sec. 8-2-34. - Backflow prevention program. 
[The backflow prevention program is] a program designed to protect the potable water supply of the City of High Point. This will be accomplished by requiring the use of appropriate backflow protection methods. The possibility of contamination will be minimized by confining with the customer's private water system those contaminants or pollutants which could, under adverse conditions, backflow through uncontrolled cross-connections into the public water system. 
(1)  Definitions. 
a.  Air gap separation. The unobstructed vertical distance through the atmosphere between the lowest point opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. An "approved air-gap separation" shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap separation be less than one (1) inch. 
b.  Approved. In reference to backflow prevention assemblies or methods, those assemblies or methods which have been accepted by the director as an effective means or method to prevent backflow. 
c.  Backflow. Any flow of water, liquid, gas or other substance, or any combination thereof, into the distribution piping of a potable water supply from any source or sources. 
d.  Backflow prevention assembly. An approved assembly or method used to prevent backflow from occurring in the potable water supply. 
e.  Back-pressure backflow. Backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or other means that could create pressure within the system greater than the supply pressure. 
f.  Back-siphonage backflow. A reversal of the normal direction of flow in the pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply line with the backflow source subject to atmospheric pressure. 
g.  Certified tester. A person who has proven his/her competency to test, repair, overhaul and prepare reports on backflow prevention assemblies as evidenced by certification of successful completion of a training program approved by the director. 
h.  Consumer/customer. Any person, firm, or corporation using or receiving water from the City of High Point water system. 
i.  Containment. Prevention of possible contamination from a private water system by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
j.  Contamination. The degradation of the quality of water so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of water. 
k.  Cross-connection. Any physical connection between the city's water supply system and any other source. This includes piping systems, sewer fixtures, containers, or devices whereby water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances may flow into or enter the city's water supply system. 
l.  Cross-connection inspector. An employee of the City of High Point designated by the director to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. 
m.  Degree of hazard. Derived from an evaluation of the health, system, plumbing, or pollution hazards. 
n.  Director. The director of the city public services department. 
o.  Double check valve assembly. An assembly composed of two (2) single, independently-acting approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly, and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
p.  Double check-detector check valve assembly. An assembly composed of an approved double-check valve assembly with a bypass water meter and a meter-sized approved double-check valve device. The meter shall register accurately for very low flow rates and shall register all flow rates. 
q.  High hazard. An actual or potential threat of contamination to the public water system or to a private water system to such a degree or intensity that there could be a danger to health. 
r.  Imminent hazard. An actual threat of contamination that presents a danger to the public health with consequences of serious illness or death. 
s.  Moderate hazard. One that presents foreseeable and significant potential for pollution, nuisance, aesthetically objectionable or other undesirable alterations of the drinking water supply. 
t.  Point of delivery. The terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, i.e., where the director loses sole jurisdiction over the water; the point where water leaves the public water system and enters a private water system. 
u.  Potable water: Water from any source which has been approved for human consumption by the appropriate agency of the State of North Carolina. 
v.  Private water system. A system of pipes or other associated facilities that is not part of the city's public water system and is used to move or receive water, regardless of the source of water in such system. 
w.  Reduced pressure principle assembly. An assembly containing within its structure a minimum of two (2) independently acting, approved check valves, together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves. The first check valve reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharge to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The assembly must include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. 
x.  Reduced pressure principle-detector assembly. An assembly composed of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly with a bypass water meter and a meter-sized approved reduced pressure principle device. The meter shall register accurately for very low flow rates and shall register all flow rates. 
y.  Water supply (approved). Any public potable water supply which has been investigated and approved by the appropriate agency of the State of North Carolina. The system must be operating under a valid health permit. 
(2)  Elimination of cross-connections. 
a.  No private water system may be connected in any manner to the public water system unless the requirements of this section and other applicable laws have been satisfied. 
b.  Only an approved device can be installed to meet the requirements of this section. The installation of any backflow prevention assembly which is not approved must be replaced with an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(3)  Installation, testing and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies. 
a.  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and those furnished by the City of High Point. Only backflow preventers approved by the City of High Point shall be installed. 
b.  All backflow prevention assemblies required by this section must be installed and maintained on the customer's premises as part of the customer's water system. 
c.  Ownership, testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention assembly will be the responsibility of the customer. Each assembly required in this ordinance must be functioning properly at all times. 
d.  Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be conducted by a certified tester at the customer's expense. Tests shall be conducted upon installation and annually thereafter with a record of all testing and repairs retained by the customer. A copy of the certified record for each test or repair must be sent to the City of High Point by such customer within 30 days after the completion of each test or repair. Such records must be maintained on forms provided by the City of High Point. 
e.  Each backflow prevention assembly required under this section must be accessible to the City of High Point. 
f.  When it is not possible to interrupt water service, the customer shall provide for the parallel installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly. The director will not accept an unprotected bypass around a backflow preventer when the assembly is in need of testing, repair or replacement. 
g.  Any time that repairs to backflow assemblies are deemed necessary, whether through annual testing or routine inspection by the owner or by the City of High Point, these repairs must be completed within a time specified in accordance with the degree of hazard. Repairs on a private water system considered to be an imminent hazard shall be completed within 24 hours, a high hazard shall be completed within 10 days, and all other repairs within 20 days for any other private water system. Failure to comply can result in termination of a customer's water service. 
h.  Upon determination that a backflow prevention assembly is required to be installed on a customer's private water system, the customer will be notified in writing of the approved backflow prevention assembly which is required. On existing systems, the customer will have the following time periods within which to install the specified backflow prevention assembly. 
Days 
Air-gap separation ..... 30 
Reduced pressure principle assembly (¾?—2?) ..... 30 
Double check valve assembly (¾?—2?) ..... 30 
Reduced pressure principle assembly (2½? and larger) ..... 60 
Double check valve assembly (2½? and larger) ..... 60 
Other approved backflow prevention assembly ..... 30 
The director may require the installation of the required backflow prevention assembly immediately or within a shorter time period than specified above if he determines that any condition poses an unreasonable threat of contamination to the public water supply system. All devices required for new construction shall be installed prior to occupancy. 
i.  All new construction plans and specifications shall be made available to the director for approval and to determine the degree of hazard. 
j.  The director shall be notified by the customer when the nature of the use of property changes so as to change the hazard classification of the property if necessary. 
(4)  High hazard facilities and methods of correction. 
a.  All high hazard facilities must have an approved reduced pressure principle assembly as a minimum containment device. 
b.  High hazard facilities include, but are not limited to: Any private water system used or designed for use with a booster pump or which may become pressurized for any reason to the extent that back pressure may occur; any private water system which contains water which has been or is being recirculated; a building with five (5) or more stories above ground level; brewery; car wash with recycling system; bottling plant; chemical plant; dentist's office; dry cleaning plant; fertilizer plant; film laboratory; fire sprinkler or standpipe system with chemical additives; hospital, clinic, medical building; irrigation system with chemical additives; laboratory; commercial laundry (except self-service laundry); metal processing plant; morgue or mortuary; nursing home; pharmaceutical plant; power plant; swimming pool; sewage treatment plant; tire manufacturer; veterinary hospital or clinic; restaurants; battery manufacturers; exterminators and lawn care companies; dairies; canneries; dye works; recycling facilities. 
c.  If a cross-connection inspector does not have sufficient access to every portion of a private water system to permit the complete evaluation of the degree of hazard associated with such private water system, an approved reduced pressure principle assembly must be installed. 
(5)  Moderate hazard facilities and methods of correction. 
a.  Moderate hazard facilities include, but are not limited to: Fire sprinkler systems without booster pump facilities or chemical additives; connections to tanks, lines and vessels that handle nontoxic substances; lawn sprinkler systems without chemical injection or booster pumps; all industrial and most commercial facilities not identified as high hazard facilities. 
b.  All moderate hazard facilities must have a double-check valve assembly as a minimum containment device. 
(6)  Lawn irrigation systems. 
a.  All existing lawn irrigation systems must have a double-check valve assembly as a minimum containment device. 
b.  All proposed lawn irrigation systems will be served through a separate meter and must have a double-check valve assembly as a minimum containment device. 
(7)  Fire sprinkler systems. 
a.  All unmetered fire sprinkler systems without booster facilities or chemical additives must have a double-check-detector check valve assembly as a minimum containment device. 
b.  All unmetered fire sprinkler systems with a booster facility or chemical additives must have a reduced-pressure principle-detector assembly as a minimum containment device. 
(8)  Imminent hazards. If the director determines that a customer's private water system constitutes an imminent hazard, such customer shall install a backflow prevention assembly as may be specified by the director within 24 hours after notice of the director's determination. If the customer fails to take corrective measures in a timely manner or refuses to install the specified assembly, water service to the customer's private water system may be terminated. If the director is unable to give notice to such customer or his representative within 24 hours after the determination that an imminent hazard exists despite reasonable efforts to provide such notice, the director may terminate water service to the private water system until the specified corrected measures are taken. Upon correction of the existing problem and with the director's approval, water service will be continued. 
(9)  Right of entry. 
a.  The director or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter any building, structure or premises during normal working hours to perform any duty imposed upon him by this section. Duties may include sampling and testing water, or inspections and observations of all piping systems connected to the public water supply. Prior notice will be given unless an imminent hazard has been reported. Refusal to allow entry for these purposes may result in termination of the water service. 
b.  At the request of the director, the customer shall furnish any pertinent information regarding the piping system and chemical storage on such property where cross-connections are deemed possible. 
(10)  Responsibility of customer. 
a.  The customer shall be responsible for the elimination of or protection against all cross-connections on his premises. 
b.  The customer shall maintain any backflow prevention assembly within his premise in good operating condition. The customer shall correct any malfunction of the backflow preventer which is revealed by periodic testing. 
c.  The customer shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for annual testing, retesting in the case that the assembly fails to operate correctly, and repairs. 
d.  A customer must immediately notify the City of High Point if the customer has reason to believe that backflow has occurred from the customer's private water system. 
(11)  Unapproved source of supply. 
a.  No person shall connect or cause to be connected any supply of water not approved by the State of North Carolina to the public water supply system. 
b.  Where a connection to a city water line is made, and the property owner continues to have a well or other source of water, it shall be unlawful for the plumbing servicing any building upon such property to be so connected that any water outlet within the building may be served with water from any source other than the city connection, and it shall also be unlawful to have plumbing cross-connected or so installed that water from the city water system or the private water system may in any way become intermingled. 
(12)  Violations. 
a.  A written notice of violation shall be given to any person who is determined to be in violation of any provision of this section. 
b.  Such notice shall set forth the violation and the time period within which the violation must be corrected. The violation must be corrected within a reasonable time, as specified in the notice, not to exceed 30 days from receipt of the notice. If the director determines that the violation is occurring on a customer's private water system and that such violation has created or contributed to the existence of an imminent hazard, the customer may be required to correct the violation immediately. 
c.  Water service may be terminated to a customer if the customer fails to correct a violation or to pay any civil penalty or expense assessed under this section. Termination of water service will be without prejudice to the city's ability to assert any other remedy available to the city against the customer or any other person responsible for the violation. 
d.  The violation of any provision of this section shall subject the violator to a civil penalty. Each subsequent day that a violation listed in subsections (12)d.1. through 4. continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense according to the following schedule: 
1.  Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system which is an imminent hazard, per day ..... $1,000.00 
2.  Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system which is a high hazard, per day ..... 750.00 
3.  Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system which is a moderate hazard, per day ..... 500.00 
4.  Unprotected cross-connection for which no other civil penalty is prescribed, per day ..... 250.00 
Each violation listed in subsections (12)d.5. through 9. shall be considered a one-time violation subject to the following schedule: 
5.  Falsifying records which are required to be submitted by this section—Tester may be removed from the approved certified tester list and/or ..... 500.00 
6.  Submitting incomplete records or failing to submit records which are required by this section—Tester may be removed from the approved certified tester list and/or ..... 250.00 
7.  Failing to test backflow prevention assemblies as required ..... 100.00 
8.  Failing to maintain backflow prevention assemblies as required ..... 100.00 
9.  Any other violation of the provisions of this section ..... 100.00 
e.  The director may increase any civil penalty assessed under this section by $100.00 or 50 percent of the maximum civil penalty associated with the violation, whichever is greater, for a second violation of the same provision within a two-year period. Water service may be terminated after a third violation of the same provision within a two-year period. 
f.  Any person violating any provision of this section shall pay to the city all expenses incurred by the city in repairing any damage to the public water system caused in whole or in part by such violation and any expense incurred by the city in investigating such violation. All such expenses are deemed to be a part of the civil penalty assessed with the violation. 
(Ord. No. 92-114,§ 1, 11-5-92; Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 92-114, adopted Nov. 5, 1992, amended §§ 8-2-34 and 8-2-35 to read as herein set out. Formerly, §§ 8-2-34 and 8-2-35 pertained to definition of the cross-connection and cross-connection prohibited, respectively.  
Sec. 8-2-35. - Right of appeal. 
Upon notice of the backflow prevention method required, the owner may request a hearing to review the selection process with city public services department personnel. If the owner is dissatisfied with the results of this review, a written request for a hearing must be sent to the director within 10 days of the departmental review. Within 10 days, a formal hearing with the director will be scheduled. A written response will be issued within 10 days after the hearing. The owner shall thereafter have the right of further appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 92-114, § 1, 11-5-92; Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97) 
Note— See editor's note following § 8-2-34 herein.  
Sec. 8-2-36. - Interference with waterworks system prohibited; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to operate, or damage by interference and meddling with, the valves on the street mains, or the curb cock, or any other part of the waterworks system. Plumbers may, in case of accident, or by permission shut off water at the curb cock but shall notify the water division immediately of such action.  
Sec. 8-2-37. - No guarantee of quality, quantity of pressure of water supply; notice to be given when water is to be cut off. 
The city does not guarantee the quality, quantity or pressure of its water supply. It is hereby made a portion of the terms on which the city furnished water to consumers that the city shall in no case be liable to any consumer for any defect on quality or any deficiency in quantity or pressure; that the city shall not be liable to any consumer for damages resulting from the complete or partial cutting off of water; and no deductions shall be made from any water bill by reason of any such defect or deficiency. In every case where practicable, ample notice, shall be given when the water is to be cut off from any portion of the city. No city employee shall take responsibility for telling a property owner or occupant how best to care for his boiler, heater or other equipment which is affected by the discontinuance, either temporary or permanent, of his water supply. The owner or occupant shall be entirely responsible for his equipment and shall hold the city in no way responsible for damage thereof.  
Sec. 8-2-38. - Protection of water supply. 
No person shall contaminate any portion of the city's water supply whether the same is in a reservoir, or tank, or pipe; and no person shall wade, bathe or contaminate any city reservoir or perform any other activity not specifically approved by the city.  
Sec. 8-2-39. - Pertinent provisions made a part of contracts. 
All pertinent rules and regulations are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city furnishes water and sewer service to any person, makes any water or sewer connection, or performs any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of water or sewer service.  
Sec. 8-2-40. - Emergency water conservation. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Special emergency resolution. If the availability of water so limits the water system that unrestricted use may endanger the adequacy of the supply, the director of public services will make a recommendation to the city manager and he shall recommend that the city council, exercising its discretion in the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, may by resolution adopt such emergency use restrictions, including increased rates, as are reasonably calculated under all conditions to conserve and protect that supply and to ensure a regular flow of water through the water system. Emergency water use regulations and restrictions shall remain in force and effect until the city council determines that the conditions requiring their imposition no longer exist. 
(2)  Emergency procedure. Even if the city council has not adopted a special emergency resolution imposing restrictions when, for whatever reasons the water level at Oak Hollow or City Lake reaches a critical level, or other emergency situations occur, the director shall implement temporary emergency procedures until formal action can be taken by the city council. 
(b)  Water conservation program. The city, in recognition of the need to conserve water during certain water shortage emergencies, will immediately restrict its usages to essential uses of water. In addition to these efforts on the city's part, the following procedures will be implemented as authorized by this section and in accordance with the city's water shortage management policy: 
(1)  Phase one—Water shortage alert. In the event of a water shortage alert due to high peak demand days which cause the water treatment plant to exceed its designed capacity, all customers of the city's public services department will be requested to voluntarily reduce water consumption by the following: 
All city water accounts and water users (residential, commercial, industrial and institutional) are requested to limit noncommercial outdoor water use such as lawn watering, sprinkler systems, pool filling and car washing to odd or even calendar days, depending on the last digit in their address: 
Example 
2011 E. Kivett (odd) would water on July 31 (odd). And would not water on August 2. 
This odd/even plan would start on April 15 and end on September 15, and therefore would be effective immediately. 
(2)  Phase two—Mandatory conservation. If the water shortage emergency continues and voluntary conservation measures prove inadequate, mandatory conservation will be implemented in accordance with the water shortage management policy. The policy will be enforced by the following: 
a.  Affecting the residential water rates whereby consumption above 15 units will be billed at double the normal rate. 
b.  Prohibiting outdoor irrigation with treated water except for handheld hose end nozzle and drip irrigation. 
c.  The director of public services will be empowered to negotiate with all industrial and commercial accounts to ensure that all reasonable conservation measures are implemented. Failure to implement such measures is grounds to terminate services. 
d.  Noncompliance with any provision of the water shortage management policy, or this section will subject the violator to a civil penalty as follows: 
	Meters 
1" and 
smaller 	Meters 
1½" and 
greater 
1st offense 	$100.00 	$200.00 
2nd offense 	$200.00 	$400.00 
3rd and subsequent 
offenses 	$300.00 	$600.00 
Each day's violations shall be a separate and distinct offense. Two or more incidents involving a single user will also result in loss of service. 
 
(3)  Phase three—Stringent conservation. If the water shortage emergency worsens and mandatory conservation measures prove inadequate, then stringent conservation measures will be implemented in accordance with the water shortage management policy. The policy will be enforced by the following measures: 
a.  Double the water rate cost for above 10 units per month. 
b.  The immediate removal of service for any violation of the shortage management policy. 
c.  The director of public services will have the authority to implement additional conservation measures on commercial and industrial customers, including but not limited to percentage reductions of consumption, cutting off specific water consumption units, etc. 
d.  A list of the names and addresses of those charged with violations of this section will be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(4)  Phase four—Rationing. In addition to all restrictions previously imposed, the following measures will be implemented: 
a.  All other uses of water will be limited to those necessary to meet minimum health and safety needs of the customers. 
b.  The director of public services shall be empowered to limit the hours of service to different sections of the city on a rotating basis in order to maintain minimum health and safety needs. 
(Ord. No. 86-29, § 1, 8-7-86; Ord. No. 95-77, § 1, 8-17-95; Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97; Ord. No. 6500/07-95, § 1, 10-22-07)  
Sec. 8-2-41. - Connection required. 
(a)  Connection to city water and sewer mains are to be made within 30 days. Within 30 days from the time water and/or sewer mains are completed and ready for use, the abutting property owners shall cause such property to be connected to both water and/or sewer mains. If both water and sewer are available the property owner must connect to both at the time of connection, provided that the property owner is notified, in writing, of the installation of said mains. The property owner shall have 30 days after such notification to make the connection. At the time a water connection is made to the city water system all cross-connections as defined in section 8-2-34 shall be disconnected. Under no conditions will interconnected dual water supply systems be permitted. This requirement may be waived by the director of public services department if, in his opinion, a health condition does not require immediate hookup. 
(Ord. No. 87-31, 4-16-87; Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97)  
Sec. 8-2-42. - Wells. 
(a)  Connection to other than city supply. No part of the plumbing served by the city's water system shall be connected to any source of water supply other than the city's. If on any premises both city water and water from any other source are used, the piping shall be separated. Pipes carrying water from a source other than the city's supply shall be painted yellow and shall not be returned to the city sewers if city water is available to the property. 
(b)  Annual permit required for drilled wells. No person shall use or operate a drilled well within the corporate limits of the city or on any premises outside the corporate limits of the city where water is furnished by the city from the city's water supply, without a written annual permit from the director of public services. 
(c)  Application. Applications for permits required by this section shall be made in writing by the owner of the premises on which a drilled well is located, or his authorized agent or representative. In addition to such information as may be required by the director of public services, the application shall show the use of the water obtained from such well and the manner in which pipes or plumbing are used in connection therewith. An annual inspection shall be made by the department of public services to determine whether or not the use of such drilled well is in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the city pertaining to such use. Upon approval of the abovementioned application, an annual permit shall be issued upon the payment of the annual permit fee as set forth by city council. 
(d)  Permit revocation. Any person using a drilled well contrary to these provisions shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, have his permit to use or operate a drilled well revoked. 
(e)  Access fee. If, during the extension of the water and sewer system pursuant to means other than by public necessity or sufficient petition, water and/or sewer service becomes available to adjacent property served by these extensions, no assessment shall be levied. However, if service is later requested by an adjacent property owner, a fee in lieu of assessment shall become due. This fee shall be the current assessment rate in effect at the time of request for service if the property is located inside the city limits. This fee shall be in effect for all property along existing road frontage affected by this extension. 
If the property of the property owner requesting service is located outside the city limits, the access fee shall be the same as is in effect pursuant to the City of High Point-Guilford County Intergovernmental Agreement. 
(Ord. No. 87-31, 4-16-87; Ord. No. 97-102(2); § 1(5), 12-18-97)  
Secs. 8-2-43—8-2-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Sewer[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 07-81, adopted Sept. 20, 2007, amended article B in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, this article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 94-15, adopted March 17, 1994; and Ord. No. 97-102(3), adopted Dec. 18, 1997. 
 
Sec. 8-2-51. - Sewer; responsibility. 
The public services department shall be charged with the maintenance and repair of all sewer mains, including house connections, pump stations and treatment plants, the construction of house connections, and the operation of all pump stations and treatment plants. There shall be employed in this department an adequate number of employees to properly maintain and operate the facilities of this department. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-52. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the City of High Point, hereafter referred to as the city, and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the state or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; 
(4)  To protect both municipal personnel who may come into contact with sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the general public; 
(5)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and 
(6)  To ensure the municipality complies with its NPDES or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any federal or state laws which the municipal wastewater system is subject to. 
This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
This article shall apply all users of the municipal wastewater system as authorized by G.S. 160A-312 and/or 153A-275. The City of High Point shall designate an administrator of the publicly owned treatment works or POTW and pretreatment program hereafter referred to as the POTW director. Except as otherwise provided herein, the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW director may be delegated by the POTW director to other City of High Point personnel. 
By discharging wastewater into the City of High Point wastewater system, industrial users located outside the city limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this article, as well as any permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-53. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or the act . The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority. The director of the division of water quality of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources or his designee. 
Authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean: 
a.  The president, secretary, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership, association, or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or the proprietor. 
(3)  If the industrial user is federal, state or local governments, or an agent thereof, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1)—(3) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the authorization is submitted to the city. 
(5)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the City of High Point prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at 20 degrees centigrade usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
Categorical standards. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or pretreatment standard. 
Control authority . Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW organization's pretreatment program approval has not been withdrawn. 
Discharger. Any person who discharges or causes the discharge of wastewater to a community sewer system, storm water system, or directly to the POTW. Discharger shall mean the same as user. 
Domestic sewage. The liquid waste from residence building drains, public rest rooms in commercial or industrial establishments, and garbage grinders, dishwashers and clothes washers which are not operated on a commercial basis. 
Effluent. Wastewater or other liquid, partially or completely treated, or in its natural state or any portion thereof flowing out of a reservoir, basin, treatment plant or industrial treatment plant. 
Enforcement response plan (ERP). The set of enforcement actions to be taken by the city in response to violations of any part(s) of this article. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Fats, oils and grease (FOG). Any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
FOG best management practices . Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to the sanitary and storm water systems. 
Food service establishment . Those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption by the public operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, that utilize one (1) or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. 
Garbage. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and for a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grease. Includes, fats, oils, waxes or other related constituents. Grease may be of vegetable or animal origin, including butter, lard, margarine, vegetable fats and oils, and fats in meats, cereals, seeds, nuts, and certain fruits. Grease may also be of mineral origin including kerosene, lubricating oil, and road oil. Grease in the wastewater collection system is generally present as, but not need be, a floatable solid, a liquid, a colloid, an emulsion, or in a solution. Grease is extractable from an acidified sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent and as determined by the appropriate methods and procedures approved by the Environmental Protection Agency, and identified in 40 CFR Part 136. 
Grease control device. A grease interceptor, grease trap, or other grease removal device designed, constructed and intended to remove, hold or otherwise prevent the passage of fats, oils or grease (FOG) to the sanitary sewer. 
Grease generating activity . Any activity that includes the following in regards to wastewater or any FOG materials entering the sanitary sewer system by means of washing dishes, kitchen equipment, discharging FOG in a drain which leaves the property. 
Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks, including but not limited to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Hot spots. Areas in sewer lines that have experienced sanitary sewer overflows or that must be cleaned or maintained at an accelerated frequency to avoid blockages of sewer system as a result from FOG buildup in the sanitary sewer system. 
Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user. Any person which is a source of indirect discharge. 
Interference. The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW collection system, treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or disposal, which causes or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES, collection system or non-discharge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations, or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Low grease generator agreement. Refers to an agreement between certain categories of FSEs and the city that do not require the installation of a grease control device. 
Maintenance log. Any form of record keeping requirements as addressed in section 8-2-54(k)(5). 
Manifest. Shall mean the receipt which is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing recyclable waste, liquid or solid wastes as required by the city. 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Monitoring facility. Structure or sampling installation for the purpose of accurately measuring the volume of flow and sampling of the wastes, the design, location and operation of which must be approved by the director. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342), or pursuant to G.S. 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA. 
National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge or certain substances; these prohibitions appear in subsection 8-2-54(a) of this article and developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307(c), provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal or existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Non-discharge permit. A permit issued by the state pursuant to G.S. 143-215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged directly to surface waters of the State or for a wastewater treatment works which does not discharge directly to surface waters of the state 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation of the POTW's NPDES, collection system, or non-discharge permit or downstream water quality standard even if not included in the permit. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government entities. 
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pollutant. Any "waste" as defined in G.S. 143-213(18) and dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, metals, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor). 
POTW director. The City of High Point Director of Public Services or his/her delegate. 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollution into a POTW collection system and/or treatment plant. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment program. The program for the control of pollutants introduced into the POTW from nondomestic sources which was developed by the city in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and 403.11 and as authorized by N.C.G.S. 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11. 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standard. Any prohibited discharge standard, categorical standard, or local limit which applies to an industrial user. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) or municipal wastewater system. A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, or in any other way, users of the city's POTW. 
Sanitary sewer overflow. Any discharge of sewage from the sanitary sewer to the inside or outside of a FSE or to the Stormwater system. 
Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the user's treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
Significant industrial user or SIU. An industrial user that discharges wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that: 
(1)  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters); or 
(2)  Contributes process wastewater which makes up five (5) percent or more of the NPDES or non-discharge permitted flow limit or five (5) percent or more of the maximum allowable headworks loading of the POTW treatment plant for any POTW pollutant of concern; or 
(3)  Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR Part 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471; or 
(4)  Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's receiving stream standard, or for limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options. 
(5)  Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsections (1) and (2) above have no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's receiving stream standard, or for limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options, and thus is not a significant industrial user. 
(6)  Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (3) above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403.3(v)(2) and thus is not a non-significant categorical industrial user. 
(7)  Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (3) above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(3) and thus is a middle tier significant industrial user. Sampling and inspection requirements may be cut in half as per 40 CFR Parts 403.8(f)(2)(v)(C) and 403.12(e)(3). 
Significant noncompliance. SNC is the status of noncompliance of a significant industrial user when one (1) or more of the following criteria are met. Additionally, any industrial user that meets the criteria in subsection (3), (4), or (8) shall also be SNC. 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l); 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numerical pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC; (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease; 1.2 for all other pollutants (except flow and pH)); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the control authority and/or POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the control authority's or the POTW's, if different from the control authority, exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(l)(vi)(B) and section 8-2-54(a) of this article to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date. 
(6)  Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the due date. 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations that the control authority and/or POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Slug load or discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violates the POTW's regulations, local limits, or industrial user permit conditions. This can include but is not limited to spills and other accidental discharges; discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature; a non-customary batch discharge; or any other discharges that can cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 8-2-54(a). 
Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987. 
Standard manhole. Shall mean a sewer inspection entrance constructed according to city standards and having a minimum horizontal diameter of four (4) feet and located on the building sewer downstream from any pretreatment works. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting there from. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Trap means any facility designed, constructed and operated for the purpose of removing and retaining dangerous, deleterious or prohibited constituents from wastewater by differential gravity separation before discharge to the public sewer. 
Twenty-five percent rule shall mean the requirement for grease control devices to be maintained such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the design hydraulic depth in any location of the grease control device. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available hydraulic volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system. 
Upset. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
Wastewater permit. As set forth in subsection 8-2-56(b) of this article. 
Waters of the state. All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds, tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
This article is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include the feminine and vice versa. 
"Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive or discretionary. 
The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand. 
(2)  CFR. Code of Federal Regulations. 
(3)  COD. Chemical oxygen demand. 
(4)  EPA. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(5)  gpd. Gallons per day. 
(6)  l. Liter. 
(7)  mg. Milligrams. 
(8)  mg/l. Milligrams per liter. 
(9)  NCGS. North Carolina General Statutes. 
(10)  NPDES. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System. 
(11)  O&M. Operation and maintenance. 
(12)  POTW. Publicly owned treatment works. 
(13)  SIC. Standard industrial classification. 
(14)  SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq. 
(15)  USC. United States Code. 
(16)  TSS. Total suspended solids. 
(17)  TKN. Total kjeldahl nitrogen. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-54. - Regulations. 
(a)  Prohibited discharge standards. 
(1)  General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes interference or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or subject to any national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
a.  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. Included in this prohibition are wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no time, shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over 10 percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
b.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause interference with the flow in a sewer but in no case solids greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension. 
c.  Any wastes or water containing mineral or, hydrocarbon, vegetable or animal fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit. Animal and vegetable fats above these units may be allowed following written application and approval by the director. 
d.  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11.0 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
e.  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), in sufficient quantity (flow or concentration), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to pass through or interfere with the POTW wastewater treatment system, any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
f.  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
g.  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under Section 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
h.  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetables tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plants effluent thereby violating the POTW's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than 10 percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life. 
i.  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (66 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with the temperature at the introduction into the POTW to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
j.  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
k.  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the system in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems. 
l.  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW director in accordance with section 8-2-65 of this article. 
m.  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW director. 
n.  Any industrial wastes containing floatable fats, waxes, grease or oils, or which become floatable at the wastewater temperature at the introduction to the treatment plant during the winter season, but in no case, industrial wastewater containing more than 100 mg/l of emulsified oil or grease unless authorized by the POTW director. 
o.  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils, commonly called soluble oils, which form a persistent water emulsion, and non-biodegradable complex carbon compounds in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
p.  Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
q.  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW director in an industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
r.  Any material containing ammonia, ammonium salts, or other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal wastewater system. 
s.  Any material identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 except as may be specifically authorized by the POTW director. 
t.  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to violate state water quality standards for toxic substances as described in 15A NCAC 2B.0200. 
u.  Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy. 
v.  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater system. 
Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that these wastes could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connection with the system. 
When the POTW director determines that a user(s) is contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts which may cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass through, the director shall: 
(1)  Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the contribution on the POTW in accordance with subsections 8-2-54(a) and (b); 
(2)  Take appropriate actions in accordance with section 8-2-60 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through. 
(b)  Polluted water control. All polluted water from homes, commercial establishments and manufacturing plants, whether such water is obtained from the city or not, when polluted by its use, shall be forced into the city's sanitary sewer system provided such wastes meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Use of public sewers required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sewage or other polluting materials, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with applicable local, state and federal laws, ordinances and policies. In the event such polluting material is discharged, whether accidental or otherwise, it shall be the responsibility of the person causing the discharge. Where an objectionable or offending condition shall exist, as determined by the director, the person causing the discharge will immediately take corrective measures to remove or otherwise eliminate the offending condition in a manner approved by the director. In any unusual circumstances where an imminent threat to the health and safety of the public may deem to exist, or where corrective measures are not taken promptly by the person causing the offending condition, the director may then take such steps as he determines necessary to remove the polluting materials and eliminate the offending condition with such costs to be borne by the person causing such condition. 
(d)  National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
(1)  Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 and incorporated herein. 
a.  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the POTW director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with CFR 403.6(c). 
b.  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
c.  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
d.  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
e.  A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7. 
(e)  Local limits. To implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in this article, industrial user-specific local limits will be developed ensuring that the POTW's maximum allowable headworks loading is not exceeded for particular pollutants of concern for each industrial user. Where specific local limits are not contained for a given parameter or pollutant in an industrial user permit, the following limits will apply to all users: 
Parameter 	Daily Limit (mg/l) 	Monthly Average (mg/l) 
BOD 	1,000 	500 
TSS 	600 	300 
Ammonia 	20 	15 
Cadmium 	0.10 	0.05 
Chromium 	0.10 	0.05 
Copper 	0.10 	0.05 
Cyanide 	0.01 	0.01 
Lead 	0.10 	0.05 
Nickel 	0.10 	0.05 
Silver 	0.10 	0.05 
Zinc 	0.20 	0.10 
Oil and grease 	100 	50 
pH range: Between 5.0 and 11.0 
 (standard units) 		
 
Industrial user-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern shall be included in wastewater permits and are considered pretreatment standards. 
(f)  State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(g)  Right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements which are more stringent than those required by either state or federal regulations if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 8-2-52 of this article or the general and specific prohibitions in section 8-2-54 of this article, as is allowed by 40 CFR 403.4. 
(h)  Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
(i)  Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(1)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and wastewater permits issued under subsection 8-2-56(b) of this article and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 8-2-54(a) within the time limitations as specified by the EPA, the state, or the POTW director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pre-treat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the POTW director before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method(s) of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the POTW director prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(2)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
a.  Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
b.  The POTW director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-controlled facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(j)  Grease control devices shall be installed on the premises where FOG is used or generated. 
(1)  All commercial kitchens in new or existing buildings, undergoing significant improvement, undergoing remodeling or change in operations shall have grease control devices (GCD) as required by the Uniform Plumbing Code. If there is a size discrepancy in GCD installation (due to space limitations, etc.) a mutual agreement between the building department and industrial pretreatment department shall agree to compromise regarding size and fixtures to be discharged through the GCD. 
(2)  All grease generating fixtures shall connect to a GCD, including but not limited to pre-rinse sinks, three-compartment sinks, two-compartment sinks, mop or janitor sinks, food preparation sinks, floor drains in dishwashing areas and kitchens, etc. All drainage fixtures in dishwashing room except for dishwashers shall connect to a GCD. 
(3)  No high temperature kitchen equipment discharges shall be allowed to connect through any type of GCD. Discharge of wastewater from dishwashers, pasta cookers, other hot lines and non-grease generating fixtures to any GCD is prohibited unless authorized by the POTW director. 
(4)  FSEs shall have a sink or other area for cleaning floor mats, containers, exhaust hood filters and equipment, which is connected to a GCD. The sink or cleaning area shall be large enough to clean the largest mat or piece of equipment to be cleaned. Outside washing of floor mats, equipment grills, or other containers is prohibited; this may allow contaminated wastewater to flow to the storm drain system. 
(5)  All in-ground GCDs greater than 750 gallons in capacity shall have a minimum of three (3) manholes (refer to City of High Point Design Standards) to allow visibility over each inlet piping, baffle (divider) piping and outlet piping to ensure accessibility for inspection, cleaning and removal of all contents. Two (2) manholes may be allowed under certain conditions only granted by the city of High Point. Nothing shall be allowed to be stored on top of any GCD manholes. 
(6)  In ground GCDs shall be installed in a suitable location that will allow access for inspection, cleaning, and maintenance. This includes drive-thru roads and parking stalls where inspection would be difficult or unsafe and impeded business operations. 
(7)  Laterals installed between a FSE and GCD, also between the GCD and the city's main shall include installation of two-way clean outs as required to allow access points for sewer line maintenance and inspection. 
(k)  Grease, oil and sand traps required for commercial and industrial establishments. 
(1)  Grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the protection of sewerage system from liquid wastes containing petroleum based oils, fluids and greases in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful pollutants not prohibited in section 8-2-54(a). Such traps shall not be required for buildings used solely for residential purposes. Such traps shall be required, for example, on discharges from all service stations, automotive repair garages, car washes, and other commercial or industrial establishments as the city may designate. 
(2)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(3)  Grease control device maintenance requirements. 
a.  All GCDs shall be kept in good repair, functioning properly and shall be maintained in continuous operation according to manufacturer's guidelines and the City of High Point's requirements. 
b.  GCDs shall be maintained by the owner at the owner's expense. 
c.  Sewer lines to and from GCDs shall be kept in good repair and clear of any buildup of FOG that could potentially contribute to backups and/or SSOs. 
d.  All FOG discharged during GCD or sewer line cleaning and maintenance shall be captured. Any FSE that has their kitchen grease waste lines, exit lines from a GCD and/or laterals cleaned by jetting or hydro flushing shall have the contractor capture the contents removed from the line to prevent SSOs depending on the main size the lateral feeds into. All contents removed from sewer lines shall be contained and disposed properly by a licensed contractor. 
e.  No additives may be introduced to GCDs or a FSE's wastewater system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG. Additives, such as solvents or enzymes that dissolve or mobilize FOG are prohibited. 
(4)  GCD maintenance frequency. 
a.  The maintenance frequency shall be set so as to ensure the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available hydraulic volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG and minimize the passage of FOG to the sanitary sewer collection system. The maintenance frequency for all FSEs with a GCD shall be determined by one (1) of the following methods: 
1.  GCDs shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the total design hydraulic depth in any location of the GCD. The 25 percent rule shall apply to all GCDs. 
2.  The entire contents of all grease interceptors (gravity grease interceptors) and GCDs greater than 100 gallons shall be removed every three (3) months or more frequently as to prevent FOG from entering the sanitary sewer. 
3.  The entire contents of all grease traps (hydro mechanical grease interceptors and automatically or mechanically cleaning GCDs) shall be removed every month or more frequently as to prevent FOG from entering the sanitary sewer. 
b.  The city may modify the maintenance frequency at any time to reflect changes in actual operating conditions. Based on the actual generation of FOG from the FSE, the maintenance frequency may increase or decrease. 
c.  If the GCD, at any time, contains FOG and solids accumulation that does not meet the requirements in this section, the FSE shall have the GCD serviced immediately such that all FOG, solids, and other materials are completely removed from the GCD. 
d.  Waste haulers servicing GCDs shall not reinsert or discharge into GCD, manhole, cleanout, or other sanitary sewer appurtenance any materials that the waste hauler has removed from the GCD or to cause those materials to be so handled. 
(5)  Requirements for record keeping. 
a.  GCD and plumbing record keeping. 
1.  The FSE shall retain all manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the GCD, disposal carrier and disposal site location for at least three (3) years. Such records, which include at a minimum of the following, shall be made immediately available for inspection and copying to the inspector or city representative upon request: 
2.  A logbook of grease interceptor, grease trap or grease control device cleaning and maintenance practices. 
3.  Copies of records of waste hauling GCD contents. The grease haulers shall leave, at the facility site, a manifest with the following information: 
•  Name of site pumped. 
•  Street address. 
•  City name. 
•  Date and time pumped. 
•  Volume collected. 
•  Hauler name. 
•  Truck number. 
•  Observed GCD structural problems. 
•  Final destination of material collected. 
4.  Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the GCDs. 
5.  Records of any SSOs, backups, spills and/or cleaning of the lateral sewer system. 
6.  A record of best management practices being implemented including employee training. 
7.  Any other information deemed appropriate by the city to ensure and document compliance with this article. 
(6)  Tallow bins. 
a.  Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil. No person shall dispose of any grease, or cause any grease to be disposed, by discharge into any drainage piping, by discharge into any public or private sanitary sewer, by discharge into any storm drainage system, or by discharge to any land, street, public way, river, stream or other waterway. All waste cooling oils shall be collected and stored properly in tallow receptacles such as barrels or drums or bins for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal. 
1.  Segregated waste grease and oil bins (tallow bins) shall be in place at the location of any FSE that creates grease or oil from the use of fryers, automatically or mechanically cleaning GCDs which need FSE staff maintenance, rotisserie drip lines not connected to a GCD or any other type of grease and oil waste created by cooking or cleaning of equipment. FSE staff, not limited to kitchen staff, shall properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment into an oil/grease receptacle such as a tallow bin, barrel or drum. Appropriate measures shall be taken to eliminate spills. An absorption rag, towel, or material shall be immediately available each time the waste oil/grease is emptied to the tallow bin or segregated receptacle and used to clean up spills. The transporting of waste oil/grease shall be conducted with a covered and sealed container. 
2.  Tallow bins or used waste oil and grease container areas shall be kept clean. Containers shall be covered with lids and free from excessive fats, oil and grease and debris to prevent foul-smelling odors and vector attraction. Housekeeping procedures shall be put in place and signs posted. 
3.  Tallow bins shall be located in areas that reduce the risk of spills or discharges to the storm drain system. Where relocation is not possible, spill prevention should be implemented to prevent such discharges. 
(7)  Tallow haulers. Tallow haulers servicing FSEs shall clean up all spills created during the collection and transporting of grease whether it is on the containers, bins, barrels or the ground. 
(8)  Tallow bin record keeping. The FSE shall keep all manifests, receipts and invoices of all oil/grease removal from the FSE, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than three (3) years. The FSE shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and invoices available to any city representative or inspector. These records may include: 
a.  A logbook of all segregated oil bins cleaning and maintenance practices. 
b.  A record of best management practices being implemented including employee training. 
c.  Copies of records and manifests of waste hauling activities. 
d.  Records of any spills and/or cleaning. 
e.  Any other information deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(9)  Best management practices—FSEs. All FSEs shall implement best management practices (BMPs). Emphasis shall be on minimizing the discharge of FOG to the sewer system and preventing non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system. All FSEs shall be required, at a minimum, to provide staff training for the appropriate ordinance requirements and for the following kitchen BMPs: 
a.  Install screens in all drains. The screens shall be installed to all sinks, drains, floor drains, floor sinks, dishwasher, etc. The screens shall be cleaned frequently by disposing waste to the trash or food scrap container if available. Regular inspections shall be conducted by lead managers and/or executive chefs to ensure screens are functioning properly and are present. It is recommended that the inspections be documented to confirm compliance and be available to the city representative or inspector upon request. 
b.  Dispose of all food waste. Food waste shall not be disposed to sinks or drains. FSE staff shall dispose of all food waste directly into the trash, garbage, compost or food waste collection bins by scraping with scrapers, towels, paper towels and/or rubber spatulas prior to using water to rinse off plates, dishes, pots, pans, containers, etc. This practice helps remove FOG from entering the sanitary sewer system and GCDs. Properly dispose of food waste and solids in enclosed plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors. 
c.  Maintain kitchen exhaust hood and equipment. Filters and other exhaust hood equipment shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to maintain good operating condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning the exhaust filter shall be disposed properly and shall be cleaned in sinks connected to a GCD to ensure to capture of FOG prior to entering the sanitary sewer. 
d.  Post signs and posters for best management and waste minimization practices conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. 
e.  Clean all kitchen equipment and other equipment in the sinks or drains that flow directly into a GCD. Never clean equipment in a sink not connected to a GCD. 
f.  Dry methods shall be used to clean up oil and grease spills. Pick up liquids or grease with rags or absorbents such as raw [saw] dust or cat litter. Sweep up absorbent, seal in a plastic bag and dispose in the trash. Regularly use dry methods to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped. Clean up all oil and grease spills prior to mopping. If possible, always discharge waste mop water to a drain that will flow to a GCD. 
g.  Dry sweep pavement, such as walkways, dining areas and dumpster areas as frequently as possible. 
h.  Never pour, sweep or direct wash wastewater into a stormwater collection system, street or gutter. If any pavement cleaning requires water, sweep first; next use a mop without soap and bucket and dispose of wash wastewater in a sink that drains to a GCD. 
i.  Never wash down dumpsters or tallow bins with a hose. If a dumpster or tallow bin must be cleaned, contact the dumpster or tallow bin vendor. Check dumpsters and tallow bins frequently for leaks. Notify the dumpster or tallow bin vendor to maintain and replace leaking dumpsters or tallow bins. 
(l)  Accidental discharge /slug control plans. The POTW director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control and prevent slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined in section 8-2-53(a). All SIUs must be evaluated within one (1) year of being designated an SIU. The POTW director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or other specific action. Alternatively, the POTW director may develop such a plan for any user. 
(1)  All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load. Also see subsections 8-2-57(f) and (g). 
(2)  An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
b.  Description of stored chemicals; 
c.  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by subsection 8-2-57(g) of this article; and 
d.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
e.  Flow and loading equalization. In order to promote the equalization of flows and any constituent loadings, including but not limited to BOD and TSS on the sewer system, each person whose operations produce wastewaters having widely fluctuating flows or constituents is required to install and maintain at his own expense, a suitable storage or holding tank. The holding tank shall have a minimum capacity of 75 percent of the user's average daily flow, except that no tank shall be less than 1,000 gallons. Suitable air mixing will be required to keep solids in suspension and maintain aerobic conditions. Such holding or storage tank, air mixing system and any outlet device controlling the discharge of wastes to the sanitary sewer shall be approved by the director. 
f.  Monitoring facilities. 
1.  To facilitate observations, flow measurements and sampling of liquid wastes discharged to the city's sanitary sewer, any person who discharges or proposes to discharge liquid wastes into the city's sanitary sewer shall construct a suitable monitoring facility, located on the building sewer and downstream from any pretreatment works, provided: 
(a)  The BOD concentration exceeds 300 mg/l; 
(b)  The TSS concentration exceeds 250 mg/l; 
(c)  The average flow per work day exceeds 25,000 gallons; or 
(d)  The manufacturing processes produce toxic or poisonous wastes such as but not limited to cyanides, heavy metals, insecticides, herbicides, etc. 
2.  All industrial users that are subject to categorical pretreatment standards will also be required to provide and operate, at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities for flow measurement and any sampling required by the director or the categorical pretreatment standards. Plans for the location and construction of the monitoring facilities shall be approved by the director prior to commencing the installation. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-55. - Fees. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be as set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees. 
(b)  User charges. A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW. 
(1)  The user charge shall reflect at least the cost of debt service, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW. 
(2)  Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of flow. 
(3)  The city manager shall review annually the sewage contributions of users, the total costs of debt service, operation and maintenance of the POTW and will make recommendations to the city council for adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees as necessary. 
(4)  Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the users shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume of flow of the users. 
(5)  For the purpose of defraying a portion of the expense of maintaining and operating the public sewer system, there shall be a sewer service charge levied and collected monthly in respect to all property in which there is a sewer connection with the public sewer system. The rate for water and/or sewer service is set forth by a rate schedule adopted by city council. The occupants of the premises shall be liable for the payment thereof as in case of the water charge. Such charge shall be added to each water bill monthly and shall be payable at the time that the water bill is payable. The penalty for failure to pay such charge shall be the same as in case of failure to pay the water bill. 
(6)  Water used for watering lawns, manufacture of ice, mixing concrete and other uses in which no portion is returned to the sanitary sewer system may be metered separately. A sanitary sewer service charge will not be billed on water used in these types of operations provided meters are installed by the city at the expense of the owner to measure only the water not required to be returned to the sanitary sewer or the director of public services may determine actual quantity of water used for bulk uses and cost of labor and materials for billing purposes. 
(7)  Where a well is used by any person and water from such well is put into the sanitary sewer system of the city, then such person shall install, at his own expense, the necessary meter or meters, obtained from the city, to register the amount of water used from such well which goes into the sanitary sewer system and the sewer service charge thereon shall be the same as the herein above given. This installation will be required it if is determined by the director of public services to be in the best interest of the city. 
(8)  In cases where the city determines not to require the installation of a meter, a flat rate shall be applied, as outlined in a rate schedule adopted by city council. These rates may apply where the water consumption of the residence or other approved user is generally no more than that of a one-family residence. The director of public services shall determine whether the customer will be on the minimum or higher flat rate or whether a meter is to be installed to determine the sewer service charge and he shall set the amount of the charge based on estimated consumption. Metering may be required where water is used for industrial purposes or where monthly or yearly discharge of waste water to the sanitary sewer system fluctuates over a wide range. A flat rate shall not be used where the water supply is from a state approved public water supply. 
(c)  Surcharges. All industrial users of the POTW are subject to industrial waste surcharges on discharges which exceed the following levels: 
BOD = 300 mg/l 
TSS = 250 mg/l 
The amount of surcharge will be based upon the mass emission rate (in pounds per day) discharged above the levels listed above. The amount charged per pound of excess will be set forth in the schedule of charges and fees. 
(1)  In order that all sewer users bear their equitable share of costs for the collection and treatment of sewage, a monthly surcharge shall be imposed where the concentration of BOD or TSS exceeds the limits as hereinbefore prescribed. The amount of the monthly surcharge will be determined by calculating the excess BOD and TSS concentration above the permissible limits of 300 mg/l BOD, and 250 mg/l TSS, according to the following formulate: 
a.  The number of hundreds of pounds of constituent (BOD or TSS) subject to the surcharge will be determined by: 
P = 	U × C × 0.006238 
	100 
 
where: 
P = pounds of constituent (BOD or TSS) in hundreds 
U = units of wastewater discharged (1 unit = 100 cu. ft.) 
C = strength of constituent in wastewater in mg/l in excess of 300 for BOD, or 250 for TSS 
0.006238 = weight of wastewater (million pounds per unit) 
b.  The amount of the surcharge will be calculated by: 
S = (R1 × P1 ) + (R2 × P2 ) 
where: 
S = total surcharge 
R1 = surcharge rate per CWT BOD 
R2 = surcharge rate per CWT TSS 
P1 = pounds of BOD in hundreds 
P2 = pounds of TSS in hundreds 
R1 and R2 are determined by a system of user charges and are set forth in a rate schedule adopted by city council. 
(2)  The city council, in a meeting with the city manager and the director, will annually review the actual cost of operation and maintenance of the pollution control plants and adjust the surcharge rate to reflect the true cost of constituent treatment. 
(3)  The volume of flow used in calculating the amount of surcharge will be based upon the metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the city. Where satisfactory evidence can be produced that more than 10 percent of the total annual volume of water consumed does not return to the public sewer, such water may be metered separately, subject to the approval of the director, and excluded from the surcharge computation. 
(d)  Pretreatment program administration charges. The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the city may include charges and fees for: 
(1)  Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment program; 
(2)  Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug load discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications; 
(4)  Permitting; 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of the pretreatment program. 
(e)  Sampling and testing procedures. 
(1)  Each person discharging liquid wastes into the public sewer shall be subject to periodic inspections to determine the character and concentration of such wastes. The frequency of sampling shall be as determined by the director. Sampling and inspections will be both scheduled and unscheduled. 
(2)  Samples from monitoring facilities may be grab and/or composite according to flow. All other sampling will be conducted in a manner prescribed by the director. 
(3)  Each person subject to sampling and analytical services will be charged the cost of such services. All costs incident to the supervision, inspection, sampling and analyses will be billed to the user in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by city council. The city council, in a meeting with the city manager and the director, will annually review the actual cost of supervision, inspection, sampling and analyses required for monitoring industrial discharges and adjust fees to reflect the true cost of the pretreatment program. Any analyses performed by contract laboratory services on behalf of the city will be billed directly to the user by the contract laboratory. 
(4)  The city, upon request by the industry concerned, shall make available a split sample collected. If the industry feels the results are not representative of their wastes, the city will resample at a cost in accordance with the fee schedule referred to in subsection 8-2-55(b)(3). The values determined from any re-sampling shall be used for future billings (or until the results of the next sampling are made) but will not be retroactive for any prior billing. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-56. - Administration. 
(a)  Wastewater dischargers. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of the city. When requested by the POTW director a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The POTW director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(b)  Wastewater permits. All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial users who are determined by the POTW director to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW director's determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW director be required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit for non-significant industrial users. 
(1)  Significant industrial user determination. All persons proposing to discharge nondomestic wastewater, or proposing to change the volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of nondomestic wastewater shall request from the POTW director a significant industrial user determination. If the POTW director determines or suspects that the proposed discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he will require that a significant industrial user permit application be filed. 
(2)  Significant industrial user permit application. Users required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with the city, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW director, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of the POTW director's determination in subsection 8-2-56(b) above. The application shall include at a minimum: 
a.  Name of industrial user; 
b.  Address of industrial user; 
c.  Standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s) or expected classification and industrial user category; 
d.  Wastewater flow; 
e.  Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants contained in the discharge; 
f.  Major products manufactured or services supplied; 
g.  Description of existing on-site pretreatment facilities and practices; 
h.  Locations of discharge points; 
i.  Raw materials used or stored at the site; 
j.  Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user; 
k.  Number of employees; 
l.  Operation and production schedules; and 
m.  description of current and projected waste reduction activities in accordance with G.S. 143-215.1(g). 
(3)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current authorized representative of the user on file with the POTW director as defined in subsection 8-2-53(a) and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(4)  Application review and evaluation. 
a.  The POTW director is authorized to accept applications for the city and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and evaluation. 
b.  Within 30 days of receipt the POTW director shall acknowledge and accept the complete application or if not complete shall return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional information is required. 
(5)  Tentative determination and draft permit. 
a.  The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and on on-site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit. 
b.  If the staff's tentative determination in subsection (5)a. above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall be made in writing: 
1.  Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed to be limited; 
2.  A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and 
3.  A brief description of any other proposed special conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the application. 
c.  The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to subsections (5)a. and b. above and the city's general permit conditions into a significant industrial user permit. 
(6)  Permit supporting documentation. The control authority staff shall prepare the following documents for all significant industrial user permits: 
a.  An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for all significant industrial users, including but not limited to permit limits, permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of total permitted flows and loads with division approved maximum allowable loadings of the POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the division. The AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as permits are modified where the permitted limits or other AT information is revised. 
b.  The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment limitations, including the following: 
1.  Documentation of categorical determination, including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical pretreatment standards; and 
2.  Documentation of the rationale of any parameters for which monitoring has been waived under 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2). 
(7)  Final action on significant industrial user permit applications. 
a.  The POTW director shall take final action on all applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete application. 
b.  The director is authorized to: 
1.  Issue a significant industrial user permit containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article and G.S. 143-215.1; 
2.  Issue a significant industrial user permit containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; 
3.  Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days' notice and pursuant to subsection 8-2-56(i) of this article; 
4.  Revoke any permit pursuant to subsection 8-2-60(a) of this article; 
5.  Suspend a permit pursuant to subsection 8-2-60(a) of this article; 
6.  Deny a permit application when in the opinion of POTW director such discharge may cause or contribute to pass through or an upset of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate the purposes of G.S. 143-215.1. 
(8)  Permit modification. Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed below. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
a.  Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change in the permit is indicated. 
b.  A single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess of four (4) months. 
c.  Modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational. 
d.  Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by subsection 8-2-56(b)(2) the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. 
e.  A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. 143-215.1(b) for modifications. 
(9)  Permit conditions. 
a.  The POTW director shall have the authority to grant a permit with such conditions attached as he believes necessary to achieve the purpose of this article and G.S. 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  A statement of duration (in no case more than five (5) years); 
2.  A statement of non-transferability; 
3.  Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or local limits or both; 
4.  Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law; 
5.  Requirements for notifying the POTW in the event of an accidental discharge or slug load as defined in subsection 8-2-53(a); 
6.  Requirements to implement a plan or other controls for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in subsection 8-2-53(a), if determined by the POTW director to be necessary for the user; 
7.  Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharges, or slug load as defined in subsection 8-2-53(a). Also see subsections 8-2-57(d) and 8-2-54(e); and 
8.  A statement of applicable civil and/or criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. 
b.  In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
2.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties. 
3.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
4.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system. 
5.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system. 
6.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
7.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules. 
8.  Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic re-sampling and reporting within 30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s). 
9.  Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements. 
10.  Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or special notification reports. 
11.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in subsection 8-2-57(l) and affording the POTW director, or his representatives, access thereto. 
12.  Requirements for prior notification and approval by the POTW director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in the system. 
13.  Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the POTW director of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee. 
14.  A statement that compliance with permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the terms of the permit. 
15.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, regulations, and the term of the permit. 
(10)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. 
(11)  Permit transfer. Industrial wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. An industrial wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. 
(12)  Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with subsection 8-2-56(b) minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-57. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the POTW director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW director of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average concentrations, shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection 8-2-57(j) of this article and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g), including 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4). 
3.  When determining mass calculations, standard pretreatment conversion factors shall be used. 
4.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection 8-2-57(k) of this article and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g), including 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4). 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's current authorized representative as defined in subsection 8-2-53(a)(1) and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection 8-2-57(b) of this article. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 8-2-56(b)(3) of this article. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 8-2-57(a)(2)g. of this article: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. These events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation; 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the POTW director. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard, deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW director a report containing the information described in subsection 8-2-57(a)(2)d.—f. of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measures of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 8-2-56(b)(3) of this article. 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the POTW director, but in no case less than once every six (6) months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the applicable flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsections 8-2-57(j) and (k) of this section. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 8-2-56(b)(3) of this article. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW director, using the procedures prescribed in subsections 8-2-57(j) and (k) of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the POTW director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. The permittee shall not begin the changes until receiving written approval from the city. See section 8-2-57 for other reporting requirements. 
(1)  The POTW director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under subsection 8-2-56(b) of this article. 
(2)  The POTW director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under subsection 8-2-56(b) of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under subsection 8-2-56(b) of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow or pollutant increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants; increases or decreases to production; increases in discharge of previously reported pollutants; discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the city; new or changed product lines; new or changed manufacturing processes and/or chemicals; or new or changed customers. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in section 8-2-53(a), that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the POTW director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(4)  All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in subsection 8-2-53(a). 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users classified as non-significant categorical industrial users under section 8-2-53(a) shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW director as the POTW director may require. At a minimum, this shall include the annual certification of continuing to meet the non-significant categorical industrial user criteria as required under 40 CFR 403.12(q). 
(h)  Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. 
(1)  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the POTW director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the POTW director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the POTW director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(2)  If the POTW director or designee has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a violation, the POTW director (or designee) shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results of the repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violations, unless one (1) of the following occurs: 
a.  The POTW director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month; or 
b.  The POTW director samples the user between their initial sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or 
c.  The POTW director requires the user to perform sampling and submit the results to the POTW director within the 30-day deadline of the POTW becoming aware of the violation. 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharge during the calendar month, and an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. The user shall not begin the discharge until receiving written approval from the city. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection 8-2-57(e) of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections 8-2-57(a), (c) and (d) of this article. 
(2)  Discharges are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (1) above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specific in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulation under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW director, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(j)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed by a laboratory certified by the state to perform the wastewater analyses in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard or unless otherwise performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA or the city. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved EPA and the city. Analyses must be performed by a state certified lab for each parameter analyzed, if such certification exists for that parameter. 
(k)  Sample collection. 
(1)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(2)  Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other pollutants as required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs necessary to be representative of the user's discharge. See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and 90-day compliance reports. Additionally, the [POTW director] may allow collection of multiple grabs during a 24-hour period which are composited prior to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136. 
(3)  Composite samples: All wastewater composite samples shall be collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the [POTW director]. When authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented. 
(l)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States postal service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(m)  Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the date analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the POTW director. 
(n)  Electronic reporting. The [POTW director] may develop procedures for receipt of electronic reports for any reporting requirements of this section. Such procedures shall comply with 40 CFR Part 3. These procedures shall be enforceable under section 8-2-60 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-58. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Monitoring facilities. The city requires the user to provide and operate at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city. 
(b)  Inspection and sampling. The city will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the city's, approval authority's or EPA's access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access. 
(c)  Search warrants. If the city, approval authority, or EPA has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city, approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant from the 18th Judicial District of Guilford County. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-59. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, non-discharge permit and/or the pretreatment programs, provided however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the approval authority and EPA upon request. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-60. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. 
(1)  Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW director finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this article, wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW director may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharge of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Violations will be administered according to the enforcement response plan (ERP). 
(2)  Consent orders. The POTW director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order issued pursuant to section 8-2-60(a)(4) below. 
(3)  Show cause hearing. The POTW director may order any industrial user who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this article or is in noncompliance with a wastewater contributor permit to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
The POTW director shall review the evidence presented at the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate. A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under subsection 8-2-60 nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW director under this section subject to an administrative appeal under subsection 8-2-56(b). POTW director's final decision shall be to either proceed with the proposed enforcement action or to modify the action. Such modification may include but is not limited to the issuance of an order to the industrial user directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless facilities, devices or other related appurtenance shall have been installed and are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(4)  Administrative orders. When the POTW director finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this article, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
a.  Immediately comply with all requirements; 
b.  Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set in the order; 
c.  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a continuing or threatened violation. 
(5)  Emergency suspensions. The POTW director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit. 
Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user's waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the suspended order, the POTW director shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW director shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW director prior to the date of the above-described hearing. 
(6)  Termination of permit or permission to discharge. The POTW director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or permission to discharge for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
a.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
b.  Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
c.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
d.  Violation of conditions of the permit or permission to discharge, conditions of this section, or any applicable state and federal regulations. 
Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection 8-2-57(a) of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this article, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty up to $25,000 per day per violation. Such assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charges and the POTW shall have such remedies for the collection of such assessments as it has for collection of other service charges (40 CFR 403.8(f), G.S. 143-215.6A(a)). 
a.  Penalties between $10,000 and $25,000 per day per violation may be assessed against a violator only if: 
1.  For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five (5) years preceding the violation, or 
2.  In the case of failure to file, submit, or make available, as the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by this section, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, only if the POTW director determines that the violation was intentional and a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five (5) years preceding the violation. 
(2)  In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW director shall consider the following: 
a.  The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the public health, or to public or private property resulting from the violation; 
b.  The duration and gravity of the violation; 
c.  The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air quality; 
d.  The cost of rectifying the damage; 
e.  The amount of money saved by noncompliance; 
f.  Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally; 
g.  The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with the pretreatment program; 
h.  The costs of enforcement to the city. 
(3)  Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section shall be as provided in section 8-2-70. 
(c)  Other available remedies. 
(1)  Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this article, are available to the POTW director/superintendent who may use any single one (1) or combination against a noncompliant user. Additional available remedies include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Criminal violations. The district attorney for the (18th) judicial district may, at the request of the city, prosecute noncompliant users who violate the provisions of G.S. 143-215.6B. (Note: Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. 143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. 143-215.B(g)), to knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, (G.S. 143-215.6B(h)), and to falsify information required under Article 21 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes (G.S. 143-215.6B(i)). 
b.  Injunctive relief. Whenever an industrial user is in violation of the provisions of this article or an order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW director, through the city attorney, may petition the superior court of justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and permanent injunction, which restrains or compels the activities in question. 
c.  Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is in violation of the provisions of this article or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated consistent compliance. 
d.  Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this article or of a permit or order issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the POTW director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of subsections 8-2-54(a)(2)f. and 8-2-60(b) of the sewer use ordinance. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The POTW director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the POTW director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW director is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-61. - Annual publication of reportable noncompliance. 
At least annually, the POTW director shall publish in the largest daily newspaper circulated in the service area, a list of those industrial users which are found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable noncompliance in 15A NCAC 2H .0903(b)(10), with this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, during the 12-month period since the previous publication. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-62. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (2), below, are met. 
(2)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the POTW director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(3)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(4)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(5)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Prohibited discharge standards defense. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in subsection 8-2-54(a) of this article or the specific prohibitions in subsections 8-2-54(a)(2)b., c., g. through k., m. through v. of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially, in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Bypass. 
(1)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (2) and (4) of this section. 
(2)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW director, at least 10 days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(3)  A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of this time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The POTW director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW director may taken an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (3) of this section. 
(5)  The POTW director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW director determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (4) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-63. - Severability. 
If any provision, paragraph, word, or section of this article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, section, and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-64. - Conflict. 
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-65. - Septic tank waste. 
No person shall discharge into the sanitary sewerage system any waste from any septic tank or other private sewage disposal device except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Only waste of domestic character (or other waste approved on special arrangement and in advance which in the opinion of the director of public services will not be detrimental to operation of the pollution control plants) will be allowed. 
(2)  All waste shall be discharged at either the eastside or westside pollution control plant at the discretion of the director of public services or his authorized representative and under the supervision of the operator on duty. 
(3)  Persons desiring to discharge waste in accordance with this section shall make application to and contract with the director of public services for such service, and obtain septage vouchers. 
(4)  Fee for septage vouchers shall be paid for in advance at the rate set forth in a rate schedule adopted by city council for each truckload of 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof. 
(5)  Prior to discharging any waste, the truck driver will complete the septage voucher, which shall be submitted to the operator on duty, setting forth the name of the individual, firm or corporation responsible for the waste, the name of the driver of the waste-carrying vehicle, the date and time of discharge, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner of each premises where the waste was collected. 
(6)  All waste-carrying vehicles shall have clear permanent markings showing the owner's name, address, Guilford County Health Department permit number and waste-carrying capacity in gallons. 
(7)  If at any time, in the opinion of the director of public services, the best interest of the city will be served by discontinuance of this service, then no more such wastes shall be accepted from any person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-66. - Sewer connections—Compulsory rules and regulations for permanent pavement of street. 
All owners, whether in fee or as life tenants, of houses or lots abutting on a street where a public sewer is laid, or which otherwise have access to a public sewer, shall connect all water closets or privies on such property with the sewer system, under such rules and regulations as are prescribed by the city council, and in the event that an order has been made for the permanent paving of any street, the sewer department shall make a connection from the sewer line to the curb line in front of each lot. Such connection shall be 15 feet from the lower property line when practicable. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-67. - Same—Procedure for compelling. 
Whenever any property in the city or within its service area shall be required by this article to be connected with the sewer system, the procedure for compelling the connection to be made shall be as follows: 30 days' notice printed or written requiring such connection shall be served by the director of public services of the city on the owner of the property if he is a resident of the city or on his agent if such owner is a nonresident, and where a nonresident has no agent in the city then such notice shall be published for 10 days in a newspaper published in the city. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-68. - Same—Refusal to make. 
It shall be unlawful for any property owner whose property or premises shall be required by the ordinances of the city to be connected with the public sewerage system to refuse or neglect to make connection in the manner required. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-69. - Same—Fees. 
(a)  The charges for sewer connections shall be as prescribed in a rate schedule adopted by city council. 
(b)  Any person residing outside of the corporation limits of the city and seeking permission to tap on any sewer line located outside the city must first make written application to the city council and must furnish a set of approved plans, from which no additions or deletions shall be made without city approval, showing any information concerning the location, size, depth and length of main to be laid and any other information deemed necessary and requested by the public services department and must secure the approval of the public services department and of the city council before such connection is made. 
(c)  Any person who shall receive such permission to tap on to the city sewer system shall not permit any extension of such main to serve any other family, firm or corporation unit except by special permission of the city council. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to have any waste matter going into the city's sewer main or sewer system to be checked and examined to determine whether such material or waste matter is corrosive, volatile, suffocating, flammable or explosive and/or would result in damage or destruction of the city's sewer line or system and if found hazardous or damaging to the city system, the owner shall be required to remove such waste from the city system. 
(e)  Drawings and specifications for all laterals required for industrial or residential development must be submitted to and approved by the director of public services. 
(f)  Charges for sewer connections outside the corporate limits of the city shall be submitted as outlined in a rate schedule adopted by city council, plus an additional amount as set forth in a rate schedule adopted by the city council per front foot of lot tract based on division or use. If the tap on is made to an outfall line, the same charge based on frontage shall apply, except for residences on undivided farm land where a frontage of 100 feet will be assumed. 
(g)  Where such sewer lines are in a street right-of-way, the city shall extend the connection to the curb line; where such sewer lines are not in a street right-of-way, the city shall extend the connection at the most convenient point within the right-of-way of the sewer main or outfall. 
(h)  Any person, firm or corporation found to be illegally connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be required to pay a penalty as set forth in a rate schedule adopted by city council plus the usual connection fee and service charges as determined by the public services department for the period of illegal use. After payment of the determined amount of money, the person, firm or corporation must submit an application, on forms supplied by the city; provided that sewer connection charges on lines installed under the agreement with Guilford County shall be the same rate for sewer connections inside the corporate limits. 
(i)  Any property owner desiring to connect to a sewer main laid under assessment shall, in addition to the regular tap-on fee, pay an amount equal to his prorated share of the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 6486/07-81, § 1, 9-20-07; Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
Sec. 8-2-70. - Hearings. 
(a)  Initial adjudicatory hearing. An applicant whose permit is denied, or is granted subject to conditions he deems unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under subsection 8-2-60(b), or one issued an administrative order under subsection 8-2-60(a)(4) shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before the POTW director or other hearing officer appointed by the POTW director upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the POTW director within 30 days following receipt of the significant industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or administrative order. Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the action shall be final and binding and further appeal is barred. For modified permits, only those parts of the permit being modified may be adjudicated. 
The hearing officer shall make a final decision on the contested permit, penalty, or order within 45 days of the receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The POTW director shall transmit a copy of the hearing officer's decision by registered or certified mail as described in subsection (b) below. The decision is a final decision for the purposes of seeking judicial review. The terms and conditions of a permit under appeal shall be as follows: 
(1)  New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the general courts of justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
(2)  Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the general courts of justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
(3)  Terminated permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the general courts of justice, of a terminated permit, no permit is in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
(b)  Final appeal hearing. Any decision of a hearing officer made as a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under subsection (a) above may be appealed, to the city council upon filing a written demand within 10 days of receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings held under this subdivision shall be conducted in accordance with city policies. Failure to make written demand within the time specified herein shall bar further appeal. The city council shall make a final decision on the appeal within 90 days of the date the appeal was filed and shall transmit a written copy of its decision by registered or certified mail as described in subsection (c) below. The decision is a final decision for the purposes of seeking judicial review. 
(c)  Official record. When a final decision is issued under subsection (a) above, the hearing officer shall prepare an official record of the case that includes: 
(1)  All notices, motions, and other like pleadings. 
(2)  A copy of all documentary evidence introduced. 
(3)  A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative summary of any testimony taken. 
(4)  A copy of the final decision of the hearing officer. 
(d)  Judicial review. Any person against whom a final order or decision of the hearing officer is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted under subsection (a) above, may seek judicial review of the order or decision by filing a written request for review by the Superior Court of Guilford County within 30 days after receipt of notice by registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter, along with a copy to the city. Within 30 days after receipt of the copy written request for the review by the court, the hearing officer shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the official record. 
(Ord. No. 6965/12-81, 12-17-12)  
CHAPTER 3 - Electric 
 
Sec. 8-3-1. - Department head. 
The head of the department of electric utilities shall be known as the Director of Department of Electric Utilities of the City of High Point, North Carolina, subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. He shall manage and have control of the entire operation of the electric utilities, including metering, operation and control of city electric lines and electric property. He shall set the standards of quality and materials to be used in the construction and maintenance of the electric utilities system as well as all planning for the electric utilities department. The director of electric utilities shall perform such other duties relative to this department as may be required of him by the city manager.  
Sec. 8-3-2. - Resale. 
Any electrical service generated and distributed to a customer of the city shall not be resold by that customer to another entity.  
Sec. 8-3-3. - Service voltage. 
Standards for supplying various choices of voltage and service shall be set forth in the departmental operating procedures. The city shall endeavor to offer voltage and service parameter demanded by the latest technology. However, the director of electric utilities shall have the discretion of choosing the service parameter mutually beneficial for both the city and the customer. 
Limits of variation for voltage shall be set in departmental operating procedures. Variations in voltage in excess of limits specified cause by addition of customer equipment without proper notification, by operation of customer's equipment, by action of elements not under control of city by conditions which are part of practical operations and are of limited extent, frequency and duration, or by emergency operations shall not be construed as a departure from the limits within which the city will endeavor to supply electricity.  
Sec. 8-3-4. - Service capacity. 
The city will install facilities with sufficient capacity to serve the customers bonafide normal load requirements to maintain voltage within specified limits and furnish abnormal motor starting and switching load. Initial and long range capacity requirements must be submitted to and obtain the approval of the city. It is the customer's responsibility to advise the city of any electrical load or method of operation change that might affect the cities ability to serve the customers electrical load requirements.  
Sec. 8-3-5. - Electrical line extensions. 
The city will make electric overhead lines extensions to a customer in accordance with established policies and procedures for providing power; however, the customer may be required to make minimum billing payments and/or contribution in aid of construction. Normally, notwithstanding the provisions specified above, the city will make single phase overhead line extensions to residential customers without cost. However, the customer may be required to secure and clear rights-of-way on private property without cost to the city. The city will provide underground electric service in accordance with underground electric service, policies and procedures, the city maintains the right to deny construction of a line if it is anticipated that the proposed line will be needed only temporarily.  
Sec. 8-3-6. - Service connections. 
Each single premises shall require a separate service connection. A single premises is herein construed to cover a structure used by one family or occupant, or where used by more than one family or occupant not adaptable to subdivision. Where a premises is adaptable to subdivision and is used by more than one family or occupant, it shall be construed to be two, three or more premises dependent upon the number of families, occupants or subdivisions.  
Sec. 8-3-7. - Separate meters required; location. 
Except in unusual circumstances there shall be only one meter to each single premises and each consumer shall require a separate meter and a separate monthly billing. Meter reading will not be consolidated. Where a consumer occupies the same premises for residential and also for commercial (nonresidential) purpose, depending on the load, two meters may be required or the predominant load or use may determine the rate of the total usage. These cases are to be evaluated by the electric department and a determination made. The city will furnish all necessary meters and the consumer will provide a location for the same. The city reserves the right to designate where the service location and meter(s) shall be located on the premises.  
Sec. 8-3-8. - Location of city's equipment. 
The city shall have the right to install any poles, lines, transformers, or any other equipment on the property occupied which in its judgment, are necessary in supplying electricity to the customer. The city shall have the right to place its transformers and such other apparatus as may be needed in connection with supplying such electricity at a convenient point or points on the property or in the building or buildings of the customer. The city shall have the right to require the customer to provide facilities such as: Foundation necessary for support, guards to prevent unauthorized access, conduits inside a structure, and such equipment and construction as to keep the city's equipment harmless from any operation or event that may occur deleterious to the city's equipment and personnel. All equipment furnished and installed by the city shall be and remain the property of the city. Should any change or changes in the service connection furnished the customer by the city be necessary by request of the customer or by requirement of public authority, the entire cost of such changes may be charged to the customer.  
Sec. 8-3-9. - Right of entry for purposes of examining or removing wires, lamps, etc. 
The city shall at all reasonable hours have the right of free ingress and egress from the consumer's property for the purpose of examining wires, lamps, meters or other property of the city or to remove the same, or for the purpose of examining any electric appliances, ascertaining whether these regulations are being followed or for any and all purposes connected with the supplying of electric current under the contract or the exercise of any and all rights secured to, or the performance of any and all obligations imposed upon the city by the contract. The city will make application for the permits and acquire the easements necessary to build its supply facilities to the property occupied by the applicant or customer and the applicant or customer will apply for, obtain, and deliver to the city all other permits or certificates necessary to give the city the right to connect its conductors to the applicant's or customer's wiring, and access for all other proper purposes, including an easement from the landowner for the city's facilities.  
Sec. 8-3-10. - Trespassing on city electrical facilities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, unless authorized by the director of electric utilities, to enter upon, trespass upon, the fences or grounds of the several electric transmission stations, electric distribution sub-stations, material inventory yards, and fenced utility customer delivery points. It shall also be unlawful, unless authorized by the director of electric utilities, to enter upon rights-of-way property posted with signs forbidding trespassing or to tamper in any way with any of the machinery, fixtures, wires, poles, down guys, transformer vaults, pad mount transformers, electric service connection handholds or any other electric utility equipment or property of the city. It shall be unlawful, unless authorized by the director of electric utilities, for any person to climb any City of High Point electric utility poles or towers.  
Sec. 8-3-11. - Meeting applicable city, state and federal codes, ordinances, policies and procedures. 
All customer's and consumer's facilities using electricity must meet applicable city, state and federal codes, ordinances, policies and procedures, and regulations and have an inspection certification on meeting same by the appropriate authority issued to the electric department before electric power will be activated to the facility; however, a limited temporary permit may be issued by the appropriate inspecting authority and the power may be activated for that duration.  
Sec. 8-3-12. - Equalized payment plan. 
If requested by the customer, the director of electric utilities may establish equalized monthly payments with bill adjustments between the total bill due and total payments made not to exceed 12 months, for those customers who have or can establish good credit by virtue of a cash deposit or other security. The equalized payment plan will apply only to electric residential rates and electric commercial rates.  
CHAPTER 4 - 911 System 
 
Sec. 8-4-1. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein:] 
(1)  911 system or 911 service means an emergency telephone system that provides the user of the public telephone system the ability to reach a public safety answering point by dialing the digits 911. The term "911 system" or "911 service" also includes "enhanced 911 service", which means an emergency telephone system that provides the user of the public telephone system with 911 service and, in addition, directs 911 calls to appropriate public safety answering points by selective routing based on the geographical location from which the call originated and provides the capability for automatic number identification and automatic location identification features. 
(2)  911 charge means a contribution to the city for the 911 service start up equipment costs, subscriber notification costs, addressing costs, billing costs, and non-recurring and recurring installation, maintenance, service, and network charges of a service supplier providing 911 service. 
(3)  Exchange access facility means the access from a particular telephone subscriber's premises to the telephone system of a service supplier. Exchange access facilities include service supplier provided access lines, PBX trunks and centrex network access registers, all as defined by tariffs of the telephone company as approved by the North Carolina Utilities Commission. Exchange access facilities do not include service supplier owned and operated telephone pay station lines, or wide area telecommunication service (WATS), foreign exchange (FX) or incoming only lines. 
(4)  Public Safety Telephone Act means N.C. General Statute Section 62A-1 et seq. 
(5)  Service supplier means a person or entity who provides exchange telephone service to a telephone subscriber. 
(6)  Telephone subscriber or subscriber means a person or entity to whom exchange telephone service, either residential or commercial, is provided and in return for which the person or entity is billed on a monthly basis. When the same person, business, or organization has several telephone access lines, each exchange access facility shall constitute a separate subscription. 
(Ord. No. 90-31, § 1, 4-19-90)  
Sec. 8-4-2. - Effective date. 
Effective August 1, 1990, there is imposed a monthly 911 service charge, in the amount specified in section 8-4-3(a), upon each exchange access facility subscribed to by telephone subscribers whose exchange access lines are in the area served by the 911 service in the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-31, § 1, 4-19-90)  
Sec. 8-4-3. - Charges; collection. 
(a)  The monthly 911 charge is $0.30 for each exchange access facility subscribed to by a telephone subscriber whose exchange access line or lines are located in the city which are in the area served by the 911 service. 
(b)  Service suppliers will be responsible for collecting and remitting to the City of High Point the 911 charges as provided by the Public Safety Telephone Act. 
(c)  Administration and collection activities to enforce and give effect to the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of the Public Safety Telephone Act and ordinances and policies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-31, § 1, 4-19-90; Ord. No. 6067/03-41, § 1, 8-7-03)  
Title 9 - DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , adopted May 16, 2016, and effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed Chs. 1—10 of this title, enacted a new Ch. 1, and renumbered the former Ch. 11 as Ch. 2 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. Formerly, Title 9 derived from the City of High Point Development Ordinance, adopted on Jan. 7, 1992, effective March 1, 1992, and subsequently amended. For a complete derivation, see the Code Comparative Table. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - Development Ordinance 
 
Sec. 9-1-1. - Adopted. 
The development ordinance is hereby adopted as a technical ordinance that is available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 3, 5-16-16)  
CHAPTER 2 - Inspection Regulations  
ARTICLE A - Adoption of Regulatory Codes by Reference 
 
Sec. 9-2-1. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes herein adopted shall apply to the following: 
(1)  The location, design, material, equipment, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal, use and occupancy of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to any building or structure; 
(2)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains, waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems, and all fixtures and appurtenances thereof; 
(3)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment, and appurtenances thereof; and 
(4)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-2. - State building code adopted by reference. 
All the provisions of the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume I, "General Construction," Standard Building Code, 1978 edition, are hereby adopted and made applicable to the area within the corporate limits of the city and that area within the city's extraterritorial area (herein referred to as the "environs"). The code is hereafter incorporated and made a part hereof as if it were set out in full herein, and three (3) copies of the code are on file with the city clerk. In the event any ordinance of the city is more stringent than the code hereinabove adopted and having been approved by the North Carolina Building Code Council, the ordinance or ordinances shall be applicable rather than the state code. In the event, however, provisions of the code are more stringent, then in such case the state code shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-3. - Residential building code adopted by reference. 
The North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code, Volume I-B, 1978 edition, are hereby adopted and made applicable to the area within the corporate limits of the city and the area within the city's extraterritorial area, (hereinafter referred to as the "environs"). The code is hereby incorporated and made a part hereof as if same were set out in full herein, and three (3) copies of the code are on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-4. - Manufactured housing code adopted by reference. 
The North Carolina Regulations for Mobile Homes and Modular Housing, 1979 edition, and the resolution of the North Carolina State Building Code Council of June 8, 1976, adopting the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards, are hereby adopted and made applicable to the area within the corporate limits of the city and the area within the city's extraterritorial area (hereinafter referred to as the "environs"). The code and regulations are hereby incorporated and made a part hereof as if they were set out in full herein, and three (3) copies of the code and regulations are on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-5. - State heating code adopted by reference. 
All provisions of the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume III, "Heating, Air Conditioning, Refrigeration and Ventilation," 1980 edition, are hereby adopted and made applicable to the area within the corporate limits of the city and that area within the city's extraterritorial area (hereinafter referred to as the "environs"). The code is hereafter incorporated and made a part hereof as if it were set out in full herein, and three (3) copies of the code are on file with the city clerk. In the event any ordinance of the city is more stringent than the code hereinabove adopted and having been approved by the North Carolina Building Code Council, the ordinance or ordinances shall be applicable rather than the state code. In the event, however, provisions of the code are more stringent, then in such case the state code shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-6. - Electrical code. 
(a)  Boundaries, code defined. There are hereby established electrical regulations for the city and the Guilford County portion of the city's extraterritorial area (hereafter referred to as the "environs"), which shall be known as the City of High Point, North Carolina and Environs Electrical Code (hereinafter referred to as the "electrical code" or this "code"). 
(b)  National code adopted. The National Electrical Code, 1984 edition, adopted by reference in North Carolina State Building Code, Volume IV, "Electrical" is hereby adopted and made applicable to the area within the corporate limits of the city and the area within the extraterritorial area of the city (hereinafter referred to as the "environs"). The code is hereby incorporated and made a part hereof as if it were set out in full herein, and three (3) copies of the code are on file with the city clerk. 
(c)  Installation standards. All installations shall be in conformity with the provisions of the laws of the state governing electrical wiring installations and materials and this section. 
(d)  Special rules. 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all outdoor lighting except where such lighting is owned and operated by a public utility company. Before any outdoor lighting is installed, plans shall be submitted to the electrical inspector for approval and a permit secured. All lighting shall be installed in accordance with this provision of this chapter, and the lights shall be located and maintained so as not to constitute a nuisance or interfere with the safety or general welfare of the public or adjoining property owners. All outdoor lighting shall conform to the National Electrical Code and this Code. 
(2)  Where the building construction is of brick veneer exterior, the electrical contractor shall install a suitable anchorage to the framework to support the service drop so that no strain will be applied to the brick veneer. The service drop bracket or fixture shall be secured by means of screws, bolts or lags. Nails shall not be used in any case. 
(e)  Five local option rules supplementing the National Electrical Code revised by the North Carolina State Building Code Council, June 13, 1978. The following rules are intended to apply to permanent buildings or structures covered by the National Electrical Code: 
(1)  All wiring on or in permanent buildings or structures located within a primary fire district shall utilize approved metal raceways or metal jacketed cables such as MI or type MC Metal—Clad (type A.C. not allowed) as permitted by the National Electrical Code. 
(2)  All permanent buildings, wherever situated, which are required to have an emergency system power source by the state building code shall have the service entrance conductors enclosed in approved raceway; and, in addition to the above, all portions of the required emergency lighting system for the entire building shall be wired in metal raceway, nonmetallic raceways encased in not less than two (2) inches of concrete, mineral-insulated metal-sheathed cable, or type MC cable as permitted by the state electrical code. The total area of any specific place of assembly shall include the area of balconies and the area of connecting rooms with movable partitions. 
Exceptions to Rules 1 and 2. Sound equipment, communication circuits. Class 2 and Class 3 remote control and signal circuits, and fire protection signaling circuits as permitted in the National Electrical Code. 
(3)  Each individual gasoline pump, dispenser, lighting standard or other electrical devices located where gasoline or other volatile flammable liquids or liquefied flammable gases are transferred to the fuel tank or any motor vehicle shall be supplied through an individual rigid metal conduit. The above is not intended to prohibit the consolidation of such individual conduits outside of the hazardous areas, or consolidation within an approved junction box flush with the dispensing inland surface. 
(4)  Service equipment shall not be located in any attic, clothes closet, kitchen storage cabinet, bathroom, toilet room, coal or trash bin. 
(5)  All panelboards which have spare pole spaces or space over-current devices and are set flush in masonry or finished walls shall be provided with at least one-inch approved raceway or other equivalent provision for future extension. Such raceways, when required, shall be installed to the basement, crawl space, accessible ceiling space or attic, or to a junction box in the ceiling or side wall at the ceiling line. 
(f)  Two or more switches or meters grouped at one location. Where two (2) or more switches or meters are grouped at one (1) location, each switch or meter outlet shall be permanently marked to show the section of building or apartment served. These markings shall be painted or stenciled. 
(g)  Liability for damage. This section shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for damages to person or property caused by any defect therein; nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein or the certificate of approval issued as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-7. - State plumbing code adopted by reference. 
All provisions of the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume II, "Plumbing," 1980 edition, are hereby adopted and made applicable to the area within the corporate limits of the city and the city's extraterritorial area (hereinafter referred to as the "environs"). The code is hereinafter incorporated and made a part hereof as if it were set out in full herein, and three (3) copies of the code are on file with the city clerk. In the event any ordinance of the city is more stringent than the code hereinabove adopted and having been approved by the North Carolina Building Code Council, the ordinance or ordinances shall be applicable rather than the state code. In the event, however, the provisions of the code are more stringent, then in such case the state code shall be followed. Exception: North Carolina Building Code Council approval for the use of bituminous fiber pipe for sewer. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-8. - Amendments to codes generally. 
Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference herein, which are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations referred to herein, shall be effective in the city at the time the amendments are filed with the city clerk or building inspector.  
Sec. 9-2-9. - Compliance with codes. 
(a)  All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed, reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished or moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards, and other provisions of either the North Carolina State Building Code, "General Construction," Volume I, or the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume I-B, "Residential," whichever is applicable, or of both if both are applicable. 
(b)  Every building or structure intended for human habitation, occupancy or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems or plumbing fixtures installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired or reconstructed in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the North Carolina Plumbing Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume II, "Plumbing"). 
(c)  All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment and appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the North Carolina Heating Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume III, "Heating"). 
(d)  All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall be erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the North Carolina Electrical Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume IV, "Electrical"). 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Secs. 9-2-10—9-2-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Inspections Division 
 
Sec. 9-2-21. - Organization of the division. 
The inspections division of the department of planning and development shall be under the supervision of the director of planning and development department and may consist of the following sections: 
(1)  Building inspections. 
(2)  Electrical inspections. 
(3)  Plumbing inspections. 
(4)  Mechanical inspections. 
(5)  Minimum code inspections. 
(6)  Zoning code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-22. - General duties of the division. 
It shall be the duty of the inspections division to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted herein, and to make all inspections necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of this chapter and the codes are being met. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-23. - Conflict of interest. 
No officer or employee of the inspections division shall be financially interested in the furnishings of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or any part thereof, or in the making of plans or specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of the building. No officer or employee of the inspections division shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-24. - Reports and records. 
The inspections division and each inspector shall keep complete and accurate records in convenient form of all applications received, permits issued, inspections and reinspections made, and all other work and activities of the inspection division. Periodic reports shall be submitted to the city council and to other agencies as required. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-25. - Inspection procedure. 
Inspection procedures for inspection of buildings shall be conducted in accordance with administrative regulations approved by the council and maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and the inspection division. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Secs. 9-2-26—9-2-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C - Enforcement 
 
Sec. 9-2-41. - Permits required. 
(a)  Building permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any building or other structure, or any part thereof, without a written permit therefor from the director of planning and development. 
(b)  Plumbing permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, a extension or general repair of any plumbing system without a written permit from the plumbing inspector. 
(c)  Heating-air conditioning permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any heating or cooling equipment system without a written permit from the heating-air conditioning inspector. 
(d)  Electrical permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment without a written permit from the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-42. - Application for permit. 
Written application shall be made for all permits required by this chapter, and shall be made on forms provided by the inspection division. Such application shall be made by the owner of the building or structure affected or by his authorized agent or representative, and, in addition to other information as may be required by the appropriate inspector to enable him to determine whether the permit applied for should be issued, shall show the following: 
(1)  Name, residence and business address of owner; 
(2)  Name, residence and business of authorized representative or agent, if any; and 
(3)  Name and address of the contractor, architect or engineer, if any, together with evidence that he has obtained a certificate from the appropriate state licensing board for such contractors, architect or engineer, if it be required from the work involved in the permit for which application is made. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-43. - Issuance of permit. 
When proper application for a permit has been made and the appropriate inspector is satisfied that the application and the proposed work comply with the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes, he shall issue a permit, upon payment of the proper fee or fees as hereinafter provided in section 9-6-47. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-44. - Revocation of permit. 
The appropriate inspector may revoke and require the return of any permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for such revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any material departure from the approved application, plans or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with proper orders of the inspector; for refusal or failure to comply with requirements of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing a permit. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-45. - Time limitation on validity of permit. 
All permits issued under this chapter shall expire by limitation six (6) months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has not been commenced. If after commencement the work is discontinued for a period of 12 months, the permit shall immediately expire. No work authorized by any permit which has expired shall thereafter be performed until a new permit has been secured. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-46. - Changes in work. 
After a permit has been issued, changes or deviations from the terms of the application and permit, or changes or deviations from the plans or specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter or of any regulatory code adopted herein, shall not be made until specific written approval of such changes or deviations has been obtained from the appropriate inspector. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-47. - Permit fees. 
Fees for building permits shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council, a schedule of which shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and the inspections division. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-48. - Plats to accompany application for building permit. 
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of each lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing, and the lines within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered, the existing and intended use of each building or part of a building, the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate, and such other information as may be necessary to enable the administrative officer to determine that the proposed structure and use of land will conform to the provisions of this title. A record of such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the administrative officer, and one (1) copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans shall have been approved by the administrative officer. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-49. - Issuance of building permits and certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  No excavation for foundation nor the erection, construction or structural alteration of any structure or part of a structure, nor occupancy of streets or alleys with building materials or temporary structures for construction purposes shall be undertaken until a permit therefor shall have been issued by the administrative officer. No such permit shall be issued before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no structure hereafter erected, structurally altered or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy has [been] issued by the administrative officer. 
(c)  A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a new building or for alteration of an existing building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within 10 days after the erection or alteration of such building or part shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this title. 
(d)  A certificate of occupancy for the use or occupancy of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land, or for a change in the use of an existing building, shall be applied for and issued before any such land shall be occupied or used, or such land or building changed in use; and such certificate shall be issued within 10 days after application has been made provided such proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this title. 
(e)  All permanent certificates of occupancy heretofore granted are hereby ratified, approved and validated. Any certificate of occupancy or permit hereafter issued for any legal nonconforming use as stipulated under chapter 9, and chapter 4, article C, "Zone Lots and Nonconformities," shall state that the use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter for the use district within which it is located. 
(f)  A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the administrative officer, and a copy shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
(g)  No fee shall be charged for an original certificate of occupancy as required herein; but for each copy of an original certificate, there shall be a charge of $1.00, which shall be remitted to the city treasurer by the issuing officer. 
(h)  No building located within the city or environs shall be erected, enlarged or undergo major repairs without public water and sewer service unless the use of private waste disposal and water facilities has been approved by the director of public services and the proposed facilities have been approved by the county health department. The director of public services shall permit such use where public water and/or sewer cannot be made available within a reasonable period of time. 
(i)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for occupancy, use, or change in use of building utilizing septic tanks for disposal of waste after February 2, 1960, without notification in writing from the county health department of its final approval of the septic tank installation. 
(Ord. No. 96-74, § 2, 12-12-96; Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-50. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety or general welfare. Where this article imposes greater restrictions upon the use of a building or land or upon the height, bulk or size of a building or structure or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this article shall govern. Where any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, or any easements, impose greater restrictions upon the use of a building or land, or upon the height, bulk or size of a building or structure, or require larger open spaces than are required under the regulations of this article, such provisions shall govern. 
(b)  All lawful structures on which construction has commenced prior to the effective date of application of zoning to the property upon which it is situated may be completed and used in accordance with the plans for which the structures were intended, provided construction shall be diligently pursued and completed within two (2) years from the effective date of application. For the purposes of this section, construction shall be considered to have commenced when footings are poured and in place. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Secs. 9-2-51—9-2-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE D - Fire Limits 
 
Sec. 9-2-71. - Establishment of primary fire district. 
The following boundaries describe the primary fire district limits: 
Beginning at a point 200 feet east of the east side of Johnson Street and 150 feet north of the north side of East Lexington Avenue; thence southerly along a line parallel to the east side of Johnson Street to a point 150 feet south of the south side of East Lexington Avenue; thence westerly along a line parallel to the south side of East Lexington Avenue to a point 150 feet east of the east side of North Main Street; thence southerly along a line parallel to the east side of North Main Street; to the south side of East Parkway; thence easterly from this point along the south side of East Parkway to the west side of North Hamilton Street; thence southerly from this point along the west side of North Hamilton Street to the south side of East Westwood Avenue; thence easterly along the line of the south side of East Westwood Avenue extended to a point 150 feet east of the east side of North Hamilton Street; thence southerly along a line parallel to the east side of North Hamilton Street to a point 150 feet north of the north side of East Kivett Drive; thence easterly along a line parallel to the north side of East Kivett Drive to a point 150 feet north of the dead end of East Washington Drive; thence easterly along a line parallel to East Washington Drive to the westerly side of North Centennial Avenue; thence southerly along a line parallel to the west side of North Centennial Avenue to the center line of the main line of the Southern Railroad right-of-way; thence easterly along the center line of the Southern Railroad main line right-of-way to a point 150 feet east of the east side of North Hamilton Street; thence southerly along a line parallel to the east side of South Hamilton Street to a point 150 feet south of the south side of East Russell Street; thence westerly along a line parallel to East Russell Street to the west side of South Hamilton Street; thence southerly along a line parallel to the east side of South Main Street to the north side of Springdale Avenue; thence westerly along the north side of Springdale Avenue to a point 150 feet west of the west side of South Main Street; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of South Main Street to a point 150 feet south of the south side of West Grimes Street; thence westerly along a line parallel to the south side of West Grimes Street to a point 150 feet west of the west side of South Elm Street; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of South Elm Street to the north side of West Russell Street; thence westerly along the north side of West Russell Street to a point 250 feet west of the west side of South Elm Street; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of South Elm Street to a point 150 feet south of the south side of West Green Street; thence westerly along a line parallel to the south side of West Green Drive to the east side of Dalton Street; thence northerly along the east side of Dalton Street to the north side of West Kivett Drive; thence from this point northerly along a straight line to a point 200 feet west of the west side of Lindsay Street and 150 feet south of the south side of English Road; thence westerly along a line parallel to the south side of English Road to a point 150 feet west of the west side of Chestnut Drive; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of Chestnut Drive to a point 150 feet north of the north side of English Road; thence easterly along a line parallel to the north side of English Road to a point 150 feet west of the west side of Pine Street; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of Pine Street to a point 150 feet north of the north side of Church Street; thence easterly along a line parallel to the north side of Church Street to the east side of North Elm Street; thence northerly along the east side of North Elm Street to the north side of West Westwood Avenue; thence from this point northerly along a straight line to the northeast corner at the intersection of West Ray and North Elm Street; thence from this point easterly along the north side of West Ray Street to a point 200 feet west to the west side of North Main Street; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of North Main Street to a point 150 feet north of the north side of Sunset Drive; thence easterly along the line parallel to Sunset Drive to a point 150 feet west to the west side of North Main Street; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of North Main Street to a point 150 feet south of the south side of West Lexington Avenue; thence westerly along a line parallel to the south side of West Lexington Avenue to a point 400 feet west of the west side of North Main Street; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of North Main Street to a point 150 feet north of the north side of West Lexington Avenue; thence easterly along a line parallel to the north side of West and East Lexington Avenues to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-72. - Establishment of secondary fire district. 
A secondary fire district is hereby established for the areas described in section 9-2-71 and the regulations established by [this] section 9-2-72 applicable thereto shall be in full force and effect within this district from June, 1957. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-73. - Designation of secondary fire district. 
The secondary fire district(s) shall be as follows: 
(1)  North Main Street district. Beginning at a point 150 feet north of the north side of West Lexington Avenue and 150 feet west of the west side of North Main Street; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of North Main Street to the south side of Westchester Drive 150 feet west of the west side of North Main Street; thence easterly along the south side of Westchester Drive and Eastchester Drive to a point 150 feet east of the east side of North Main Street; thence southerly along a line parallel to the east side of North Main Street to a point 150 feet north of the north side of East Lexington Avenue and 150 feet east of the east side of North Main Street; thence westerly along a line parallel to the north side of East and West Lexington Avenues to the point of beginning. 
(2)  English Road district. Beginning at a point 150 feet west of the west side of Chestnut Drive and 150 feet north of the north side of English Road; thence westerly along a line parallel to the north side of English Road; thence southerly along the east side of Westchester Drive to a point 150 feet south of the south side of English Road; thence from this point along a line 150 feet from the south side of and parallel to English Road to a point on a line extended from the west side of Boyer Street; thence following the line of Boyer Street extended southeasterly to the center line of the Southern Railroad right-of-way; thence from this point northeasterly along the center line of the Southern Railroad right-of-way to the east side of Lindsay Street; thence from this point northerly along a straight line to a point 200 feet west of the west side of Lindsay Street and 150 feet south of the south side of English Road; thence westerly along a line parallel to the south side of English Road to a point 150 feet west of the west side of Chestnut Drive; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of Chestnut Drive to the point of beginning. 
(3)  East Green Street district. Beginning at a point 150 feet north of the north side of East Green Drive and 150 feet east of the east side of South Hamilton Street; thence easterly along a line parallel to the north side of East Green Drive to the west side of East Green Drive; thence southerly along the west side of Thissell Street to the south side of East Green Drive; thence westerly along the south side of East Green Drive to the west side of Thissell Street; thence southerly along the west side of Thissell Street to a point 150 feet south of the south side of East Green Drive; thence westerly along a line parallel to the south side of South Hamilton Street and 150 feet south of the south side of East Green Drive thence northerly along a line parallel to the east side of South Hamilton Street to the point of beginning. 
(4)  South Main Street district. Beginning at a point north of the north side of Springdale Avenue and 150 feet east of the east side of South Main Street; thence southerly along a line parallel to the east side of South Main Street to the north side of U.S. 29-70 and 150 feet east of the east side of South Main Street; thence westerly along the north side of U.S. 29-79 to a point 150 feet west of the west side of South Main Street; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of South Main Street to the north side of Springdale Avenue and 150 feet west of the west side of South Main Street; thence easterly along the north side of Springdale Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(5)  East Lexington and Centennial Avenue district. Beginning at a point 150 feet west of the west side of Centennial Street and 150 feet south of the south side of East Lexington Avenue; thence easterly along a line parallel to the south side of East Lexington Avenue to a point 150 feet east of the east side of Fifth Street and 150 feet south of the south side of East Lexington Avenue; thence northerly along a line parallel to the east side of Fifth Street to the north of East Lexington Avenue; thence easterly along the north side of East Lexington Avenue to a point 650 feet east of the northeast corner of the intersection of Centennial Street and East Lexington Avenue; thence northerly along a line parallel to the east side of Centennial Street to a point 400 feet north of the north side of East Lexington Avenue and 600 feet east of the east side of Centennial Street; thence 600 feet westerly to the east side of Centennial Street to a point 650 feet north of the northeast corner at the intersection of Centennial Street and East Lexington Avenue; thence southerly along the east side of Centennial Street to a point 150 feet north of the north side of East Lexington Avenue; thence westerly along a line parallel to the north side of East Lexington Avenue to a point 150 feet north of the north side of East Lexington Avenue and 150 feet west of the west side of Centennial Street; thence southerly along a line parallel to the west side of Centennial Street to the point of beginning. 
(6)  Montlieu and East Lexington Avenue district. Beginning at a point at the northeast corner of the city limits 150 feet north of the north side of East Lexington Avenue and 400 feet east of the east side of Jensen Street; thence westerly along a line parallel to the north side of East Lexington Avenue to a point 150 feet west of the west side of Jensen Street; thence southerly to the south side of East Lexington Avenue; thence 13 degrees 03 minutes east 173 feet to a point; thence south 52 degrees 57 minutes 30 seconds west 109.44 feet to a point; thence south 61 degrees 02 minutes east 217.47 feet to the east side of Montlieu Avenue; thence along a straight line to a point 350 feet southwest of the southwest corner at the intersection of Montlieu Avenue and Gordon Street; thence 350 feet from this point northerly along the east side of Gordon Street; thence from this point easterly to the city limits line 150 feet east of the east side of Gordon Street; from this point northerly along the city limits line to the point of beginning. 
(7)  East Washington Street district. Beginning at a point 150 feet north of the north side of East Washington Street and the west side of North Centennial Street; thence easterly along a line parallel to the north side of East Washington Drive to the west side of Gaylord Street; thence southerly along the west side of Gaylord Street extended along a straight line to the center line of the main line of the Southern Railroad right-of-way; thence westerly along the center line of the Southern Railroad main line right-of-way to a point at the west side of North Centennial Street; thence northerly along a line parallel to the west side of North Centennial Street to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-74. - Building restrictions in secondary fire district. 
Building restrictions in the secondary fire district shall be as follows: 
(1)  All permitted uses in the present fire limits. 
(2)  Within this area one- and two-family and multifamily residences in instances not provided for in sections 9-2-71 and 9-2-72 and this section 9-2-74 may be repaired or altered when approved by the authority having jurisdiction for code enforcement and only when no fire hazards will be created or the repairs or alterations will not cause the spread of fire. 
(3)  No building of wood frame construction which has been damaged by fire, flood, storm, earthquake, riot or act of God, in an amount equal to one-half (½) its floor area or 50 percent of its then reproductive value, shall be repaired or allowed to stand. 
(4)  Nothing in these provisions shall prevent an owner or tenant from making the necessary repairs to any building, in order to ensure the health and safety of its occupants when not in excess of 50 percent of its reproductive value at time of the repairs. 
(5)  All other buildings within the secondary fire district shall conform to the requirements of the fire limits, except the above mentioned exceptions. 
(6)  All buildings erected or repaired within the secondary fire district shall conform to the requirements of the North Carolina Building Code and the building code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Secs. 9-2-75—9-2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE E - Minimum Housing Code[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , adopted June 5, 2017, amended Article E in its entirety. Former Article E pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 96-28, §§ 1—6, adopted May 5, 1996; Ord. No. 96-74, § 2, adopted December 12, 1996; Ord. No. 6166/04-63, §§ 2—7, adopted August 19, 2004; and Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, adopted May 16, 2016. 
 
Sec. 9-2-91. - How article known and cited. 
This article shall be known as the "Minimum Housing Code," may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this article." 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-92. - Findings; intent. 
Pursuant to G.S. 160A-441 and 160A-443, the city council hereby finds and declares the existence and occupation of dwellings within the city limits that are unfit for human habitation and inimical to the welfare, and dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and morals of, the residents of the city, and that a public necessity exists for repairing, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, in the manner herein provided, as provided by North Carolina State General Statutes. The city finds that there exists in the city, dwellings that are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-93. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to arrest, remedy, and prevent and eliminate the decay and deterioration of dwellings for the protection of the life, health, welfare, safety and property of the general public and the owners and occupants of dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-94. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article are applicable to all dwellings within the city limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, as now or hereafter fixed. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-95. - Definitions. 
Certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this article. Terms, words, phrases, and their derivatives used, but not specifically defined in this article, shall have the meaning specifically defined in the North Carolina State Building Code, and any terms, words, phrases, and their derivatives used, but not specifically defined in either this article or the North Carolina State Building Code, shall have the meaning specifically defined in the Development Ordinance. 
(a)  Abandon shall mean an owner vacating or closing a dwelling for more than one (1) year and failing to substantially repair the dwelling, enter into a contract for repairing the dwelling, or maintain the premises or dwelling in a secure manner in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Accessory structure shall mean any building or structure used or intended to be used in conjunction with a dwelling, whether attached to or detached from a dwelling, including, but not limited to, sheds, storage buildings, outbuildings, carports and garages, and any fence. 
(c)  Area: 
1.  As applied to the dimensions of a building, shall mean the maximum horizontal prospected area of the building at grade. 
2.  As applied to the dimensions of a room, shall mean the total square footage of floor area between finished walls. 
(d)  Basement shall mean a story with 50 percent or more of its cubical contents below finished yard grade. 
(e)  Building shall mean that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
(f)  Ceiling height shall be the clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. 
(g)  Demolish shall mean the demolition and removal of the entire building leaving the premises free and clear of any debris and without holes or pockets which may retain water. 
(h)  Dwelling shall mean any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home, or portion thereof, which is used, or designed or intended to be used for human habitation, including living, sleeping, cooking, eating or any combination thereof, and shall include accessory structures. A dwelling does not include manufactured homes or mobile homes which are used solely for a seasonal vacation purposes. 
(i)  Exit shall mean a clear and unobstructed way of departure from the interior of a building to the exterior at street or grade level. 
(j)  Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the inspector. 
(k)  Fire damage shall mean an action caused by a fire other than smoke damage. 
(l)  Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable refuse resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, including a minimum amount of liquid necessarily incidental thereto. 
(m)  Habitable room shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, communicating corridors, closets or storage spaces. 
(n)  Infestation shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any harmful insects, rodents or other pests. 
(o)  Inspector shall mean the director of community development and housing or the inspector duly appointed by the director of community development and housing to enforce the provisions of this article. The inspector is the public officer as defined in G.S. 160A-442. 
(p)  Occupant shall mean any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling or rooming unit. 
(q)  Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
(r)  Parties in interest shall mean all individuals, associations, partnerships, corporations, and others who have monetary interest in a dwelling and any who are in possession or control thereof either as agent of the owner, as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. 
(s)  Pier shall mean a masonry support of at least eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches of solid masonry extending from the ground and footing to and supporting the building or portion thereof. Pier sizes and spacing shall conform to the specifications of the North Carolina State Residential Building Code. 
(t)  Plumbing shall mean the water supply system, the sanitary and storm drainage system, the vent system, the fixtures and traps and shall include their respective connections, devices, appliances and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises. 
(u)  Premises shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the dwelling, building, or structure thereon or any part thereof, except land occupied by streets, alleys or public thoroughfares. 
(v)  Public authority shall mean any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or State relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning dwellings in the city. 
(w)  Rooming house shall mean any dwelling, or part thereof, in which the owner or occupant shall rent or offer for rent accommodation for living and sleeping purposes to three (3) or more persons, none of whom is husband, wife, son, daughter, mother, father, sister or brother (or in a step or in-law kinship, with respect to the six (6) last-named relationships) of the owner or occupant renting or offering for rent the dwelling, or part thereof. 
(x)  Rooming unit shall mean any room for let within a rooming house 
(y)  Sagging shall mean the amount of deflection occurring over a span between two (2) supports. A deflection of L/240 and greater shall be deemed as a structural defect. 
(z)  Seriously shall mean that the amount of damage occurring shall be sufficient to decrease the designed strength of the structural member. 
(aa)  Tenant shall mean any person who alone or jointly or severally with others occupies a dwelling under a lease or holds a legal tenancy in a building. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-96. - Public officer. 
Pursuant to G.S. 160A-443, the director of community development and housing is hereby designated as the public officer to exercise, by and through his duly appointed inspector, the powers prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-97. - Consulting agencies. 
The inspector shall have authority to request advice and assistance of a High Point Planning and Zoning Commission, Housing Authority of High Point, High Point Fire and Police Department, Guilford County Health Department, Davidson County Health Department, Forsyth County Health Department, Randolph County Health Department, or any other public authority the inspector may deem appropriate, in exercising the powers of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-98. - Powers. 
The inspector shall determine that dwellings are unfit for human habitation if the inspector finds a violation of the standards and requirements of fitness set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-99. - Administrative liability. 
Except as may otherwise be provided by North Carolina statute, local law or ordinance, no officer, inspector or employee of the city charged with the enforcement of this article shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. No person who institutes or assists in the prosecution of a criminal proceeding under this article shall be liable to damages hereunder unless he acted with malice and without reasonable grounds for believing that the person accused was guilty of any unlawful act or omission. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec 9-2-100. - Minimum standards. 
The following shall constitute the minimum standards and requirements for dwellings and shall be pertinent in determining fitness for human habitation. 
(a)  Minimum services and facilities: 
1.  The premises must be used and maintained individually without trespass upon adjoining premises. 
2.  Utilities and other facilities shall be independent for each premises. An exception may be permitted for common gas and water service to two (2) adjacent premises where: 
a.  The location of the common service line does not adversely affect the future use of the premises, and 
b.  The common service line is protected by a permanent easement agreement to assure continued maintenance, and 
c.  Individual shut-off valves are provided so that independent service is assured, and 
d.  Ownership of the common portion of the service line remains with the serving utility. 
3.  Each dwelling shall contain provisions for each of the following: 
a.  A continuing supply of safe and portable water. 
b.  Sanitary facilities and a safe method of sewage disposal. 
c.  Heating facilities adequate for healthful and comfortable living conditions. 
d.  Domestic hot water. 
e.  Electricity for lighting and for equipment used in the dwelling. 
(b)  Access: 
1.  Access to the premises. 
a.  The premises shall be provided with vehicular access to the premises by an abutting public or private street. Private streets shall be protected by a permanent easement for ingress and egress. 
b.  The width and construction of the required street and provisions for its continued maintenance shall provide safe and suitable vehicular access to and from the premises at all times. 
2.  Access to the rear yard. 
a.  Each dwelling shall be provided with a means of access to the rear yard, for safety. 
b.  For a row dwelling, the access shall be by means of an alley, easement, open passage through the dwelling, or other acceptable means. 
(c)  Premises maintenance: 
1.  Building and structure. 
a.  Exterior surfaces, not inherently resistant to deterioration, shall be treated with a protective coating, such as paint or other suitable preservative, with sufficient frequency to prevent deterioration. 
b.  Floors, walls, ceilings, and fixtures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
2.  Open areas. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant water. 
3.  Infestation. The premises and all dwellings shall be maintained free of infestation. 
4.  Garbage and refuse. There shall be adequate sanitary facilities and methods provided and used for the storage, handling, and disposal of garbage and refuse. 
(d)  Minimum standards: 
1.  General. Each dwelling shall have at least two (2) habitable rooms of which one (1) shall be a bedroom. In addition, a bathroom shall be provided within. Dwellings designed as efficiency apartments may have one (1) habitable room, with a bathroom if the minimum space requirement is met. 
2.  Minimum standards objective. 
a.  Each dwelling shall be provided with space necessary to assure suitable living, sleeping, cooking, and dining accommodations, adequate storage, laundry and sanitary facilities and laundry when required. 
b.  The area occupied by a stair or closets shall not be included in the determination of required room sizes. 
3.  Minimum space requirements. 
a.  Living or principal room shall not be less than 100 square feet. 
b.  The first bedroom not less than 100 square feet. 
c.  All other bedrooms not less than 70 square feet. 
d.  Kitchen and dining room combination shall be not less than 100 square feet. 
e.  Efficiency apartment shall not be less than 200 square feet. 
4.  Minimum space requirements for occupancy. 
a.  At least 150 square feet of habitable floor space for the first occupant. 
b.  At least 100 square feet for each of the next three (3) occupants. 
c.  At least 50 square feet for each additional occupant. 
Note: Children under four (4) years of age shall not be counted. 
(e)  Habitable rooms: 
1.  Every habitable room shall be not less than seven (7) feet wide in any part and shall contain not less than 70 square feet of net floor area. 
2.  Habitable rooms shall have a clear height of not less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches for at least 50 percent of the net floor area. Except a kitchen can have a minimum height of seven (7) feet. 
3.  That portion of any room where the ceiling height is less than five (5) feet shall not be considered as required floor area. 
4.  A basement may be used as a habitable room if it meets the following criteria: 
a.  Finished rooms in basements or below grade intended for year round occupancy are considered habitable rooms and shall comply with the same standards as rooms above grade. 
b.  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface run-off water and are insulated against dampness and condensation. 
c.  The total window area in each room is equal to at least the window area sizes prescribed herein for habitable rooms (see subsection (g), light and ventilation requirements). 
d.  The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the area prescribed herein for habitable rooms (see subsection (e), light and ventilation requirements), except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the inspector. Habitable rooms used primarily for the purpose of sleeping that do not meet the requirements for openable window and which have adequate approved ventilation shall have two (2) exit doors located as remotely as possible from each other. 
5.  Toilet and bathing facilities shall be enclosed. 
6.  Access shall be provided to required toilet rooms without going outside building or habitable space. 
7.  Interior access shall be provided to all rooms within a dwelling without passing through a public space. Rooming houses are exempt from this requirement. 
8.  Doors shall be provided at all doorways leading to bedrooms, toilet rooms, and bathrooms and all rooms adjoining a public space. 
9.  Exterior doors shall have entrance locks. 
10.  All exterior doors shall be weathertight. 
(f)  Rooming house requirements: 
1.  Lavatory facilities shall be in good working condition and consist of one (1) flush water closet, one (1) washbasin and one (1) bathtub or shower for every six (6) persons residing in the rooming house. 
2.  Access shall be provided from any rooming unit to lavatory facilities without entering another dwelling, rooming unit or non-conditioned area. 
3.  A washbasin and bathtub or shower shall be provided and shall be properly connected and supplied with hot and cold running water. 
4.  A lavatory not located in the basement shall be provided. 
5.  Walls, floors and ceilings shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
6.  All garbage shall be promptly disposed of in a sanitary condition. 
7.  In rooming houses with fossil fuel heating systems exceeding 250,000 B.T.U., the furnace room shall be enclosed with material having at least a one-hour fire protection rating. A smoke detector shall be installed in every furnace room. 
8.  A smoke detector shall be installed in all public hallways within fifteen (15) feet of each rooming unit. Primary source of power for detectors shall be taken from the dwelling electrical current. 
(g)  Light and ventilation requirements: 
1.  Natural lighting, when required, shall be provided by means of windows, glazed doors, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or by any combination thereof. The area of glazing material shall be sufficient to transmit an amount of light equal to that transmitted by the required area of clear glass. 
2.  For the purpose of providing adequate light, each habitable room shall have a total glazed area of not less than six (6) square feet. 
3.  Operable screened window must be three (3) percent of the total floor area or 50 percent of the existing window area, whichever is greater. 
4.  All outside windows and doors opening to the outside used for ventilation purposes shall be adequately screened. All dwellings where approved permanent conditioned air is provided shall be excluded from this requirement. 
a.  Screens shall not be permanently fixed to sash, frames or jamb. 
b.  All screen frames shall be removable for repair. 
5.  All moveable sash windows shall be lockable. 
6.  An alcove opening off a habitable room may be included as part of that room in determining the window area required provided that a portion of the common wall between the habitable room and the alcove is open and unobstructed. 
7.  For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements, any room may be counted with an adjoining room when one-half (½) of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed. 
8.  Windows shall be weathertight; there shall be no broken glass. 
9.  A toilet room which contains more than one (1) flush unit shall have an operable window unless served by an approved ventilation system. 
10.  Every public hall and inside stairway in every dwelling shall be adequately lighted at all times to permit safe passage. 
(h)  Exit requirements: 
1.  Each dwelling shall have two (2) exits located as remotely as possible. 
2.  At least one (1) exit shall be side hinged. 
3.  One (1) exit door shall be at least 30 inches wide and six (6) feet, six (6) inches high. 
4.  All exit doors shall be easily operable. 
5.  There shall be a safe, continuous, and unobstructed exit from interior of building to the exterior at street or grade level. 
6.  Those buildings meeting the requirements of the North Carolina Building Code exempting two (2) exits shall be exempted from the requirements of this section. 
(i)  Plumbing requirements: 
1.  All new plumbing shall be installed in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code. Any repair or replacement of existing plumbing shall be done in accordance with said plumbing code when, in the opinion of the chief plumbing inspector, it is practical or otherwise vital to the interest of health and sanitation. 
2.  All plumbing shall be connected to the city water and sanitary sewer system where necessary as determined by the director of public services department or the department of health. 
3.  All fixtures shall be operable. 
4.  There shall be no broken water closet bowls. 
5.  Water closet shall not be loose or leaking. 
6.  No leaks shall be in shower stall floor. 
7.  There shall be running water installed inside each dwelling. 
8.  There shall be adequate separate facilities for furnishing running a hot and cold water to each tub or shower, lavatory, kitchen sink, and clothes washer connection when required. 
9.  There shall be separate toilet facilities for each dwelling. 
10.  All water piping shall be protected from freezing by proper insulation. 
11.  Sewer and water lines shall be properly supported and no lines shall be broken or leaking. 
12.  Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall be so constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to water and so maintained to permit such floor to be readily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(j)  Heating requirements: 
1.  All new heating, ventilation and air conditioning shall be installed in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code, relating to H.V.A.C. Any repair or replacement of existing H.V.A.C. shall be done in accordance with said H.V.A.C. code when, in the opinion of the chief H.V.A.C inspector it is practical or otherwise vital to the interest of dangerous and hazardous conditions. 
2.  Every building and every dwelling shall be weatherproof and capable of being adequately heated. The heating equipment in every dwelling shall be maintained in a safe workable condition. 
3.  A heating system shall be provided by the owner. In an occupied building the heating system shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition and capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments to a temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit. 
For unoccupied buildings no certificate of compliance shall be issued until issuance of a permit for a heating system, and said system has been inspected and found to be properly installed. 
4.  Hand-fired equipment shall have a check damper and turn damper installed in the smoke pipe unless it is included as an integral part of the heating unit. The turn damper shall have not less than 20 percent free opening when in closed position. 
5.  All applicable heating equipment installed on the premises shall be listed by a National Testing Laboratory accepted by the State of North Carolina labeled and installed in accordance with the provisions of the North Carolina State Building Code. 
6.  Liquid fuel stored on the premises shall be stored in accordance with the provisions of the North Carolina State Building Code. 
7.  There shall be no loose bricks in chimneys. 
8.  There shall be no holes in flues. 
9.  There shall be no hanging masonry chimneys. 
10.  Thimbles shall be grouted in tightly. 
11.  Thimbles shall not be broken. 
12.  Thimbles shall be high enough for stovepipe to rise one-quarter (¼) inch per foot minimum. 
13.  Hearth, where required, shall be at least 16 inches deep (measure to face material) and six (6) inches beyond each side of fireplace opening. 
14.  If fireplace opening is closed, it shall be a masonry closure. 
15.  Stove shall be within six (6) feet of thimble serving it. 
16.  No combustible material shall be within 18 inches of stovepipe. 
17.  Solid fuel burning stovepipe shall be not less than 24 gauge. Joints shall be fastened with three (3) screws. 
18.  No stovepipe shall be through combustible walls. 
19.  In dwellings with central heat, fossil fuel heating system exceeding 250,000 B.T.U., more than two (2) adjoining heating systems or boiler heating system exceeding 10 horsepower, the furnace room shall be enclosed with material having a one-hour firewall. 
20.  Solid fuel appliances require an approved-type mat, liquid fuel appliances shall be installed per manufacturer's specification. 
21.  Liquid fuel storage tanks shall not be more than nine (9) feet above the surrounding grade. 
(k)  Electrical requirements: 
1.  There shall be at least two (2) duplex receptacles installed in each habitable room. 
2.  There shall be a lighting fixture controlled at the fixture or by wall switch installed in each habitable room, bathroom, laundry and furnace rooms. A third receptacle outlet controlled by a wall switch may be substituted for a fixture. 
3.  There shall be a wall switch controlled lighting fixture installed at each outside entrance, and in stairways controlled by three-way switches. 
4.  If the dwelling is wired for an electrical range and also an electric water heater or an electric clothes dryer, the electric service shall be a minimum of 100 amps. 
5.  Fuses shall be properly sized to match the wire sizes to prevent overloading and damaging the wire. Type "S" fuses, (fuse-stats), shall be used. 
6.  Stationary or fixed appliances shall be provided a duplex receptacle. 
7.  Extension cords used for lamps and accessories shall be limited to six (6) feet in length. 
8.  All switches, fixtures, and receptacles shall be in safe operable condition. 
9.  All new wiring to be installed shall be in accordance with the N.C. Electrical Code that is in effect at the time the work is done. 
10.  Within 15 feet of every bedroom there shall be provided an approved listed smoke detector installed as per the manufacture's recommendation and listing. 
11.  Any repair or replacement of existing wiring shall be done in accordance with said electrical code when, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, it is reasonably practical or otherwise vital to the health and safety in order to eliminate a dangerous and hazardous condition. 
12.  Where electric heat is installed in an existing dwelling, the requirements of the North Carolina State Electrical Code shall be met, including insulation minimums in flooring, walls, and ceilings. 
(l)  Structural requirements: 
1.  Foundation. 
a.  No footing shall be exposed. 
b.  Beneath the building, there shall be firm ground, reasonably dry ground, no soggy ground, no water standing, no water running under building unless designed otherwise. 
c.  There shall be sound footings, with adequate bearing. 
d.  There shall be sound piers with no loose mortar. 
e.  There shall be no piers in which a plumb line from top center falls outside the middle one-third (?) of the pier base. 
f.  There shall be no isolated solid masonry piers exceeding in height 10 times the least dimension of the pier. 
g.  There shall be no wood stiff-knee piers unless pressure treated or equivalent and bearing on solid masonry raised one (1) concrete block above ground level. 
h.  The space between the ground and the first floor of every dwelling which is enclosed shall be underpinned with masonry to substantially weather-proof and rodent-proof with adequate access opening of 18 by 24 inches with a door. Curtain walls shall have foundation vents installed at a minimum on one (1) square foot for every 250 square feet of crawl space when signs of moisture damage exist. 
2.  Floors. 
a.  There shall be no seriously rotted, or termite damaged joists and sills. 
b.  There shall be no fire damaged charred wood. 
c.  There shall be no broken, overloaded, or sagging girders. 
d.  There shall be no broken, overloaded, or sagging sills. 
e.  Sills shall be reasonably level. 
f.  Sills shall be properly and sufficiently supported. 
g.  There shall be no broken joists. 
h.  Any floor joists which show signs of weakness or disrepair shall be properly replaced with lumber comparable to at least the same nominal dimension and grade as the original joist. 
i.  Flooring shall be weathertight without holes or excessive cracks which permit air penetration into rooms. 
j.  Flooring shall be reasonably smooth, and not rotten, fire damaged or worn through. 
k.  There shall be no loose flooring or floor covering. 
l.  The floor shall be reasonably level. 
m.  When any new flooring is to be installed there shall be a minimum of five-eighths (?) inch plywood underlayment (or equivalent) or three-quarters (¾) inch tongue and groove board flooring over the floor joists. 
3.  Walls, exterior. 
a.  There shall be no wall in which plumb line from top center of studs falls outside the bottom plate at any point along wall unless by design. 
b.  No studs shall be seriously rotted or termite damaged. 
c.  There shall be no fire damaged charred wood. 
d.  There shall be no broken structural members. 
e.  All siding shall be weathertight, with no holes or excessive cracks, or rotted boards. 
f.  There shall be no loose siding. 
4.  Walls, interior. 
a.  Interior wall finish shall be free of holes. 
b.  There shall be no wall in which a plumb line from top center of studs falls outside of bottom plate unless by design. 
c.  There shall be no loose plaster, loose boards, or other loose wall materials susceptible to falling. 
d.  There shall be no cardboard, newspaper, or similar highly combustible wall finish in a dwelling. 
e.  There shall be no seriously rotted, termite damaged, or broken studs. 
f.  There shall be no fire damaged charred wood. 
5.  Ceilings. 
a.  There shall be no seriously rotted, broken, sagging, or fire damaged joists or improperly supported ends. 
b.  Any ceiling joists which show signs of disrepair shall be properly replaced with lumber comparable to at least the same nominal dimension and grade as the original joist. 
c.  There shall be no holes. 
d.  There shall be no loose plaster, boards, sheet rock, or other ceiling finish susceptible to falling. 
e.  There shall be no cardboard, newspaper, or other similar highly combustible finishes in a dwelling. 
f.  There shall be an attic access provided with a minimum size of 14 x 24 inches. 
6.  Roofs. 
a.  There shall be no seriously rotted, broken rafters or improperly supported ends. 
b.  There shall be no fire damaged charred wood. 
c.  Rafters shall be properly braced and tied. Maximum spacing of collar beams shall be five (5) feet on center, or other approved methods of bracing roof may be used. 
d.  Attics ventilation is required only when signs of heat or moisture damage exist. The net opening shall be at least 1/150 of the attic floor space. Obstructions caused by screens and louvers must be subtracted to obtain the net area. The net opening must be cut to 1/300 if 50 percent of the ventilation is in the upper portion of the attic. Alternate methods as specified in Volume 1b, Section 25, may be used. 
e.  There shall be no loose, or seriously rotted sheathing. 
f.  There shall be no fire damaged charred sheathing. 
g.  There shall be no loose roof covering, nor holes, nor leaks. 
h.  There shall be a minimum of Class "C" roof covering; except in the number one Fire District a Class "A" or "B" covering is required. 
i.  There shall be proper metal flashing at walls or chimney. 
j.  Not more than two (2) roof coverings may be installed. 
7.  Porches, exterior stairs and steps. 
a.  Floor, ceiling, and roof shall be equal to requirements set forth above, except sills, joists, and floors need not be level if providing drainage of floors; floors need not be weather-tight; ceiling height may be seven (7) feet; and attic shall be vented. 
b.  Posts, railings and guards shall not be seriously rotted or termite damaged and shall be sufficiently anchored. 
c.  Every porch, terrace or entrance platform located at least 36 inches above adjacent finished grade shall be equipped with railings not less than 30 inches high. Pickets shall be installed on railings and hand railings with no more than a six-inch spacing. Handrails continuous on all open sides of stairs exceeding 36 inches in height leading to a platform, porch or terrace, shall be installed at least 30 inches high. 
d.  Enclosed stairs exceeding a rise of 36 inches shall have at least a single handrail. 
8.  Interior stairs and steps. 
a.  Stairs and steps shall be free of holes, grooves and cracks large enough to constitute an accidental hazard. 
b.  Interior steps and stairs more than 36 inches of rise shall have rails not less than 30 inches measured vertically from the nose of the treads to top of the rail. 
c.  Every rail shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good condition. 
d.  No flight of stairs shall be settled more than one (1) inch out of its intended position or pulled away from supporting or adjacent buildings. 
e.  There shall be no rotting, sagging, or deteriorating supports. 
f.  Every stair riser shall be reasonably uniform and shall not exceed eight and one-quarter (8 ¼) inches in height; treads shall be at least one and one-eighth (1 ?) inch thick and shall be securely fastened in position. Every wood stair riser in excess of 36 inches in width shall have an additional "stringer," each "stringer" to be spaced not more than 30 inches apart. The minimum depth of treads shall be 10 ¼ inches including the "nosing." 
9.  Accessory structures. 
a.  Accessory structures shall either be maintained in a safe and substantial condition or demolished and removed. 
b.  Exterior surfaces, not inherently resistant to deterioration, shall be treated with protective coating, such as paint or other suitable preservative, and with sufficient frequency to prevent deterioration. 
c.  Any electrical, plumbing, heating, or other utilities furnished to an accessory structure shall be installed in accordance with applicable code provisions; and maintained in a safe condition. 
d.  Every accessory structure shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and free from physical hazards and other matter detrimental to the public health. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-101. - Occupants. 
(a)  Occupant's responsibilities. Every occupant of a dwelling shall : 
1.  Keep the part of a dwelling which he occupies and controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
2.  Keep all required plumbing and other fixtures in a clean and sanitary condition, and exercise reasonable care in the use and operation thereof. 
3.  Be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests whenever said dwelling is the only dwelling or portion thereof, infested and the owner has provided a reasonably insect-proof and adequately rodent-proof dwelling. 
4.  Dispose of all garbage and other refuse in an approved garbage receptacle; when approved garbage receptacles are not provided by the landlord, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to provide adequate approved garbage receptacles. 
5.  Not place on the premises any material which causes a fire hazard or otherwise endangers the health or safety of any occupants of such dwelling; not place in storage or on the premises any furniture, auto parts, junk equipment or material which harbors insects, rodents or other pests. 
6.  Not occupy any dwelling unless running water is provided to the required plumbing fixtures. 
7.  Not place within any building for use therein any oil, kerosene or gas fired portable heater to be used as the primary source for heating or cooking. 
8.  Not place on the premises for the use thereon any heating or cooking unit which constitutes a fire hazard. If the occupant provides heating or cooking equipment, the occupant shall be responsible for its proper installation and maintenance. 
9.  Not cause such damage to the dwelling let to him as to make the same unfit for human habitation. 
10.  No occupant of a rooming house shall heat or cook food or permit the heating or cooking of food within his rooming unit. 
(b)  Owner's responsibilities. Any owner remains liable for violations of duties imposed upon him by this Article even though: 
1.  An obligation is also imposed on the occupant; or 
2.  The owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required equipment or of complying with this Article. 
(c)  Enforcement against occupant. Upon discovering a violation of this section, the inspector shall have the power to order the correction of any such violation within 48 hours from date of notice thereof; in the event that the occupant fails to make such corrections, then the inspector shall set a hearing pursuant to the procedures of section 9-11—105, and thereafter may again order the correction of any such violation within 48 hours from date of service of the order upon the occupant or the inspector may order the dwelling to be vacated within a reasonable time. The inspector may pursue any other civil or criminal action as the inspector deems reasonably necessary in order to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Safety of occupants. In order to protect the health and safety of occupants of a dwelling, the owner shall, within 48 hours after being notified in writing by the occupant or the city, repair and replace any: 
1.  Broken, burst, frozen or inoperable plumbing pipe or fixtures; 
2.  Exposed or unsafe wiring; 
3.  Unsafe and/or dangerous cooking or heating equipment provided by the owner; and 
4.  Fuel storage tanks and/or supply lines provided by the owner which are leaking, improperly supported or dangerous. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-102. - Powers and duties of inspector. 
(a)  The inspector shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including (without limiting the generality of the foregoing), the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 
1.  To investigate dwelling conditions in the city to determine which dwellings have been erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained, or used in violation of this article. 
2.  To administer oaths, affirmations, and to examine witnesses and receive evidence. 
3.  To enter upon and within premises, dwellings, and buildings for the purpose of making examinations and investigations, provided that such entries shall be made in such lawful manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the person in possession. 
4.  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as the inspector deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
5.  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as the inspector may designate. 
6.  To file civil action in the nature of summary ejectment to effectuate an order to vacate a dwelling as provided in G.S. 160A-443(7). 
7.  To file copies of ordinances, orders and other notices with the office of the register of deeds, the clerk of superior court and other governmental agencies. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the inspector to diligently examine dwellings located in the city for the purpose of locating and taking action with respect to such dwellings that appear to be unfit for human habitation in violation of this article. The inspector shall conduct all inspections and procedures as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-103. - Emergency cases. 
(a)  In emergency cases where it reasonably appears there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person or to the safety of other property, unless a dwelling unfit for human habitation is immediately repaired or demolished, the inspector shall order the dwelling vacated and cause the immediate repair or demolition of the dwelling and the cost of such repair or demolition shall be recovered and collected as is provided in section 9-11-105 hereof. 
(b)  In emergency cases as cited above, the inspector shall have the power immediately to cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling a placard with words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." 
(c)  The employees of the city fire and police departments shall report to the inspector all dwellings which are, may be, or are suspected of being unfit for human habitation. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-104. - Dwellings unfit for human habitation. 
(a)  The inspector shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if the inspector finds that any of the following conditions exist in the dwelling: 
1.  Interior walls or vertical studs seriously list, lean or buckle to such extent as to render the dwelling unsafe. 
2.  Supporting member or members showing 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration, or nonsupporting, enclosing or outside walls or covering showing 50 percent or more of damage or deterioration. 
3.  Floors or roofs having improperly distributed loads, overloaded, or having insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
4.  Such damage by fire, wind, or other causes as to render the dwelling unsafe. 
5.  Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions or disrepair dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or other people in the city or its environs. 
6.  Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic. 
7.  Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities. 
8.  Inadequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary facilities endangering the health, safety or general welfare of the occupants or other residents of the city or its environs. 
9.  Improper electrical, heating or plumbing facilities required by this Article which constitute a health or a safety hazard. 
10.  Lack of adequate weatherization as required by Section 9-11-100. 
11.  Lack of an operable smoke detector as required by Section 9-11-100. 
(b)  Irrespective of the above, a dwelling may be construed by the inspector to be unfit for human habitation, and the inspector shall so find, if such dwelling contains any violations of any of the minimum standards set forth in section 9-11-100, which, in the judgment of the inspector, renders any dwelling dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of the dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings, or other residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-105. - Procedure for enforcement. 
(a)  Initiation of preliminary investigation. The inspector shall initiate a preliminary inspection of a dwelling when a petition is filed by a public authority or at least five (5) residents of the city charging that the dwelling is unfit for human habitation. The inspector shall also initiate a preliminary inspection of a dwelling whenever it appears to the inspector that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation. 
(b)  Notice of complaint. If the inspector's preliminary investigation discloses a basis for determining that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation due to violations of the minimum standards provided for in this article, the inspector shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest of the dwelling a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a hearing at a place certain will be held before the inspector, not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after serving of said complaint. Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least one (1) person signing a petition relating to such dwelling. 
(c)  Hearing. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony and evidence relevant to the matter, at the place and time fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the inspector. 
(d)  Procedure after hearing. 
1.  After such notice and hearing, the inspector shall determine whether the dwelling is unfit for human habitation. If the inspector determines that the dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the inspector shall provide written findings of facts in support of such determination and the inspector shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner, 
a.  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a cost equal to or less than 65 percent of the value of the dwelling, to repair, alter or improve the dwelling to comply with the minimum standards established by this article, within a specified period of time, not to exceed 30 days; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling would cost an amount in excess of 65 percent of the value of the dwelling, the order shall require the owner to demolish the dwelling, within a specified period of time, not to exceed 30 days. 
c.  The order may require that the dwelling be vacated and closed only if continued occupancy during the time allowed for repair will present a significant threat of bodily harm, taking into account the nature of the necessary repairs, alterations, or improvements; the current state of the dwelling; and any additional risks due to the presence and capacity of minors under the age of 18 or occupants with physical or mental disabilities. 
2.  Such orders shall state that the failure to make timely repairs as directed shall make the dwelling subject to the issuance of an unfit order. Such orders shall further state that if the owner does not make the necessary repairs, alterations, or improvements to correct existing violations, or fails to vacate and close or demolish and remove the dwelling, as specified in the order, the inspector will submit a request to the city council to adopt an ordinance ordering the inspector to repair, alter, improve, vacate and close, or demolish and remove the dwelling. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the dwelling is located in a historic district of the city and the Historic District Commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by ordinance, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and closed consistent with N.C.G.S. 160A-400.14(a) 
3.  Whenever a determination is made that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished, under the provisions herein, notice of the order shall be given by first-class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum period of 45 days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal or demolition by action of the inspector, to allow the opportunity for any organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease, or purchase the dwelling or premises for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The inspector or city clerk shall certify the mailing of the notices, and the certification shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written request for such notices may raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order requiring the inspector to wait 45 days before causing removal or demolition. 
4.  If, within the time fixed by the inspector for repairing, altering or improving the dwelling, the inspector finds there has been substantial compliance with the provisions of the order, or that the owner has filed with the inspector a copy of a written contract with a contractor to make such repairs, alterations or improvements, the inspector may extend the time for compliance for an additional period not exceeding 90 days. 
5.  If the owner does not make the necessary repairs, alterations, or improvements to the dwelling to comply with the minimum standards established by this article, or fails to vacate and close the dwelling, within the time specified in the order, the inspector shall take one (1) or more of the following actions in accordance with this section: 
a.  Secure the issuance of a warrant charging such owner with violation of this article. 
b.  Cause such dwelling to be repaired, altered, improved, provided that an ordinance ordering the inspector to effectuate this action has first been approved by city council. Any such ordinance adopted by city council shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the dwelling is located and shall be indexed in the name of the owner in the grantor index. 
c.  Cause such dwelling to be vacated and closed, provided that an ordinance ordering the inspector to effectuate this action has first been approved by city council. Any such ordinance adopted by city council shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the dwelling is located and shall be indexed in the name of the owner in the grantor index. The inspector shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling for which an ordinance has been adopted by city council ordering the owner to vacate and close the dwelling a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." The inspector shall notify the customer services department for the city of all dwellings found unfit for human habitation that are vacant so that the customer services department for the city can discontinue services until such time as there is compliance with the order. 
6.  If the owner of a dwelling, which has been found unfit for human habitation, shall fail to comply with an order of the inspector issued pursuant to this article to demolish and remove the dwelling, the inspector may cause the dwelling to be demolished and removed, provided that the city council by ordinance has ordered the inspector to proceed to effectuate such action. Any such ordinance adopted by city council shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the dwelling is located and shall be indexed in the name of the owner in the grantor index. No such ordinance shall be adopted until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring the dwelling into conformity with this article. 
7.  As provided by G.S. 160A-443(6), the amount of the cost of any repairs, alterations, improvements, vacating and closing, or demolition and removal by the inspector shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred; said lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be collected or foreclosed upon in the same manner as is provided for special assessments pursuant to Article 10, Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes. The amount of the cost is also a lien on any other real property of the owner located within the City limits or within one (1) mile thereof except for the owner's primary residence. This additional lien is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the inspector, the inspector shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the inspector, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court (in a special proceeding brought before the clerk of superior court for said purpose). All liens shall be filed in the office of the register of deeds of the county where the dwelling is located. 
8.  Failure on the part of any owner or party in interest to receive or have served upon him any complaint, notice or order herein provided for shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to any other owner or party in interest or any other person, firm, or corporation. 
9.  The inspector is hereby authorized to fix reasonable value of any dwelling for the purpose of this article and such value shall be binding, unless the owner protests such value in writing to the inspector within ten (10) days after receipt of an order. 
10.  A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) inspection fee shall be charged for any type of courtesy inspection requested by any person. 
(f)  Dwellings vacated and closed for one year or more. 
1.  If the owner of a dwelling which has been vacated and closed under the provisions of this article shall fail to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling within one (1) year of the date on which the dwelling was vacated and closed, the city council may, after the expiration of such one (1) year period, enact an ordinance, which shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the dwelling is located and indexed in the name of the owner in the grantor index, requiring the owner to do the following: 
a.  If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50 percent of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days; or 
b.  If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50 percent of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days. 
2.  Prior to enacting such an ordinance, the city council shall find: 
a.  That the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation; and 
b.  The continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the city in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants and would attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause and contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in this city. 
3.  If the owner fails to comply with subsection (f) of this section, the inspector shall effectuate the purpose of this article and the amount of the cost of repairing, altering, improving, or demolishing and removing the dwelling by the city shall be a lien against the real property upon which the costs were incurred pursuant to subsection (e)(7) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-106. - Certificate of compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to rent or offer for rent any vacant dwelling or part thereof upon which an order to repair, alter, improve, or to vacate and close has been issued without the owner first filing application for and securing a certificate of compliance from the inspector. The inspector shall issue a certificate of compliance when, after examination and inspection, it is found that the repairs, alterations, and improvements have been made and that the dwelling conforms with the provisions of this article. The owner requesting a certificate of compliance shall pay no fee for the first two (2) inspections required in which the owner is seeking a certificate of compliance; provided, however, the owner shall pay a fee of $25.00 for each subsequent reinspection required. Any violation of this Section by the owner shall subject the violator to a fine of $50.00 a day or 30 days imprisonment for each day occupancy of the dwelling is permitted, not to exceed a total of $500.00 in fines for any one (1) dwelling. Any owner or rental agent so violating this section by leasing a dwelling before obtaining a certificate of compliance shall be subject to immediate prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-107. - Appeal. 
(a)  An appeal to the board of adjustment may be taken from any decision or order of the inspector by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or commission of the city. Any appeal from the inspector to the board of adjustment shall be taken within 10 days, and shall be taken by filing with the inspector a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of notice of appeal, the inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the inspector refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, the inspector's decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the board of adjustment, unless the inspector certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that because of facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension of the inspector's requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one (1) day's written notice to the inspector, by the board of adjustment, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, shall give due notice to the parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make any decision and order that in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers of the inspector, but the concurring vote of four (4) members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the inspector. The board of adjustment shall have power also in passing upon appeals, when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to adapt the application of the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(c)  Every decision of the board of adjustment shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the decision of the board of adjustment, but not otherwise. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the inspector or a decision rendered by the board of adjustment may petition the superior court for an injunction restraining the inspector from carrying out the order or decision and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the inspector pending a final disposition of the cause. The petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be had by the court on a petition within 20 days, and shall be given preference over other matters on the court's calendar. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require. It shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this subsection. 
(e)  If any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained, or used in violation of this article or of any other ordinance or code adopted by the city, or any valid order or decision of the inspector or board of adjustment made pursuant to any ordinance or code adopted by the city, the inspector or board may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about the premises of the dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-108. - Service of complaints, etc. 
Complaints, notices or orders issued by the inspector pursuant to this Article shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint, notice, or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within 10 days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dwelling affected. 
If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or, if the owners are known but have refused to accept service by registered or certified mail, and the inspector makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under the provisions of this article. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. Failure on the part of any owner or party in interest to receive or have served upon him any complaint, notice or order herein provided for shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to any other owner or party in interest or any other person. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-109. - Notice of lis pendens. 
Upon the issuance of a complaint and notice of hearing or an order pursuant thereto, the inspector may cause the filing of a notice of lis pendens, with a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing or order attached thereto, in the office of the clerk of superior court. The notice of lis pendens and a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing or order attached shall be indexed and cross-indexed in accordance with the indexing procedures of the North Carolina General Statutes. From the time and date of recording of such complaint and notice of order, it shall be notice to and binding upon the successors in interest or assigns of the owner. Upon compliance with the requirements of any order based upon such compliant and hearing, the inspector shall direct the clerk of superior court to cancel the notice of lis pendens. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-110. - Alternative remedies. 
Neither this article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary action or otherwise, and the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws. The procedure described in this article shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred on the city by any other law. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-111. - Conflicts with other provisions. 
In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this article is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the residents of the city shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-112. - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Sec. 9-2-113. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dwelling to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to fail to vacate and close or remove and demolish the same, upon order of the inspector duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in the order. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to section 9-11-105 of this article, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in the order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacation and closing. All dwellings which are vacated upon order of the inspector to repair or vacate and close the same shall be kept locked and secured in a manner so as not to create a fire and safety hazard or to create a hazard to children or attract vagrants or persons with criminal intent and the lawns and grounds of such vacant dwellings shall be kept free of high grass, weeds, trash and debris. It shall be unlawful for an owner of any dwelling which is vacant and under an order to repair, alter, improve or to remove and demolish same to fail to properly lock and secure same or to keep the lawns and grounds of such dwelling free of high grass, weeds, trash, and debris. 
(b)  An owner who fails to comply with an order to repair or to improve, vacate or close any occupied dwelling determined unfit for human habitation pursuant to the provisions contained in section 9-11-105, or who permits the reoccupancy of a vacant dwelling found to be unfit for human habitation or who fails to secure a vacant dwelling which has been found unfit for human habitation or who fails to keep the lawns and grounds of such dwelling free of high grass, weeds, trash and debris, shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00 for the first day following the expiration of an order to repair, improve, or vacate and close any dwelling or following a determination that any unfit dwelling has been reoccupied in violation of section 9-11-105 or following notification that a vacant dwelling is to be secured or following notification to cut high grass and weeds or remove trash and debris. In each instance, a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00 per day shall be imposed for each subsequent day that the unfit dwelling remains occupied in violation of this article or a vacant dwelling remains open and not secured or grounds and lawns are not mowed or cleared of trash and debris. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within 10 days after being notified of the amount due, the city may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. No civil penalty shall be imposed against an owner of an unfit dwelling where the only violation rendering a dwelling unfit is a violation of section 9-11-101, unless the owner is also the occupant. 
(c)  If any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained, or used in violation of this article or any order or decision of the inspector or board of adjustment, the inspector is authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling, to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about the premises of the dwelling or for any other purpose authorized by G.S. 160A-446(g) or any other law. The failure of the owner to comply with an order issued by the inspector may also be enforced through any equitable or other remedy deemed appropriate by the city and permitted by law. 
(d)  No person shall remove or permit the removal of any placard, complaint, notice or order posted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  No person shall occupy any dwelling with a placard, complaint, notice or order posted on it in accordance with the provisions of this article. Occupation of a dwelling so posted shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(f)  When the inspector finds that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation within the meaning of this article and has notified the owner that the time limit set by the inspector for the correction of defects and vacating the dwelling has expired, no person shall receive rentals, offer for rent, or occupy said dwelling for any purpose. 
(g)  No person shall damage, mutilate or remove, nor shall any person suffer, permit or cause to be damaged, mutilated or removed, any permanent fixtures from any dwelling. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling upon whom a notice, complaint or order has been served, to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of said dwelling until the provisions of the notice, complaint or order have been complied with, or until such owner shall furnish to the transferee, lessee, or mortgagee, a true copy of any notice, complaint or order issued by the inspector and concurrently give written notice to the inspector of the intent to transfer, lease, or mortgage as to whom the transferee, lessee or mortgagee who had received actual constructive notice of the existence of a notice, complaint or order shall be bound by the notice, complaint or order as of date of the transfer, lease or mortgage without service of further notice upon him. 
(i)  The violation of any provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 7301/17-43 , 6-5-17)  
Secs. 9-2-114—9-2-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE F - Insulation Contractors 
 
Sec. 9-2-131. - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to G.S. 143-151.126 et seq. and G.S. 160A-194. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-132. - Required license. 
No person, firm or corporation may for a consideration install, alter or restore within the city or its environs any insulation or other materials or energy utilization equipment designed or intended to meet the state building code requirements for insulation and energy utilization standards who is not either: 
(1)  Licensed as a contractor to do the proposed work under chapter 87 of the General Statutes; 
(2)  Working under the supervision of a registered architect or professional engineer; 
(3)  An owner working upon his own building; or 
(4)  Licensed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-133. - Application for license. 
Every person desiring a license under this article shall submit an application for a license to the director of planning and development conforming to the following requirements: 
(1)  Form of application. Each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the designated official. 
(2)  Contents of application. Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and house address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation; 
c.  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
d.  Complete record of all convictions of felonies or acts involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit by the applicant of any partner, officer or director of the applicant, whether in this or any other state of the a federal government; 
e.  Complete record of all licenses held by the applicant or any partner, officer or director of the applicant authorizing activities of the type authorized herein or other construction, alteration or modification of buildings and structures; 
f.  Information as to the circumstances in which any local, state or a federal government or agency has refused, suspended or revoked a license of the type described in subsection (2)e., to the applicant or any employee, partner, officer or director of the applicant. 
(3)  Fees. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $25.00 for the license, an amount to be for the year running from June 1 through May 31. 
(4)  False statements. False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation or denial of the license. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-134. - Procedure for issuance of license. 
(a)  Licensing agency. The application and any comments and recommendations relating thereto shall be considered by the director of planning and development, who shall then recommend issuance of the license by the office of the city collector, or deny the license pursuant to the standards specified in subsection (b). 
(b)  Standards. The director of planning and development shall recommend issuance of the license unless he shall find that the applicant or any employee, partner, officer or director of the applicant: 
(1)  Has been convicted within the last three (3) years of a felony or an act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit, whether in this or any other state or jurisdiction; 
(2)  Has been refused a license to do the type of work authorized herein or has had such a license suspended or revoked by any local, state or federal government or agency and that government or agency has not subsequently granted or restored the license; 
(3)  Has knowingly made a false statement in the application; 
(4)  Has failed to post the bond or other security required by section 9-2-135. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-135. - Bond required. 
(a)  Before a license shall be issued to any applicant, the applicant shall post a bond with the city in the amount of $2,000. In lieu of posting a bond, the applicant may deposit a cashier's check or cash in the same amount. 
(b)  The security required by subsection (a) shall be available to indemnify any person for any damage which may accrue by reason of the applicant's failure to properly provide or install insulation, energy utilization equipment or other material designed or intended to meet the state building code standards for insulation and energy utilization. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-136. - Termination and renewal of license. 
All licenses issued hereunder shall terminate on the thirty-first day of May of each year. Renewal of licenses shall be pursuant to the same procedures and requirements set forth for initial issuance. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-137. - Suspension, revocation of license. 
(a)  The director of planning and development may suspend or revoke any license issued under this article at any time upon a showing that the applicant has: 
(1)  Knowingly made a false statement in the application for a license; 
(2)  Violated the state building code requirements as to insulation or energy utilization equipment or materials, whether in this or any other jurisdiction; or 
(3)  Been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with respect to any contract entered into for work requiring this license. 
(b)  Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked may appeal the suspension or revocation to the city council. After reasonable notice to the licensee, the city council shall afford the licensee an opportunity to show why its license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-138. - Change of location. 
The location of any licensed business may be changed, provided 10 days' notice thereof is given to the director of planning and development and operation at the new location does not violate any applicable state or local law, ordinance or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-139. - Required permit; fee. 
No person, firm or corporation licensed under this article may, for a consideration, install, alter or restore any insulation or other materials or energy utilization equipment designed or intended to meet the state building code requirements for insulation and energy utilization without first securing a permit from the inspections division for each item of work. There shall be a fee as required for building permits. A certificate of compliance shall be issued upon completion of work. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-140. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to all applicable punishment, penalties and equitable relief provided for by G.S. section 160A-I 75 and chapter 703, North Carolina Session Laws of 1977. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Secs. 9-2-141—9-2-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE G - Regulation of Abandoned and Junked Motor Vehicles[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7298/17-40 , adopted May 15, 2017, repealed the former Art. G, §§ 9-2-161—9-2-168, and enacted a new Art. G, §§ 9-2-161—9-2-165, as set out herein. The former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-2016. 
 
Sec. 9-2-161. - Purpose and finding. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the lawful regulation of abandoned and junked motor vehicles within the city's ordinance-making jurisdiction and to prohibit the abandonment of motor vehicles on public streets or on public or private property within the city, including the removal and disposal of junked or abandoned motor vehicles according to the procedures set forth herein; furthermore, the city council hereby finds and declares that the regulation, restraint or prohibition of the abandonment of junked motor vehicles on public grounds, and on private property within the city is necessary and desirable to promote or enhance community, neighborhood or area appearance and such enforcement may include the removal or disposal of junked motor vehicles according to the procedures set forth herein. Further objectives of this article are as follows: 
(a)  To ensure the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing controls on the removal and disposal of abandoned and junked motor vehicles. 
(b)  To prohibit abandoned or junked motor vehicles from being disposed of by leaving them on public or private property. 
(c)  To eliminate the present accumulation of abandoned and junked motor vehicles. 
(d)  To prevent future accumulation of abandoned and junked motor vehicles. 
(e)  To promote or enhance community, neighborhood or area appearance. 
( Ord. No. 7298/17-40 , 5-15-17)  
Sec. 9-2-162. - Definitions. 
(a)  Motor vehicle. A machine designed or intended to travel over land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle. 
(b)  City official. Director of community housing and development or his or her designee. 
(c)  Abandoned motor vehicle. A motor vehicle that: 
(1)  Has been left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or 
(2)  Is left on property owned or operated by the city for longer than 24 hours; or 
(3)  Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant, or lessee of the private property for longer than two (2) hours; or 
(4)  Is left on any public street or highway for longer than seven (7) days or is determined by law enforcement to be a hazard to the motoring public. 
(d)  Health hazard. An abandoned or junked motor vehicle shall be declared by the city official to be a health hazard when its condition is such that the motor vehicle can or does harbor diseases, furnish shelter and breeding places for mosquitoes and other insects, or become a breeding ground and harbor for rats and other pests. 
(e)  Safety hazard. An abandoned or junked motor vehicle shall be declared to be a safety hazard when its condition is such that the motor vehicle's areas of confinement which cannot be opened from the inside, such as trunk compartments and engine compartments and engine or glass, windows, or any exterior or interior fixtures present physical dangers to the safety and well-being of children or other persons. 
(f)  Junked motor vehicle. An abandoned motor vehicle that also: 
(1)  Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or 
(2)  Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was originally intended to move; or 
(3)  Is more than five (5) years old and worth less than $500.00. 
(g)  Nuisance vehicle. A motor vehicle on public or private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be: 
(1)  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other insects or a breeding ground or harbor for rats or other pests; or 
(2)  A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight (8) inches in height; or 
(3)  A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or 
(4)  A point of concentration of combustible items such as gasoline, oil, other flammable or explosive materials including but not limited to boxes, paper, old clothes, rags, refuse, or any other combustible materials or objects of a like nature; or 
(5)  One which has parts thereof which fall and injure members of the public or one which may have parts which fall or be closed and become an area of confinement which may not be released for opening from the inside; or 
(6)  One which is so situated and located that there is a danger of the vehicle falling, rolling, turning over, or creating an unsafe movement such as unattended, blocked or jacked vehicles; or 
(7)  One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; or 
(8)  One which has parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or 
(9)  Any other vehicle specifically declared a health or safety hazard or a public nuisance by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 7298/17-40 , 5-15-17)  
Sec. 9-2-163. - Jurisdiction. 
This article shall govern the removal and disposal of abandoned or junked motor vehicles on public grounds and private property within the city unless otherwise specified herein. However, this article shall govern the removal and disposal of abandoned or junked motor vehicles on city-owned property wherever located. 
( Ord. No. 7298/17-40 , 5-15-17)  
Sec. 9-2-164. - Complaints. 
Prior to an investigation to determine whether a motor vehicle is an abandoned or junked motor vehicle, a complaint must be submitted in writing with the appropriate city officer or employee. Nothing in this section or article shall preclude the city official from initiating his/her own complaint without it being in writing. 
( Ord. No. 7298/17-40 , 5-15-17)  
Sec. 9-2-165. - Abandoned motor vehicles. 
(a)  Abandonment of motor vehicles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on city-owned property and private property within the city and on city-owned property wherever located. 
(b)  Removal of abandoned motor vehicles. The city may remove to a storage garage or area abandoned motor vehicles that are found to be in violation of this article. An abandoned motor vehicle may not be removed from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises unless the city council or a duly authorized city official or employee has declared the vehicle to be a health or safety hazard. Appropriate city officers and employees may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter on any premises within the city ordinance-making jurisdiction at any reasonable hour in order to determine if any vehicles are health or safety hazards. The city may require a person requesting the removal of an abandoned motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the city against any loss, expense, or liability incurred because of vehicle's removal, storage, or sale. 
(c)  Notification and probable cause hearing. 
(1)  Whenever a vehicle with a valid registration plate or registration is towed, the city shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle of the following: 
(i)  Notice that the vehicle has been towed, along with a description of the vehicle; 
(ii)  Address where the vehicle is stored; 
(iii)  The violation with which the owner is charged, if any; 
(iv)  The possible sale or other disposition of the vehicle; 
(v)  The procedure the owner must follow to have the vehicle returned to him/her; and 
(vi)  The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the towing. 
If the vehicle has a North Carolina registration plate or registration, notice shall be given to the owner within 24 hours; if the vehicle is not registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given to the owner within 72 hours. Notice shall be mailed to the owner's last known address unless the owner waives this notice in writing. In addition to written notice by mail, and if feasible, additional notice shall be given by telephone. Whether, or not, the owner is reached by telephone, notice shall be mailed to his last known address unless he/she or his/her agent waives the notice in writing. 
(2)  Whenever a vehicle with neither a valid registration plate nor registration is towed, the city shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number (VIN), to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and notify the owner as required by this article. Unless the owner has otherwise been given notice, it is presumed that the city has not made reasonable efforts, as required under this article, unless notice that the vehicle would be towed was posted on the windshield or some other conspicuous place at the least 10 days before the towing actually occurred; except, no pre-towing notice need be given if the vehicle impeded the flow of traffic or was otherwise jeopardizing the public welfare so that immediate towing was necessary. 
(3)  The owner or any person entitled to claim possession of the vehicle may regain possession of the motor vehicle by paying to the city all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage. 
(4)  The owner or any person entitled to claim possession of the vehicle may request in writing a hearing to determine if probable cause existed for the towing. The request shall be filed with the magistrate's office in Guilford County. The magistrate shall set the hearing within 72 hours of his/her receiving the request. The owner, the city official who requested the hearing if someone other than the owner, the tower, and the person who authorized the towing shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing. The rules of the General Statutes apply to any appeal. 
(d)  Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles. After holding an abandoned motor vehicle for 30 days after the date of removal, the city may sell or dispose of the vehicle as follows: 
(1)  If the vehicle appears to be worth less than $500.00, the city may dispose of the vehicle as a junked motor vehicle as provided by this article. With the consent of the owner, the city may remove and dispose of a motor vehicle as a junked motor vehicle without regard to the value, condition or age of the vehicle and without holding it for a prescribed period of time. 
(2)  If the vehicle appears to be worth $500.00 or more, the vehicle shall be sold at public auction. The city shall give 20 days' written notice of the sale to the registered owner at his last-known address, to each holder of a lien of record against the vehicle and to the state division of motor vehicles. Any person having an interest in the vehicle may redeem it at any time before the sale by paying all costs accrued to date. The proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the finance officer of the city, who shall pay to the appropriate officers or persons the cost of removal, storage, investigation, sale and liens in that order. The remainder of the proceeds of sale, if any, shall be paid over to the registered owner, or held by the city for 60 days if the registered owner cannot be located with reasonable diligence. If the owner does not claim the remainder of the proceeds within 60 days after the day of the sale, the funds shall be deposited in the city's general fund and the owner's rights in the vehicle are extinguished. 
(e)  Exceptions. This article does not apply to any vehicle in an enclosed building, to any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the enterprise, or to any vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(f)  Junked motor vehicles. 
(1)  Abandonment of junked motor vehicles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a junked motor vehicle on public grounds and on private property within the city or upon city-owned property wherever located. 
(2)  Removal of junked motor vehicles. Junked motor vehicles found to be in violation of this article may be removed to a storage garage or area, but no such vehicle shall be removed from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises unless the city council or a duly authorized city officer or employee finds in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following among other relevant factors, may be considered: 
(i)  Protection of property values; 
(ii)  Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities; 
(iii)  Indirect protection of public health and safety; 
(iv)  Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and 
(v)  Promotion of comfort, happiness, and emotional stability of area residents. 
The city may require any person requesting the removal of a junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the city against any loss, expense, or liability incurred because of the removal, storage or sale of the junked motor vehicle. 
(g)  Notification and probable cause hearing. 
(1)  Whenever a vehicle with a valid registration plate or registration is towed, the city shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle of following: 
(i)  A description of the vehicle; 
(ii)  The place where the vehicle is stored; 
(iii)  The violation with which the owner is charged, if any; 
(iv)  The possible sale or other disposition of the vehicle; and 
(v)  The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the towing. 
If the vehicle has a North Carolina registration plate or registration, notice shall be given to the owner within 24 hours; if the vehicle is not registered in this state, notice shall be given to the owner within 72 hours. This notice shall, if feasible, be given by telephone. Whether, or not, the owner is reached by telephone, notice shall be mailed to his last known address unless he/she or his/her agent waives the notice in writing. 
(2)  Whenever a vehicle with neither a valid registration plate nor registration is towed, the city shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number (VIN), to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information as required by this article. Unless the owner has otherwise been given notice, it is presumed that the city has not made reasonable efforts, as required under this article, unless notice that the vehicle would be towed was posted on the windshield or some other conspicuous place at least 10 days before the towing actually occurred; except, no pre-towing notice need be given if the vehicle impeded the flow of traffic or otherwise jeopardized the public welfare so that immediate towing was necessary. 
(3)  The owner or any other person entitled to claim possession of the vehicle may regain possession of the motor vehicle by paying to the city all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage. 
(4)  The owner or any person entitled to claim possession of the vehicle may request in writing a hearing to determine if probable cause existed for the towing. The request shall be filed with the magistrate's office in Guilford County. The magistrate shall set the hearing within 72 hours of his/her receiving the request. The owner, the person who requested the hearing if someone other than the owner, the tower, and the person who authorized the towing shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing. Any decision by the magistrate may be appealed by either party to district court. 
(h)  Disposal of junked vehicles. After holding a junked motor vehicle for 15 days, the city may destroy it or sell it at private sale as junk. Within 15 days after the final disposition of a junked motor vehicle, the city shall notify the state division of motor vehicles that the vehicle has been determined to be a junked motor vehicle and disposed of as such. The notice shall contain as fully accurate a description of the vehicle as can be reasonably determined. The full proceeds of the sale of the junked vehicle shall be paid to the finance officer of the city, who shall pay to the appropriate officers or persons the cost of removal, storage, investigation, sale and liens, in that order. The remainder of the proceeds of sale, if any, shall be held by the city for 30 days after the day the vehicle is disposed of, the funds shall be deposited in the city's general fund, and the owner's rights in the vehicle are extinguished. 
(i)  Disposal of vehicle without plates or identification numbers. If a junked motor vehicle does not display a current license plate and the vehicle identification numbers have been removed or defaced so as to be illegible, the city may dispose of a junked motor vehicle under this article. The city may destroy the vehicle or sell it at private sale, without regard to value, after having held the vehicle for 48 hours. The proceeds shall be placed in the city's general fund. 
(j)  Exceptions. This articles does not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle in the process of repair or restoration on property under the control of the owner of the vehicle or property under the control of the person repairing or restoring the vehicle. Visible evidence of repair or restoration shall be apparent on a monthly basis. 
(2)  Any motor vehicle that is used on a regular basis for business or personal transportation purposes. 
(k)  Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle. 
(2)  Upon investigation, proper officials may determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as defined in this article, and order the vehicle removed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(l)  Enforcement remedies authorized; penalties for violation. 
(1)  The city may secure injunctions, abatement orders and other appropriate equitable remedies to further ensure compliance as provided in G.S. 160A-175. 
(2)  The violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor and in addition to, or in lieu of, remedies authorized in this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days. 
(3)  Any act constituting a violation of this article or a failure to comply with any of its requirements shall subject the offender to civil penalty of $50.00 for each day the violation continues. If the offender fails to pay this penalty within 15 days after being cited for violation, the penalty may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt. 
(4)  Any one (1), all or any combination of the foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce this article. 
( Ord. No. 7298/17-40 , 5-15-17)  
Secs. 9-2-166—9-2-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE H - House and Building Numbering 
 
Sec. 9-2-181. - Required; duty of owner. 
Each and every owner of a house or building within the corporate limits or within the High Point extraterritorial jurisdictional limits shall at all times post the current official assigned street number conforming to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-182. - Assigned street numbers; responsibility of director of planning and development. 
The director of planning and development, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for assigning each house or building an official street number. As conditions merit such official street number may be changed upon proper official notice to the property owner and public agencies. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-183. - Compliance with requirements. 
(a)  Existing house or building. All existing houses or buildings shall comply with the requirements of this article by January 1, 1988. 
(b)  New house or building. All new houses or buildings shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this article immediately upon completion. A certificate of compliance or a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the building inspector until the new house or building complies in full with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-184. - Standards; house and building numbers. 
(a)  Material and color. All house or building numbers shall be constructed of a durable material. The color of the number shall contrast with the color scheme of the house or building. If mounted on glass, the number shall contrast with the background and be clearly visible. 
(b)  Size. The standard minimum size of a street number for a typical residential or nonresidential house or building shall be three (3) inches in height. The standard minimum size of a street number for a larger residential or a nonresidential house or building such as an apartment, townhouse or condominium complex, or large commercial or industrial building or complex shall be six (6) inches in height. Minimum sizes larger than standard shall be where the standard size would not provide necessary identification deemed appropriate by the director of planning and development. 
(c)  Location. In typical situations where three-inch standard size house or building numbers are required, such street number shall be included within a two (2) square foot surface area located on the face of the house or building within a four-foot perimeter of the front entrance. In typical situations where six-inch standard size house or building numbers are required, such number shall be located in the approximate center of the face of the building which fronts on the public or private street providing primary vehicular access to the structure. In every situation the house or building number shall be located so that it is clearly visible from the public or private street or parking lot which provides primary vehicular access to the structure. 
(d)  Number. Every house or building shall be posted with the official assigned street number in at least one (1) location in conformance with this article. Additional posting of street numbers shall be required in the following situations: 
(1)  All commercial or industrial buildings which have a rear or side door that is used for deliveries, public entry purposes, or as a required exit shall be posted with the official assigned street number at such door. 
(2)  Any building or house which is located more than 100 feet from the public or private street which provides primary vehicular access to the structure, or in any situation where the topography or landscaping of the lot is such that the street number posted on the structure cannot be seen from the public or private street providing primary vehicular access, shall also be posted with the official assigned street number located on a name plate sign at or near the property line at a driveway or walkway to said structure. 
(3)  In any situation where, in the opinion of the director of planning and development, additional posting of street numbers is required to clearly identify the location of a house or building. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-185. - Posting on street curbing not acceptable. 
In no situation does the posting on an official assigned street number on street curbing satisfy any of the requirements of this article. Such posting of street numbers on street curbing is permitted as optional to the property owner. Where such street numbers are posted they shall at all times be consistent with the current official assigned street number for the property. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-186. - Temporary posting during construction. 
Immediately following the issuance of a building permit (building, electrical, mechanical or plumbing), and before the related work is begun, the owner, contractor, or agent of the owner shall post the official assigned street number at or adjacent to the entrance of the property or job site at the public or private street providing primary vehicular access to the structure. The temporary number shall be of sufficient size and posted in such a manner so as to be clearly visible from the street. Additional posting shall be required to suit the job site conditions. Temporary posting of street numbers shall be maintained until the permanent official assigned street number conforming with the requirements of this article is in place and is approved. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-187. - Violation; failure to post street number conforming to requirements of article. 
Failure to post official assigned street numbers on any house or building in full compliance with the requirements of this article shall be deemed a violation of the development ordinance. Such violation shall be subject to the enforcement mechanisms and penalties stipulated by title 9, chapter 8 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Secs. 9-2-188—9-2-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE I - Abandoned Structure Code[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Abandoned and junk motor vehicles, § 9-2-161 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-2-191. - How article known and cited. 
This article shall be known as the "Abandoned Structure Code," may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this article." 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-192. - Exercise of police powers; authority. 
The city council hereby finds and declares that there exists within the city limits and its environs abandoned structures which are a health or safety hazard as a result of the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities. In order to alleviate these unsafe and dangerous conditions for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of High Point and its environs, a public necessity exists to exercise the police powers conferred upon the city for the repair, closing or demolition of such structures. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-193. - Procedure for enforcement. 
(a)  Duty of inspector. It shall be the duty of the inspector to examine abandoned structures located in the city and its environs where conditions described in section 9-2-192 exist for the purpose of locating and taking action with respect to such structures as appear to be a health or safety hazard. 
(b)  Notice of complaint. If the inspection discloses health or safety hazards as described in this article, the inspector shall post a warning on the structure giving notice of its unsafe or dangerous conditions and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest to the structure, a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the inspector at a place therein fixed, not less than 10 nor more than 30 days after serving of said complaint. 
(c)  Hearing. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Any person desiring to do so may attend the hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the inspector. 
(d)  Procedure after hearing. After such hearing, if the inspector finds that a structure constitutes a health or safety hazard, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination. In such case, the inspector shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to repair, close or demolish the structure as necessary to correct the health or safety hazard within a specified period of time. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-194. - Appeal. 
An appeal to the board of adjustment may be taken from any decision or order of the inspector by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or commission of the city. Any appeal from the inspector to the board shall be taken within 10 days as prescribed by the rules of the board, and shall be taken by filing with the inspector and with the secretary of the board a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of notice of appeal, the inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the records upon which the decision appealed from was made. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-195. - Securing, closing and demolition by the city. 
If the owner fails to comply with an order of the inspector to repair, secure and close, or demolish, the inspector shall take one (1) or more of the following actions as necessary: 
(a)  Secure the issuance of a warrant charging such owner with violation of this article; 
(b)  Secure and close said structure; 
(c)  Cause such structure to be repaired, altered or improved; or 
(d)  Cause such structure to be demolished. 
Subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section shall not be exercised by the inspector until the city council by ordinance has ordered the inspector to proceed to effectuate such action. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-196. - Lien on property. 
The amount of the cost of such repair, alterations, improvements, vacating and closing or demolition ordered by the city council or by the inspector shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred; said lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be collected or foreclosed upon in the same manner as is provided for assessments pursuant to article 10, chapter 160A, North Carolina General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-197. - Other unlawful actions. 
(1)  No person shall remove or permit the removal of any complaint, notice or order posted in accordance with the provisions of section 9-2-193 of this article. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building upon whom a notice, complaint or order has been served, to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of said building unless one of the following actions have been taken: 
(a)  Compliance with the provisions of the notice, complaint or order, or 
(b)  Furnish a copy of any notice, complaint or order to the transferee, lessee or mortgagee and give written notice to the inspector of said action. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-198. - Alternative remedies. 
Neither this article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisance and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided or in other ordinances of laws. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-199. - Conflicts with other provisions. 
In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this article is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the residents of the city and environs shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-200. - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-201. - Violations, penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any structure to fail, neglect, or refuse or repair, alter or improve the same, or fail to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the inspector duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in the order, and each day that such failure, neglect or refusal to comply with the order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any structure, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to section 9-2-193 of this article, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in the order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacating and closing, and each day that the occupancy continues after the prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor as provided by North Carolina General Statutes 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
ARTICLE J - Board of Electrical Examiners 
 
Sec. 9-2-202. - Creation and purpose. 
The board of electrical examiners is hereby created. The purpose of the board is to establish standards and procedures for the qualification, examination, and licensing of journeyman electricians, to issue licenses, and to perform such other duties as may be assigned it from time to time by the city council. The board shall report to the city council at least annually, before the first day of August. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-203. - Composition of board and term of office. 
(a)  The board is composed of five (5) members, with the electrical inspector serving ex officio and without voting privileges. The board shall elect a chairman from its members and shall elect a secretary from its members or from city employees, both serving for a term to be fixed by the board. The board shall elect a temporary chairman or secretary when the regular chairman or secretary is absent from any meeting. 
(b)  The city council shall appoint members for a term of three (3) years or until a successor is appointed and qualified. Any vacancy resulting from a cause other than expiration of term is filled only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may serve two (2) full terms, after which they are not eligible for reappointment for at least one (1) full year, with appointment for an unexpired portion of a term being considered as appointment for a full term. 
(c)  A member of a board or commission may be removed by the council for cause. If a member shall miss all of the meetings held during any period of 90 days without excuse granted by the board or commission, this may be considered as cause for removal. 
(d)  Members serve at the will and pleasure of the city council, without compensation. The board may adopt its own procedural rules and regulations, which are to be filed with the city clerk. Members may not vote on, advocate, or discuss with other board members, the city council, or its committees, any matter in which the member has a private or monetary interest. A violation of this provision may result in removal from the board. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-204. - Functions and duties in general. 
(a)  The functions of the board of electrical examiners are administrative in nature, and are for the safety and welfare of the citizens. 
(b)  Any person desiring to be licensed as a journeyman electrician may apply, in writing, to the board after acquiring four (4) years training and experience in the electrical field. The applicant must pay a nonreturnable examination fee of $10.00. If the applicant fails to pass the board's examination he may apply for reexamination after the expiration of 30 days and upon payment of the regular examination fee. 
(c)  The board shall provide each licensed journeyman electrician with evidence of their license, which must be carried by the holder of the license whenever he is engaged in electrical work. The license is automatically revoked if the holder fails to engage in the electrical field for a period of 12 months, or if the journeyman fails to perform his duties as determined by the board. 
(d)  The board may issue a temporary license pending examination, provided the applicant holds a similar license from an equivalent board and provided the temporary license is valid for no more than 60 days. 
(e)  The board may not make expenditures or contracts for which the city would be held liable unless city council approval is obtained. 
(f)  An appeal from the decision of the board upon the denial of a license shall be only for errors of law and shall be taken to the superior court by certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-205. - Meetings. 
(a)  The board shall meet at least once each month unless there is not sufficient business to warrant a meeting, but not more than 90 days shall expire without a regular or special meeting of the board. The regular meeting of the board shall be the first Tuesday of each month in the municipal building unless adjourned to another place. 
(b)  Special meetings may be called by the chairperson upon 48 hours' oral or written notice to each board member, but notice is waived if the member attends the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-206. - Procedure. 
Three (3) members constitute a quorum, and a concurrence of at least a majority of those regular members present shall be required for any action. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-207. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall install, alter, repair, make extensions, or connect any fixture or current consuming device (except lamps and appliances connected by means of attachment plug) to any electrical wiring system for which an electrical permit is required, whether employed by an electrical contractor, firm, corporation, or otherwise, unless he is a qualified electrician or works under the direct supervision of a qualified journeyman electrician or qualified electrical contractor. 
(b)  No electrical contractor, firm, or corporation shall authorize the installation of electrical wiring by any person in violation of subsection (a). 
(c)  For the purposes of this division a "qualified electrician" shall mean any person: 
(1)  Who has qualified for a limited electrician's license issued by the state; 
(2)  Who has qualified for an intermediate electrician's license issued by the state; 
(3)  Who has qualified for an unlimited electrician's license issued by the state; 
(4)  Who has qualified for a single-family detached residential dwelling electrician's license issued by the state; or 
(5)  Who is qualified as journeyman electrician by the board of electrical examiners of the city or its equal. 
(d)  No person shall use an expired or revoked electrical license. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Secs. 9-2-208—9-2-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE K - Trash, Debris, and Dilapidated Outbuildings Code 
 
Sec. 9-2-211. - How article known and cited. 
This article shall be known as "Trash, Debris, and Dilapidated Outbuildings Code" and may be cited as same and will be referred to herein as "this article." 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-212. - Authority; exercise of police powers. 
The city council hereby finds and declares that there exists within the city limits and its environs properties on which are stored trash, debris and materials and that there exists lots both vacant and improved which due to neglect have high grass, weeds, undergrowth, and other vegetation which may conceal filthy deposits, or harbor insects or any offensive matter or thing which is likely to adversely affect the health and safety of the residents of the community, and that there exists dilapidated outbuildings, sheds, and accessory structures and these conditions render such areas unsanitary or unsafe or dangerous and are detrimental to the health, safety, or morals or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city and its environs. The city council further finds that public necessity exists to exercise the police powers of the city to cause that such trash, debris, and materials be removed or properly stored and that high grasses, weeds, undergrowth, and vegetation be cut and cleared and that such outbuildings, sheds, and accessory structures be repaired as to render them safe or demolished in the manner provided by this article as provided by North Carolina General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-213. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to arrest, prevent, and mitigate the hazards to health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city and its environs caused by trash, debris, the improper storage of materials, overgrown lots, and the existence of dilapidated outbuildings, sheds, and accessory buildings which create areas which harbor vermin, insects, and increase the hazard of fire or accident or other calamities. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-214. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article are applicable to all properties, whether improved or vacant land, which are located within the city limits or the extraterritorial jurisdiction as now or hereafter fixed. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-215. - Definitions. 
Certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this chapter. Terms, words, phrases, and their derivatives used but not specifically defined in this article shall have the meaning specifically defined in the North Carolina Building Code or the City of High Point's Minimum Housing Code, and any terms, words, phrases, and their derivatives used but not specifically defined in either this article, the North Carolina Building Code, or the City of High Point's Minimum Housing Code shall have the meaning specifically defined in the City of High Point's Zoning Code. 
(a)  Apartment house is any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other in dwelling units. 
(b)  Building shall mean that which is built or constructed an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
(c)  Common areas shall mean all areas which were conveyed to a homeowner's association in a townhouse development, condominium, cooperatives, or planned unit development. 
(d)  Demolish shall mean the demolition and removal of the entire building leaving the property free and clear of any debris and without holes or pockets which may retain water. 
(e)  Dwelling shall mean any building or structure, or portion thereof, which is used, or designed or intended to be used for human habitation including living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
(f)  Dwelling unit shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
(g)  Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the inspector. 
(h)  Fire damage shall mean an action caused by a fire other than smoke damage. 
(i)  Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable refuse resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including a minimum amount of liquid necessarily incidental thereto. 
(j)  Housing shall mean any building, or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, including any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually associated therewith. 
(k)  High grass shall mean any growth of grass or grasses in excess of one and one-half (1½) feet in height. 
(l)  Infestation shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any harmful insects, rodents or other pests. 
(m)  Inspection office shall mean the office of the director of inspections of the city. 
(n)  Inspector shall mean the director of inspections and any other employee of the city in the inspections department who is designated by the director of inspections to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(o)  Multifamily house (building/structure) means a building or portion thereof containing three (3) or more dwelling units, including tenement house, apartment house, or flat. 
(p)  Occupant shall mean any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling or rooming unit. 
(q)  Owner is deemed to mean and include a holder of any legal or equitable estate in the premises, whether alone or jointly with others, and whether in possession or not. 
(r)  Parties in interest shall mean all individuals, associations, partnerships, corporations, and others who have monetary interest in a dwelling and any who are in possession or control thereof either as agent of the owner, as executor, executrix, administrator, trustee administratrix, or guardian of the estate of the owner. 
(s)  Parties in possession shall mean the occupant, tenant, lessee, or others who have the right to enter and use the premises for any purpose. 
(t)  Prohibited material shall mean but not be limited to those listed as follows and includes items of the same group though not specifically listed: 
(1)  Furniture and appliances (i.e.): 
Ranges 
Refrigerators 
Washing machines 
Clothes dryers 
Dish washers 
Water heaters 
Televisions 
Furnaces, space heaters, wood stoves 
Duct material 
Sofas and/or chairs 
Beds and/or bedding 
Dressers 
Tables 
Pictures, lamps and accessories, etc. 
(Note: Does not include lawn furniture) 
(2)  Auto parts (i.e.): 
Tires and wheels 
Engines 
Transmissions and transaxles 
Driveshafts 
Rear ends 
Front end assemblies 
Any and all body parts 
Frames (in whole or in part) 
Exhaust pipes and mufflers/converter 
(3)  Farm implements (i.e.) (except those used in permitted farm operations): 
Tractors and/or harvesters 
Plows, harrows, tillers 
Wagons and/or farm trailers 
(4)  Inoperable lawn maintenance equipment (i.e.): 
Mowers 
Tillers 
(5)  Building materials and equipment (i.e.) (unless stored for construction of a properly permitted structure or ongoing project): 
Brick and block 
Lumber 
Metal/vinyl siding and/or material 
Concrete or mortar mix 
Paints and stains 
Windows and/or doors 
Roofing material 
Siding, trim and/or gutters 
Plumbing fixtures 
Pipe and pipe fittings 
Cement/mortar mixers 
Scaffolding 
Paint spraying equipment 
(u)  Public authority shall mean any public authority for housing or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, Guilford County, or State of North Carolina relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning dwellings or buildings in the city. 
(v)  Public space shall mean that space within any multifamily housing which is open to common use by the occupants and others visiting the premises. 
(w)  Residential building shall mean any building or structure, or portion thereof, which is used, or designed or intended to be used for human habitation including living, sleeping, cooking, or eating or any combination thereof. 
(x)  Story shall mean that part of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. 
(y)  Structure shall mean that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The term structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words, "or part thereof." 
(z)  Tenant shall mean any person who alone or jointly or severally with others occupies a residential building under a lease or holds a legal tenancy in a building. 
(aa)  Trash and/or debris shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials except garbage, including but not limited to ashes, wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior, foam, rubber, leather, plastic, plastic containers, tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves, chemical containers, chemical matter, metal cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, glass bottles, crockery, dust, and dirt. 
(bb)  Weeds are uncultivated plants which grow in profusion and for the purpose of this article may not be allowed to grow more than one and one-half (1½) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-216. - Enforcement agency. 
The director of inspections is hereby designated the officer to exercise, by and through his duly appointed inspector, the powers prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-217. - Consulting agency. 
The inspector shall have the authority to request the advice and assistance of the High Point Planning and Zoning Commission, the Housing Authority of the City of High Point, High Point Fire Department, High Point Police Department, Guilford County Health Department, or any other public authority he may deem appropriate, in exercising the powers of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-218. - Powers. 
The inspector shall determine that a violation of this article exists if, based on his inspection of the premises, any one (1) or more of the following conditions are observed: 
(a)  Trash and/or debris on the property in such quantity that it is injurious to the health, safety, or morals occupants of the property or of neighboring properties or other residents of the city or its environs. 
(b)  Prohibited materials are stored outside of the dwelling structure or accessory structure(s). 
(c)  Property on which high grass, weeds, or undergrowth have been allowed to grow and which may conceal filthy deposits or harbor insects or vermin. 
(d)  Accessory structure(s) which by reason of defects in materials or method of construction, or deterioration are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of occupants of the property or of neighboring properties or other residents of the city or its environs. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-219. - Administrative liability. 
Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or local law or ordinance, no officer, inspector, or employee of the municipality charged with the enforcement of this article shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. No person who institutes or assists in the prosecution of a civil or criminal proceeding under this article shall be liable to damages hereunder unless he acted with malice and without reasonable grounds for believing that the person accused was guilty of any unlawful act or omission. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-220. - Procedure for enforcement. 
(a)  Preliminary investigation. The inspector shall initiate a preliminary investigation of the condition of properties when a petition charging a violation of this article is received from a public official, the owner of property deemed to be in violation, or from five (5) residents of the jurisdiction or whenever it appears to the inspector that a basis for such investigation exists. 
(b)  Notice of complaint and order. If his preliminary investigation discloses that violations of this article exist, the inspector shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner, parties in possession, and parties in interest in the property a complaint and order stating his findings of violations and ordering that corrective actions be taken to correct the violations. The inspector shall state in his complaint and order the nature of the corrective actions required and the date by which the violations must be corrected. The time given to correct violations shall be not more than 60 days nor less than 30 days, unless there exists such immediate hazards that in the opinion of the inspector must be corrected in such lesser time so as to protect the health and safety of the residents of the jurisdiction. 
(c)  Extensions of time to correct violations. If the property owner, occupant, or parties in interest request additional time to correct the violations the inspector may grant one (1) or more extensions, said extensions not to exceed a total of 90 days in which to correct the violations provided that substantial progress is being made in correcting the violations or extenuating circumstances exist which prevent the owner from correcting the violations in the time granted. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-221. - Appeal. 
An appeal to the housing board of appeals may be taken from any decision or order of the inspector by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board, or commission of the city. Any appeal from the inspector to the board shall be taken within 10 days as prescribed by the rules of the housing board of appeals, and shall be taken by filing with the inspector and with the secretary of the commission a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of notice of appeal, the inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-222. - Petition to superior court. 
General statute reference needed for grounds for appeal if any. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-223. - Service of complaints, notices, orders, etc. 
Complaints, notices, or orders issued by the inspector pursuant to this article shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail; but, if the whereabouts of any person is unknown and same cannot be ascertained by the inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint, notice or order upon such person may be made by publishing the same once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a daily newspaper published in the city, service being deemed complete upon the date of the last publication. A copy of any notice, complaint, or order served by publication shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the notice, complaint, or order on or before the last date of publication. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-224. - Further powers. 
The inspector shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including (without limiting the generality of the foregoing), the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 
(a)  To enter upon lands and within buildings for the purpose of making examinations and investigations, provided that such entries shall be made in such lawful manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to persons in possession; 
(b)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this article; 
(c)  To administer oaths, affirmations, and to examine witnesses and receive evidence; 
(d)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-225. - Other unlawful actions. 
No person shall remove or permit the removal of any complaint, notice, or order posted in accordance with the provisions of section 9-2-223 and section 9-2-220 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-226. - Alternative remedies. 
Neither this article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, and the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-227. - Conflicts with other provisions. 
In the event any provision, standard, or requirement of this article is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the residents of the city and environs shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-228. - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9-2-229. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or party in possession to fail, refuse, or neglect to correct violations of this article upon order by the inspector duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in the order or such time as extended by the inspector, and each day that any failure, refusal, or neglect to comply with the order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to impose fines and penalties for violations of its ordinances, and may secure injunctions and abatement orders to further insure compliance with this article. Further, the city may adopt ordinances authorizing the director of inspections or his designee to take such actions as deemed necessary to correct violations of this article and may assess the costs of such actions to the owner and may place liens on the property for any unpaid costs or assessments. 
(c)  Methods of imposing fines and penalties for violation of this article include: 
(1)  Misdemeanor (G.S. 160A-175(b)): 
a.  A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. 14-4 and shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment as prescribed by G.S. 14-4. 
b.  Any person, firm, or corporation failing to comply with an order to correct a violation or continuing to violate this article in the manner named in the order within 10 days after the date stated in the order shall also be subject to a penalty of $500.00. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Civil penalty (G.S. 160A-175(c)). Any person, firm, or corporation failing to pay the penalty for failing to comply with a provision of this article within a 10-day period shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00. Each day beyond the 10-day period shall create a new offense. This penalty shall be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt. 
(3)  Equitable remedy (G.S. 160A-175(d)). Provisions of this article may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate. It shall not be a defense to the application of the city for applicable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law. 
(4)  Injunction and order of abatement (G.S. 160A-175(e)). Provisions of this article may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement. The general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he or she may be cited for contempt and the city may execute the order of abatement. The city shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the form of a mechanic's or materialman's lien. 
(5)  Combination of authorized remedies (G.S. 160A-175(f)). This article may be enforced by any one (1), all, or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed under the provisions of G.S. 160A-175. 
(d)  Method of correcting violations of this article and assessing costs. Upon adoption of an ordinance by city council the director of inspections or his designee shall have the power to immediately take all necessary and appropriate actions to correct violations of this article and shall assess the costs of such actions as a lien against the real property upon which such costs was incurred. Said lien shall be filed and shall have the same priority and be collected or foreclosed upon in the same manner as is provided for assessments pursuant to article 10, chapter 160A, North Carolina General Statutes. 
(1)  The director of inspections may solicit bids and contract with persons or firms for the furnishing of labor, materials, equipment, and/or services necessary to correct violations of this article. 
(2)  The director of inspections may authorize persons or firms to enter upon the lands of the owner for the purpose of correcting violations of this article and may authorize persons or firms to remove and dispose of prohibited materials, to demolish and remove dilapidated outbuildings, and to mow, clear, and remove weeds and undergrowth. 
(Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 4, 5-16-16)  
APPENDICES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7206/16-26 , § 5, adopted May 16, 2016, and effective Jan. 1, 2017, deleted Appendices 1—16 from this Code, and provided that Appendix 8, Street Closing Policy, Appendix 9, Street Name and Address Assignment Standards, Appendix 13, Traffic Impact Analysis Policy, and Appendix 16, City of High Point Water and Sewer Utility Extension Policy, which were previously adopted as policies by the city council, shall remain in effect as policies but not contained within this Code of Ordinances. 
 
Title 10 - TRANSPORTATION AND TRAFFIC  
CHAPTER 1 - Traffic Regulations[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Visibility at intersections, § 6-1-9. 
State Law reference— Authority of cities to regulate traffic, G.S. 160A-300; restrictions on local authorities, G.S. 20-169; operation of motor vehicles and rules of the road, G.S. 20-138 et seq.; motor vehicles generally, G.S. 20-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 10-1-1. - Definitions of words and phrases. 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article. Whenever any words and phrases used herein are not defined herein but are defined in the state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
(1)  Alley. Any strip of land publicly or privately owned, 25 feet or less in width between property lines, set aside for public vehicular right-of-way to adjoining properties for use of public utilities. 
(2)  Authorized emergency vehicle. Vehicles owned and operated by the fire department; federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement vehicles; and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the city. 
(3)  Bicycle. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter. 
(4)  Block. A block is the part of a street lying between the nearest intersecting streets on either side. 
(5)  Business district. A business district is the territory contiguous to a street where 75 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business purposes. 
(6)  Commercial vehicle. Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of property or freight, including vehicles licensed for such purpose. 
(7)  Controlled-access highway: Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
(8)  Crosswalk. 
a.  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
b.  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
(9)  Driver. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
(10)  Freight curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or property from a commercial vehicle. 
(11)  In operation. Operating in good working condition. 
(12)  Intersection. 
a.  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
b.  Where a highway includes two (2) roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
(13)  Lane. A lane is a section of roadway between marked lines or between a marked line and the edge of a roadway, which section is set aside for a single file of vehicular traffic, except a section reserved for parking. 
(14)  Median. That portion of public right-of-way lying between two (2) roadways and used for the separation of vehicular traffic. A median may be paved or unpaved and may or may not have a raised curb. 
(15)  Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled but not operated upon rails. 
(16)  Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
(17)  Official time standard. The hours designated in time limitations set by this chapter refer to eastern standard time or eastern daylight saving time as may be in current use within the city by the action of the governing body, the North Carolina General Assembly, or the Congress of the United States. 
(18)  Official traffic control devices. All signs, signals, marking and devices including parking meters not inconsistent with this chapter placed by authority of the council, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(19)  Park or parking. Means the standing of vehicle, whether occupied or not, on public highway or street other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
(20)  Parking meter. A parking meter is a coin operated mechanical device used in regulating traffic. 
(21)  Passenger curb loading zone. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(22)  Pedestrian. Any person afoot. 
(23)  Person. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation. 
(24)  Police officer. Every officer of the police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(25)  Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
(26)  Railroad. A carrier of persons or property upon cars other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
(27)  Railroad train. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streets. 
(28)  Residence district. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
(29)  Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
(30)  Roadway. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
(31)  Safety zone. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
(32)  Service vehicle. Any vehicle used for the delivery or transportation of freight. 
(33)  Sidewalk. A pedestrian way that consists of that portion of a street or highway between the curb line, or lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property line which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(34)  Stand or standing. Means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
(35)  Stop. When required means complete cessation from movement. 
(36)  Stop or stopping. When prohibited means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
(37)  Stop line. A stop line is a line across a roadway or part of a roadway indicating the point behind which vehicles are required to stop in compliance with an official traffic control device. 
(38)  Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
(39)  System location. The approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. 
(40)  Through highway. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
(41)  Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel. 
(42)  Traffic citation. A traffic citation is a written or printed notice, issued by the authority of the governing body of this city, informing the person designated that he has violated a provision of this chapter or a state traffic law and citing him to appear in district court division of the general court of justice to answer for the violation. 
(43)  Traffic control photographic system. An electronic system consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera and a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an official traffic control device and to automatically produce photographs, video or digital images of each vehicle violating a standard traffic control statute or ordinance. 
(44)  Traffic control signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
(45)  Traffic schedule. A traffic schedule is a separate schedule which is incorporated into by reference and made a part of this chapter, and which designates certain streets, parts of streets, street areas, or times to which a provision of this chapter applies. 
(46)  Traffic ticket. A traffic ticket is a printed ticket, issued by authority of the governing body of this city, informing the person designated that he has violated a provision of this chapter and notifying him to appear at or within the designated time at the city traffic bureau to answer for the violation. 
(47)  Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(48)  Vehicle owner. The person identified by the North Carolina Division of Motor Vehicles as the registered owner of a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 00-89, § 1, 7-20-00)  
Secs. 10-1-2—10-1-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations 
 
Sec. 10-1-11. - Required obedience to traffic chapter. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-13)  
Sec. 10-1-12. - Obedience to police officials. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or any other person designated by the police to direct traffic which relates to the regulation or control of traffic consistent with the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city.  
Sec. 10-1-13. - Persons propelling pushcarts or riding animals to obey traffic regulations. 
Every person propelling any pushcarts or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-15)  
Sec. 10-1-14. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of this city. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-16)  
Sec. 10-1-15. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, or any political subdivision of this state, except persons and vehicles actually engaged in street surface work, including street cleaning, and in construction, repairs or maintenance, but not while traveling to or from such work, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-17)  
Sec. 10-1-16. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  When the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle is lawfully displaying a lighted red or blue light and, is lawfully sounding a siren, and the nature of his official duties require it, he may: 
(1)  Park without regard to the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Turn without regard to the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Exceed the speed limits fixed by this chapter; provided, that ambulances may not exceed any speed limit by more than 10 miles per hour; 
(4)  Drive through a funeral procession; 
(5)  Proceed past a red signal indication or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(b)  The exemption herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying a red or blue light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(c)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.  
Sec. 10-1-17. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
Upon the immediate approach of a police or authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state: 
(1)  The driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the righthand edge or curb of a two (2) way roadway and the lefthand edge or curb of a one (1) way roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(2)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-19)  
Sec. 10-1-18. - Snow removal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a motor vehicle to remain parked on a street where official traffic control devices are in place indicating no parking during snow removal operations. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section or parked in any manner so as to obstruct traffic during snow removal operations may be impounded as provided in section 10-1-54.  
Sec. 10-1-19. - Traffic accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, it shall be the duty of the director of transportation to conduct studies of such accidents and recommend remedial measures for the improvement of traffic flow.  
Sec. 10-1-20. - Traffic accident reports. 
The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the director of transportation.  
Sec. 10-1-21. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The director of police services by and with the approval of the director of transportation is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)  The director of transportation may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic.  
Secs. 10-1-22—10-1-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C - Traffic Control Devices 
 
Sec. 10-1-31. - Placement and maintenance of traffic control devices. 
(a)  The director of transportation has the duty to place and maintain official traffic control devices as required by this chapter. In the event that it becomes necessary for the regulation of traffic or the safety of pedestrian, the director of transportation shall designate and make effective the location of official traffic control devices upon a determination by him: 
(1)  If such a device is to be installed at a particular location, that its installation is necessary in order to control traffic congestion in the interest of public safety; 
(2)  If such a device is to be moved or removed from a particular location, that the device is no longer required at such location for control of traffic congestion in the interest of public safety. 
(b)  Each location of an official traffic control device shall be compiled in traffic schedules, approved by city council and retained permanently in the office of the director of transportation. 
Cross reference— Traffic schedules adopted, Sec. 10-1-291.  
Sec. 10-1-32. - Manual and specifications for traffic control devices. 
All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the most recent edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways as adopted by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. All signs, signals and pavement markings required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-22)  
Sec. 10-1-33. - Obedience to official traffic control devices. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, subject to the regulations governing the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter.  
Sec. 10-1-34. - Traffic control signal legend. 
Where traffic is controlled by an official traffic signal displaying different colored indications successively, the meanings of the indications are as follows: 
(1)  Vehicles. 
a.  Circular green indication. A person operating a vehicle approaching or facing a circular green indication may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official traffic control device prohibits such movements. But vehicles, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or adjacent crosswalks at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Green arrow indication. A person operating a vehicle approaching or facing a green arrow indication may make only that movement indicated by such arrow from the designated lane with explicit right-of-way over those vehicles and pedestrians except those vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or adjacent crosswalks at the beginning of the green arrow indication. 
c.  Green arrow in combination with another indication. A person operating a vehicle approaching or facing a green arrow in combination with another indication may enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow or such other movements as permitted by the other indication shown at the same time. Vehicles, including turning vehicles, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or adjacent crosswalks at the beginning of such indication. At the termination of the arrow indication, the explicit right-of-way designated by the arrow is relinquished and traffic shall comply with the other signal indications. 
d.  Yellow or caution indication. All persons operating a vehicle approaching or facing a yellow indication are warned that the related movements associated with the green indication have been terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately. 
The yellow indication requires the vehicle to stop before the nearest crosswalk or stop bar at the intersection, but if the stop cannot be made safely or if vehicles are lawfully within the intersection at the beginning of the yellow indication, they may cautiously proceed through the intersection. 
e.  Red indication. Any person operating a vehicle facing or approaching a red indication shall stop before the nearest stop bar or crosswalk or, if none, before entering the intersection and shall remain stopped until an indication to proceed is exhibited except as indicated below in section 10-1-11, Right Turn on Red Permitted. 
(2)  Pedestrians. Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows: 
a.  "Walk" indication, continuously illuminated lunar white. Pedestrians facing such signal indication may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
b.  Flashing "Walk" indication (lunar white). Warns that there is a possible conflict of pedestrians and vehicles. Pedestrians facing such flashing "Walk" indication may proceed across the intersection in the direction of the indication. 
c.  "Don't Walk" indication, continuously illuminated portland orange. Pedestrians facing such an indication shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the indication. 
d.  Flashing "Don't Walk" indication, portland orange. Pedestrians facing such an indication shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing during the "Walk" indication shall proceed to the sidewalk or safety zone. 
e.  Pedestrians crossing roadways at intersections which are regulated by separate pedestrian signals shall obey the instruction of the pedestrian signals. 
f.  Pedestrians crossing roadways at intersections which are not regulated by separate pedestrian signals shall obey the indication of the signal facing vehicular traffic moving in the same direction as such pedestrian except when the sole vehicular green indication is a turn arrow or yellow indication. Pedestrians shall not start to cross the roadway when a green turn arrow or yellow indication is exhibited to vehicles. 
(3)  Placing signals. The vehicular and pedestrian traffic signals described in this section shall be placed as designated in article P, schedule 1 and schedule 10 respectively.  
Sec. 10-1-35. - Flashing signals. 
Where traffic is controlled by an official traffic control signal, flasher or combination of flasher and another traffic control device exhibiting flashing colored indications, the meaning of such flashing colored indication shall be as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red or "STOP." A person driving a vehicle approaching or facing the signal must come to a complete stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at another point if indicated by a stop line. 
(2)  Single flashing yellow or "CAUTION." A person driving a vehicle approaching the signal must proceed through the intersection with caution. 
(3)  Single or dual yellow or "CAUTION" in school areas. Whenever the dual flashing yellow signal lights are installed in school areas it shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in the area controlled thereby at a speed greater than that displayed on the speed lens or signs associated with said flashing lights. 
(4)  Placing flashers. The flashing signals described in this section shall be placed as designated in article P, schedule 2.  
Sec. 10-1-36. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any street or highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the director of transportation is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(d)  No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic control device to be used on any street or highway in the city which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.  
Sec. 10-1-37. - Tampering with official traffic control devices or railroad signs or signals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person without lawful authority to alter, remove or tamper with an official traffic control device or railroad signal.  
Sec. 10-1-38. - Avoidance of official traffic control devices. 
It shall be unlawful to drive across a sidewalk or through the driveway of a parcel of property for the purpose of avoiding an official traffic control device.  
Sec. 10-1-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6507/07-102, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2007, deleted § 10-1-39, which pertained to play streets.  
Sec. 10-1-40. - Crosswalks and safety zones. 
The director of transportation is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.  
Sec. 10-1-41. - Traffic lanes. 
(a)  The director of transportation is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.  
Secs. 10-1-42—10-1-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE D - Powers and Duties of the Police Department 
 
Sec. 10-1-51. - Duties of the police department. 
It is the duty of the law enforcement officers of this municipality to enforce all of the provisions of the chapter and all of the state motor vehicle laws. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-31)  
Sec. 10-1-52. - Traffic regulation and pedestrian safety. 
In the event that it becomes necessary for the regulation of traffic or the safety of pedestrians, the law enforcement officers of the city may direct traffic as required without regard to other provisions of this chapter. No person may refuse to comply with a lawful order of a law enforcement officer, when the order is given under the authority of this section.  
Sec. 10-1-53. - Street and sidewalk obstructions. 
It is the duty of the law enforcement officers of this municipality to take all reasonable measures to prevent the obstruction of streets and sidewalks. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-34)  
Sec. 10-1-54. - Impounding of vehicles. 
(a)  The following enumerated sections have been enacted for the protection of the public health, to afford maximum fire protection, and to alleviate dangerous traffic congestion: 
(1)  The section prohibiting the parking of a vehicle within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(2)  The section prohibiting the parking of a vehicle between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  The section prohibiting the parking of a vehicle in front of or in the entrance to a public or private alley. 
(4)  The section prohibiting the parking of a vehicle in commercial and passenger loading zones and established for the purpose of alleviating dangerous traffic congestion. 
(5)  The section prohibiting the parking of a vehicle in special traffic lanes during specified time periods and established for the purpose of alleviating dangerous traffic congestion. 
(6)  The apparent abandonment of vehicles on the streets within the fire limits of the city, or on property owned or operated by the city, for a period of 48 hours or within any other section of the city for a period of three (3) days. 
(7)  The parking of a vehicle within 25 feet of a street intersection in violation of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
(8)  Section 10-1-156 prohibiting parking in certain places and under certain conditions. 
(9)  At any place where pavement markings or signs indicate that stopping, standing or parking is prohibited. 
(10)  The section prohibiting the parking or driving of vehicles upon medians. 
(11)  Law enforcement officers of the city or other city officials designated by the director of police services shall impound or cause to be impounded any vehicle or vehicles found parked on the streets, alleys, or rights-of-way or off-street parking facilities of the city in violation of those sections of this chapter heretofore set forth in this section. 
(b)  In order to carry out the intent of this chapter, the law enforcement officers or designated officials are hereby authorized, and it shall be the duty of said officers or officials to either tow and store such vehicles in a suitable place provided by the city or to make arrangements with wrecker companies who have entered into a contract with the city to tow any vehicle impounded by authority of this chapter to its place of business and to store such vehicle until the owner, or person entitled to the possession thereof claims such vehicle. All costs incident to towing and storage shall be paid by the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof. The costs of towing and storing such vehicle shall be as fixed from time to time by contract between the city and wrecker company. In the event the owner, or person in possession, of the vehicle should appear after the law enforcement officer has called for towing equipment and before such towing equipment has performed any labor incident to the removal of the vehicle a fee less than the full towing fee may be charged as fixed from time to time by contract between the city and the wrecker company. When any work has been performed incident to removal, the full towing fee may be charged. In the event the city should operate towing storage service, any fees collected by the city under the provisions of this section shall be used for the enforcement of this chapter and shall be paid into the general fund of the city. The charges provided for in this section are for services and shall be in addition to any penalty or costs provided for violation of city traffic ordinances. Notice shall be sent to owner (see section 10-1-198). 
(c)  Notification shall be sent to the owner of any vehicle towed and impounded as provided in section 10-1-198. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city manager may, enter into an exclusive contract with one (1) or more persons engaged in the towing and storage of motor vehicles, to remove the vehicles described herein from the public streets and alleys and other public places under the control of the city on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon. The contract so made shall be in writing; shall specify the charges to be made for towing and storage and shall require the person entering into the contract for the towing and storage of such vehicles to perform the service in a manner satisfactory to the city manager and shall provide for the forfeiture of the contract in the event of a violation of any of the provisions of the contract of any other rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to it or of any subsection of this section which may be incorporated in and made a part of the contract. The contract shall further provide that the city shall not be obligated to the person undertaking the towing and storage of such vehicles for any damages or charges which may be incurred in the performance of the obligation assumed by him but that charge shall be collected solely from the owner of the vehicle involved. 
(Code 1958, § 19-41) 
Cross reference— Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles, § 10-1-196 et seq.  
Sec. 10-1-55. - Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility designated by the city any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Code except as authorized by police officials in compliance with provisions as established by the director of public services.  
Secs. 10-1-56—10-1-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE E - Speed Regulations 
 
Sec. 10-1-61. - State speed laws applicable. 
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city, except as this article, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this article when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 86-18A, § 1, 6-5-86)  
Sec. 10-1-62. - Decrease, increase of state law maximum speed. 
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon the streets or portions of streets described in article P, section 10-1-291(3), is (a) greater than is reasonable or safe under conditions found to exist thereon, or (b) is less than is necessary for safe and efficient operation of vehicles thereon; and it is hereby declared that the maximum speed upon those streets or portions of streets designated herein shall be as specified herein at times designated when signs are erected giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 86-18A, § 1, 6-5-86)  
Sec. 10-1-63. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable at intersections or on streets or portions thereof and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 86-18A, § 1, 6-5-86)  
Sec. 10-1-64. - Maximum speed limits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on certain city streets in the state highway system in excess of speeds established and set out under article P, section 10-1-291(3). 
(Ord. No. 86-18A, § 1, 6-5-86)  
Secs. 10-1-65—10-1-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE F - Turning Movements 
 
Sec. 10-1-71. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as follows: 
(1)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway or in the designated right turn lane. 
(2)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  Left turns on other than two-way roadway. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one (1) or more roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available for traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1958, § 19-49)  
Sec. 10-1-72. - Authority to place and obedience to turning markers. 
(a)  The director of transportation is hereby authorized to place markers, buttons, signs, or other traffic control devices, within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.  
Sec. 10-1-73. - No left turn. 
When official traffic control devices are in place prohibiting left turns, it shall be unlawful to make a left turn from the streets designated in article P, section 10-1-291(4)a.  
Sec. 10-1-74. - No right turn. 
When official traffic control devices are in place prohibiting right turns, it shall be unlawful to make a right turn from the streets designated in article P, schedule 4b.  
Sec. 10-1-75. - No turn. 
When official traffic control devices are in place prohibiting any turn, it shall be unlawful to make a turn at the intersections designated in article P, schedule 4e.  
Sec. 10-1-76. - U-turns and turning around. 
When official traffic control devices are in place it shall be unlawful to make a U-turn at any location designated in article P, schedule 4d.  
Sec. 10-1-77. - Right turn on red permitted. 
(a)  Any vehicle, after coming to a complete stop, before entering the intersection, for a red indication facing the vehicle, may, unless prohibited by an official traffic control sign, make a right turn after yielding to pedestrians and other vehicles lawfully in a roadway at the intersection when the signal is first exhibited. 
(b)  When official traffic control devices are in place prohibiting such turns, it shall be unlawful to make a right turn on red at the intersections designated in article P, schedule 4c.  
Secs. 10-1-78—10-1-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE G - One-Way Streets 
 
Sec. 10-1-91. - One-way streets. 
When official traffic control devices are in place indicating one-way streets, it shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle on the streets or parts of streets in a direction other than the one indicated in article P, schedule 5.  
Sec. 10-1-92. - Driving in restricted lanes. 
When official traffic control devices are in place indicating that a roadway lane is restricted to a certain vehicular movement in one (1) direction during one (1) period and the opposite direction during another period of the day, it shall be unlawful to drive contrary to the indication of the official control devices as designated in article P, schedule 6.  
Secs. 10-1-93—10-1-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE H - Stop and Yield Intersections 
 
Sec. 10-1-101. - Stop intersections. 
(a)  When official traffic control devices are in place indicating stop intersections, it shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle into the intersection from the street indicated to stop without first bringing the vehicle to a complete stop and yielding the right of way to all traffic approaching on the intersecting streets. 
(b)  Locations of those intersecting streets which traffic must stop are designated in article P, schedule 8.  
Sec. 10-1-102. - Yield intersections. 
(a)  When official traffic control devices are in place indicating yield right of way intersections, it shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle into the intersections without first slowing down to a speed reasonable for existing conditions and shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian lawfully within the intersection or any vehicle approaching on the intersecting street which is close enough to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(b)  Locations of those intersecting streets which traffic must yield right of way are designated in article P, schedule 9.  
Sec. 10-1-103. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-63)  
Secs. 10-1-104—10-1-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE I - Miscellaneous Driving Rules 
 
Sec. 10-1-111. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately 1500 feet of the highway grade crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing is an immediate hazard; 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-64) 
Cross reference— Railroads, Sec. 10-1-301 et seq.  
Sec. 10-1-112. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official fire call shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-65)  
Sec. 10-1-113. - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-66)  
Sec. 10-1-114. - Driving through funeral or other processions. 
No vehicle may be driven through a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion except fire department vehicles, police patrols and authorized ambulances, and only if the same are responding to calls. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-67)  
Sec. 10-1-115. - Drivers in a procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-68)  
Sec. 10-1-116. - Vehicle shall not be driven on a sidewalk. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-69)  
Sec. 10-1-117. - Limitations on backing. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless the movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-70)  
Sec. 10-1-118. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-71)  
Sec. 10-1-119. - Entering intersections or crosswalks. 
No driver shall move his vehicle across an intersection, or a marked crosswalk, unless he knows that there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection, or crosswalk, to accommodate his vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, or pedestrian although a traffic control signal may be indicating his right to proceed. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-72)  
Sec. 10-1-120. - Moving cars from parked positions. 
Parked cars shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are parked at an angle with the curb, they shall back out at that angle until they have cleared the other cars and shall then proceed in the direction in which they are most nearly headed, but not until movement can be made in safety and without interfering with the moving traffic. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-73)  
Sec. 10-1-121. - Riding on motorcycles. 
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-74)  
Sec. 10-1-122. - Clinging to vehicles. 
No person riding upon any bicycles, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-75)  
Sec. 10-1-123. - Controlled access. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by the director of transportation in accordance with the driveway ordinance.  
Sec. 10-1-124. - Driving on divided roadways. 
Whenever any street or highway has been divided into two (2) or more roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to prohibit vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway, unless directed or permitted by official traffic control devices or police officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier, or section except through an "opening" in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a cross-over or intersection as established by the director of transportation.  
Sec. 10-1-125. - Traffic control regulations for street construction and maintenance operations. 
The city council hereby finds as a fact that construction and maintenance activities within street rights-of-way can create hazardous conditions which may result in accidents if proper precautions are not taken. Every precaution shall be taken to insure the safety of motorists, pedestrians, and workmen in and around the work area. In accordance with this finding of fact it shall be the duty of all agencies, public or private, who perform work in or adjacent to a public street to provide safe and effective work areas and to warn, control, protect and expedite vehicular and pedestrian traffic in accordance with the current policy for traffic control regulations for street construction and maintenance operations as established by the director of transportation.  
Secs. 10-1-126—10-1-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE J - Pedestrian Rights and Duties 
 
Sec. 10-1-131. - Pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals. 
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals where such devices are in place or special pedestrian signals as designated in article P, section 10-1-291(10) but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article.  
Sec. 10-1-132. - Pedestrians' right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be so to yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within the crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(c)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1958, § 19-78)  
Sec. 10-1-133. - Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks. 
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1958, § 19-79)  
Sec. 10-1-134. - Crossing at right angles. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1958, § 19-80)  
Sec. 10-1-135. - Crossing at other than crosswalks. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.  
Sec. 10-1-136. - Obedience of pedestrians to railroad signals. 
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
Cross reference— Railroads, § 10-1-301 et seq.  
Sec. 10-1-137. - Pedestrians walking along roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a street shall when practicable walk only on the far left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1958, § 19-83)  
Sec. 10-1-138. - Pedestrians soliciting rides, business or contributions. 
(a)  No person shall stand, sit or walk in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle traveling in or upon a roadway or stopped momentarily in compliance with a duly erected traffic control device or traffic sign located upon the roadway. 
(b)  No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway or while soliciting such vehicles to park in an off-street parking facilities. 
(Code 1958, § 19-84; Ord. No. 86-18, § 1, 6-5-86)  
Sec. 10-1-139. - Pedestrian-actuated flasher system for mid-block locations. 
The city council hereby finds as a fact that pedestrians crossing the roadway at locations other than intersections can create hazardous conditions for the pedestrian and motorist. Every precaution shall be taken to ensure the safety of the pedestrian and to provide adequate warning, of such crossings, to the motorist. In accordance with the finding of fact it is necessary for the preservation and protection of the public safety that all pedestrian street crossings locations other than at intersection shall be in accordance with the current policy for pedestrian-actuated flasher system for mid-block crossings as established by the director of transportation.  
Secs. 10-1-140—10-1-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE K - Stopping, Standing and Parking  
Division 1 - Generally 
 
Sec. 10-1-151. - Standing or parking close to curb. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicles parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb, except where vehicles are parked on the left side of one-way streets; in such cases the left-hand wheels of such vehicle shall be parallel to and within 12 inches of the left curb.  
Sec. 10-1-152. - Angle parking and obedience to angle-parking signs or markings. 
(a)  Vehicles shall be parked at an angle upon any of the streets or portions thereof as described in article P, schedule 11a. 
(b)  On those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.  
Sec. 10-1-153. - Parking within marked-off spaces. 
On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces for cars, the same shall be parked between such lines. 
(Code 1958, § 19-89)  
Sec. 10-1-154. - Stopping with left side of car to curb prohibited. 
No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb on any improved two-way street. 
(Code 1958, § 19-90)  
Sec. 10-1-155. - Parking so as to interfere with police, fire and sanitary divisions. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be so parked in any private alleys, private roadways or driveways as to block, interrupt or interfere with the passage of any truck or vehicle of the sanitary, fire or police divisions of the city, servicing the people and such residential, business and industrial property abutting thereon. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be permitted to park in the public alley or area underneath the pedestrian plaza adjacent to the pedestrian parking garage where signs are erected giving notice thereof except authorized trucks unloading at designated loading docks. (Code 1958, § 19-91) 
(c)  Subsection (a) above has been enacted for the protection of the public health, safety and convenience. To afford maximum fire protection, and to alleviate dangerous traffic congestion, vehicles parked unlawfully in violation of subsection (a) are found and declared to be inherently and substantially determined to be in violation hereof and such vehicles may be towed and impounded as provided in section 10-1-54.  
Sec. 10-1-156. - Prohibited places; no signs required. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  On a crosswalk; 
(5)  Within 20 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a street or roadway; 
(6)  On either side of any street leading to a railroad underpass, or an overhead bridge, within 50 feet in any direction of the outer edge of such underpass or overhead bridge; 
(7)  On either side of any street leading to a grade crossing, within 50 feet of the closest rail; provided, that where existing permanent structures are located closer than 50 feet, parking may be permitted in front of such structures unless otherwise prohibited and if such parking does not block the view in either direction of the approach of a locomotive or train; 
(8)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction if such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(9)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any underpass structure; 
(10)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopping, standing or parking at the edge or curb of a street; 
(11)  Within 15 feet of any fireplug or hydrant; 
(12)  Within 25 feet of a corner of any intersection, provided that this subsection shall not apply to any public conveyance; 
(13)  Upon the intervening space, physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section used to divide a street or highway into two (2) or more roadways; 
(14)  Between the raised street curb and the adjacent property line; 
(15)  It shall be unlawful to drive or park any vehicle on any public park except the paved or graveled park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  Any vehicle parked in violation of this section or parked in any manner to obstruct traffic may be impounded as provided in section 10-1-54. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to drive or park any vehicle on any public park except the paved or graveled park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1982, Ord. of 4-7-83; Ord. No. 83-23, § 1, 4-7-83)  
Sec. 10-1-157. - Unlawful parking. 
No person shall, stand or park, a vehicle upon any street for the principal purposes of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, excepting repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(3)  Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons; 
(4)  Storage of any detached trailer, or van, when the towing unit has been disconnected; 
(5)  Transferring merchandise, or freight, from one vehicle to another; 
(6)  Advertising.  
Sec. 10-1-158. - Truck and recreational vehicle parking. 
All motor truck carriers operating as either common or contract carriers over regular or irregular routes, all passenger bus carriers, and all other operators of motor trucks or trailers of any kind, including all nonmotorized trailers and stand-alone containerized units, operating into, out of, through, or within the corporate limits of the city are hereby prohibited from parking or storage of such vehicles on the public streets except for the purposes of loading and unloading passengers and freight, and except for temporary parking in cases of emergency involving a mechanical breakdown necessitating repairs to any such vehicle. Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to mass transit business owned by the city, and trucks of one (1) ton capacity or less. 
(Ord. No. 99-30, § 1, 3-4-99; Ord. No. 6333/06-20, § 1, 06-20)  
Sec. 10-1-159. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle upon any street in such a manner or under such conditions as to obstruct any portion of the street or roadway used for the movement of vehicular traffic. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park, stop or stand any vehicle in any traffic lane upon any street designated in article P, schedule 11 b to e.  
Sec. 10-1-160. - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-98)  
Sec. 10-1-161. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
When official traffic control devices are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such place as designated in article P, schedule 11f.  
Sec. 10-1-162. - No stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The director of transportation is hereby authorized to determine locations in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official traffic control devices indicating no parking, stopping, or standing are erected at hazardous or congested places no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such place, as designated in article P, schedule 11b to e.  
Sec. 10-1-163. - Protrusion into street. 
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on a street so that any part of the vehicle or its load extends more than eight (8) feet from the edge of the roadway, except in those areas where diagonal parking is permitted.  
Sec. 10-1-164. - Application of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official traffic control devices except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer.  
Sec. 10-1-165. - Regulations not exclusive. 
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-100)  
Sec. 10-1-166. - Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. 
When official traffic control devices are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described in article P, schedule 11b.  
Sec. 10-1-167. - Emergency stopping on certain streets. 
When official traffic control devices are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop or park a vehicle for any purpose except an emergency, upon any of the streets described in article P, schedule 11c.  
Sec. 10-1-168. - Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. 
When official traffic control devices are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in article P, schedule 11d of any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets described in said article.  
Sec. 10-1-169. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. 
When official traffic control devices are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle between the hours specified in article P, schedule 11e of any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets described in said article.  
Sec. 10-1-170. - Two-hour parking on certain streets. 
When official traffic control devices are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. upon any of the streets or portions thereof as described in article P, schedule 11g.  
Sec. 10-1-171. - One-hour parking on certain streets. 
When official traffic control devices are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than one (1) hour at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and public holidays or upon any of the streets or portions thereof as described in article P, schedule 11h.  
Sec. 10-1-172. - Thirty-minute parking on certain streets. 
When official traffic control devices are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than 30 minutes at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and public holidays or upon any of the streets or portions thereof as described in article P, schedule 11i.  
Sec. 10-1-173. - Fifteen-minute parking on certain streets. 
When official traffic control devices are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than 15 minutes at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and public holidays or upon any of the streets or portions thereof as described in article P, schedule 11j.  
Sec. 10-1-174. - Change of vehicle position in the block. 
A change of position of vehicle from one (1) point directly to another point, within the same block, shall be deemed one (1) continuous parking period. The parking period shall be as designated on traffic signs erected within the same block regulating the parking time limit. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-110)  
Sec. 10-1-175. - Special furniture market parking regulations. 
Notwithstanding any requirements of this chapter to the contrary, the following special parking regulations shall apply during the semi-annual International Home Furnishings Market, ("furniture market") as those dates are published by the International Home Furnishings Market Authority. 
(1)  For the period beginning at 6:00 a.m. on the Monday preceding the furniture market and ending at 11:00 p.m. on the last day of the furniture market, the maximum time limits for parking prescribed by sections 10-1-170 through 10-1-173 shall not apply, except that at the following locations no parking shall be allowed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.: 
S. Elm Street, High Avenue to Green Drive. 
S. Hamilton Street, Broad Avenue to Green Drive. 
S. Main Street, High Avenue to Green Drive. 
S. Wrenn Street, High Avenue to Green Drive. 
(2)  Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. during the furniture market, unattended vehicles and those impeding the flow of traffic are prohibited on the following streets: 
Elm Street, Westwood Avenue to Russell Avenue. 
Hamilton Street, Russell Avenue to Westwood Avenue. 
Main Street, Russell Avenue to Westwood Avenue. 
Wrenn Street, Westwood Avenue to Russell Avenue. 
(3)  During the dates of the furniture market the following regulations shall apply in the area bounded by High Avenue in the north, Lindsay Street on the west, Russell Avenue on the south and Hamilton or Steele Street on the east: 
a.  Loading or unloading of any goods for display in showrooms is prohibited between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Loading and unloading is permitted in official loading zones, and off street loading docks or areas between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
b.  Vehicles shall not wait upon the street for access to a loading dock or area. If necessary to avoid delays in loading or unloading, showrooms shall provide a private staging and holding area for vehicles needing to access their docks. 
(Ord. No. 02-75, § 1, 8-15-02)  
Sec. 10-1-176—10-1-190. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-43, § 1, adopted May 7, 1992, deleted §§ 10-1-176—10-1-180, which contained provisions relative to parking meters and to the violation of this division and were derived from provisions presumably enacted during the original codification and from Code 1958, §§ 19-121—191-123 and 19-125.  
Division 2 - Off-Street Parking 
 
Sec. 10-1-191. - General. 
The city council hereby finds as a fact that traffic congestion within High Point is such that the establishment of a system of off-street parking facilities is necessary for the preservation and protection of the public safety, the alleviation of congestion created by traffic and parking upon the public streets and for the promotion of the welfare and convenience of the public within the city. In accordance with this finding of fact it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any of these off-street facilities without making proper payment when prescribed as required in article P, schedule 18(b).  
Sec. 10-1-192. - Definitions. 
(a)  Off-street parking facility is any lot, area or structure owned or operated by the city for the purpose of parking vehicles. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Public parking facility: Any lot, area or structure owned or operated by the city which is used exclusively by the general public for the purpose of parking vehicles. 
(2)  Reserve parking facility: Any lot, area or structure owned or operated by the city which has assigned or leased parking for specified purposes. 
(3)  Restricted parking facility: Any lot, area or structure owned or operated by the city which is designated for city-owned vehicles or authorized vehicles being used as a necessary part of city employment. 
(Code 1958, § 19-159)  
Sec. 10-1-193. - Unlawful parking in public facility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a trespass for any person to park a motor vehicle in any parking facility owned or operated by the city as a public parking facility as designated in article P, schedule 18a, at any place except in a designated parking space or in such a manner as to block or interfere with the placing of a motor vehicle in a regular designated parking space or the removal of a motor vehicle from any such designated parking space or the actual entrance and exit to the facility. Any motor vehicle found parked in violation of this section shall be impounded. Parking facilities to which this section shall be applicable shall have a sign at each entrance containing language indicating that motor vehicles parked contrary to this section will be impounded. 
(b)  The director of transportation is hereby authorized to establish short parking spaces in any public parking facility owned and operated by the city after an engineering and traffic investigation has been made to determine the need for such spaces. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in these designated spaces for longer than two (2) hours at a time between the hours of 8:00 a.m., and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. All such spaces shall have signs erected, giving notice of the prescribed time limit. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-160, as amended by Ord. of 3/6/80)  
Sec. 10-1-194. - Unlawful parking in reserve parking facility. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute trespass for any person to park a motor vehicle in any parking facility owned or operated by the city as a reserve parking facility as designated in article P, schedule 18a, at any place except in a designated parking space or area assigned to him by the director of transportation or in such a manner as to block or interfere with the placing of a motor vehicle in a regular designated parking space or the removal of a motor vehicle from any such designated parking space or the actual entrance and exit to the facility. Any motor vehicle found parked in a reserve parking facility owned or operated by the city in violation of this section shall be impounded. Parking facilities to which this section shall be applicable shall have a sign at each entrance containing language indicating that such facility is a reserve facility and that motor vehicles parked contrary to this section will be impounded.  
Sec. 10-1-195. - Unlawful parking in restricted parking facility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a trespass for any person to park a motor vehicle in any restricted parking facility as designated in article P, schedule 18(a) except that any authorized person operating a city owned vehicle or a vehicle used exclusively for city purposes may park such vehicle in any restricted parking lot operated by the city. 
(b)  No vehicle shall park at any place except in a designated parking space or in such a manner as to block or interfere with the placing of a motor vehicle in a regular designated parking space or the actual entrance or exit to the facility. Any motor vehicle found parked in a restricted parking facility to which this section shall be applicable shall have a sign at each entrance containing language indicating that such facility is a restricted facility and that motor vehicles parked contrary to this section will be impounded. 
(c)  Vehicles parked in a restricted parking facility that are not authorized or which are not parked in the assigned area shall be issued a citation by the police department. 
(d)  The director of transportation is hereby authorized to establish shortterm parking spaces in any restricted parking facility owned and operated by the city, after an engineering and traffic investigation has been made to determine the need for such spaces. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in these designated spaces for longer than the established time, at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. All such spaces shall have signs erected giving notice of the prescribed time limit. The police department shall have the authority to issue a citation to any vehicle parked in excess of the established time limit. 
(Code 1958, § 19-162; Ord. No. 91-34, § 1, 5-2-91)  
Sec. 10-1-196. - Impounding vehicles—When illegally parked. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay the required charges for the privilege of parking a vehicle in any parking facility of which rates are fixed in article P, schedule 18b. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the director of transportation to park a vehicle in any reserved or restricted parking facility owned or operated by the city. All violators shall be subject to having such vehicle impounded as herein provided. 
Cross reference— Impoundment powers and procedures of police. Sec. 10-1-54.  
Sec. 10-1-197. - Same—Right of redemption and charges. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to impound any vehicle from any parking facility owned or operated by the city when such vehicle is in violation of the provisions of this article and such vehicle shall be held until claimed by the legal owner. 
(b)  In the event it becomes necessary to impound such vehicle, the charges for impounding and storage shall be paid by the owner or other person responsible for such vehicle. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-164)  
Sec. 10-1-198. - Same—Notification to owner. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city to notify the owner of any impounded vehicle in writing, by registered mail, return receipt requested, within 72 hours, of the fact that his vehicle has been impounded, setting forth the reasons for such impounding and the amount of the charges constituting a lien thereon. 
(b)  When the vehicle is registered in this state or in any other state the registered owner thereof, as shown by the records of the state of its registration, shall be deemed the owner of the vehicle, and the mailing of the notice required hereby to such registered owner at the address shown on such records shall be deemed sufficient notification hereunder. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-165)  
Sec. 10-1-199. - Same—Charges constitute lien; release. 
Impounding, storage, violation and other charges incurred by the city and imposed upon the owner or operator of any illegally parked vehicle in connection with the impounding thereof shall constitute a lien upon the illegally parked vehicle, and no such impounded vehicle shall be released until all such charges have been paid to the collections department of the city and proper evidence of ownership exhibited. 
(Code 1958, § 19-166)  
Sec. 10-1-200. - Rate schedule. 
In accordance with section 10-1-191 the rates for off-street parking facilities shall be as established from time to time by the council as designated in article P, schedule 18(b).  
Sec. 10-1-201. - Liability of city for theft, damage to vehicles, etc. 
(a)  The city shall not be responsible or liable for the loss or theft of any vehicle parked on any off-street parking facility established by the city, or any part thereof, or any contents thereof; nor shall the city be responsible or liable for damage to any vehicle or to the contents thereof, while same is parked within the boundaries of any such off-street parking facility. 
(b)  Persons parking vehicles on any off-street parking facility established by the city will do so at their own risk, with respect to such vehicles and any parts or contents thereof. 
(Code 1958, § 19-169)  
Sec. 10-1-202. - Selling goods from parked vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer to sell, any goods, wares, merchandise from any vehicle parked on any off-street parking facilities as established by the city or within the boundaries thereof. 
(Code 1958, § 19-170)  
Sec. 10-1-203. - Loitering prohibited; littering parking facilities with rubbish, handbills, etc., prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on any parking facility established by the city without lawful authority or permission. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or litter trash, rubbish, refuse, paper or distribute handbills on any parking facility established by the city, provided that nothing shall prohibit the delivery by hand of handbills to any person. 
(Code 1958, § 19-171)  
Sec. 10-1-204. - Bicycles, roller skates, etc., prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a trespass for any person upon roller skates, in-line skates, roller blades, skateboards, or any other self-propelled or push device, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, bicycle or similar device to be upon the premises of any parking facility owned or operated by the city where a fee is charged. 
(b)  Parking facilities to which this section shall be applicable shall have a sign at each entrance containing language indicating the uses being prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 3-3-94) 
Cross reference— Bicycles, § 10-1-251 et seq.  
Secs. 10-1-205—10-1-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE L - Loading and Unloading 
 
Sec. 10-1-211. - Loading and unloading prohibited during certain hours for certain types of vehicles. 
The loading and unloading of tractor-trailer trucks is prohibited during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. upon any of the streets or portions thereof as described in article P, schedule 11p.  
Sec. 10-1-212. - Freight curb loading zones. 
The director of transportation is hereby authorized to establish freight curb loading zones on certain streets or parts of streets in such a manner as he shall determine, after an engineering investigation, to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the adjacent businesses and to the general public and every such freight loading zone shall be designated by an appropriate sign and/or signs. The freight curb loading zones described in this section shall be located as designated in article P, schedule 11l.  
Sec. 10-1-213. - Passenger curb loading zones. 
The director of transportation is hereby authorized to establish passenger curb loading zones on certain streets or parts of streets in such manner as he shall determine, after an engineering investigation, to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the adjacent businesses and to the general public and every such passenger loading zone shall be designated by an appropriate sign and/or signs. The passenger curb loading zones described in this section shall be located as designated in article P, schedule 11m.  
Sec. 10-1-214. - Standing in passenger curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, except that when signs are erected at any passenger loading zone designating a longer time period, no vehicle shall be allowed to stop, stand or park for more than the time specified on the signs. The time period that may be established at any passenger loading zone shall not exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1958, § 19-113)  
Sec. 10-1-215. - Standing in freight curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.  
Sec. 10-1-216. - Temporary freight curb loading zones. 
The director of transportation is hereby authorized to establish temporary freight curb loading zones when temporary loading and unloading activities warrant the creation of such a zone for a limited period of time.  
Sec. 10-1-217. - Public carrier curb zones. 
The director of transportation is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxi stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. The bus stops and taxi stands described in this section shall be located as designated in article P, schedule 11n and 11o, respectively.  
Sec. 10-1-218. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxis regulated. 
(a)  The operator of the bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 12 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to impede unduly the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxi stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxi from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Code 1958, § 19-116)  
Sec. 10-1-219. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(b)  The mass transit facility located, adjacent to Broad Avenue between Hayden Place and Elm Street shall be for the exclusive use of buses, except for emergency and service vehicles using the pedestrian walkway. No vehicles except buses shall stop, stand or park at anytime in the transfer facility and those buses, emergency, and service vehicles shall travel only in the direction indicated when signs indicating the direction of travel have been erected and maintained. No person or vehicle shall interfere with the operation of the buses and with the access of pedestrians between the transfer facility and the pedestrian walkway. Vehicles interfering with the operation of the buses in the transfer facility shall be subject to immediate removal. 
(Code 1958, § 19-117)  
Secs. 10-1-220—10-1-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE M - Regulating Kinds and Classes of Traffic on Certain Streets 
 
Sec. 10-1-231. - Truck routes. 
(a)  The city council hereby finds as a fact that the indiscriminate driving of heavy trucks and trailers over the streets located within the corporate limits of the city is detrimental to the health, morale, comfort, safety and welfare of the people of the city and deems it best for the public welfare of the citizens that the operation of such trucks and trailers be confined to certain streets within the corporate limits of the city. The heavy trucks and trailers to which this chapter applies are tractor and tandem tractor type trucks when pulling semi-trailers or tandem semi-trailers. 
(b)  When official traffic control devices are in place all trucks and trailers entering the city destined to any point outside the city and not taking on or discharging within the city limits, any goods, wares or merchandise shall travel exclusively on the streets designated in article P, schedule 12. 
(c)  No person shall operate any such trucks or trailers for the transportation of property, except along and over the routes set out in article P, except when it is impracticable to do so because of street repairs or other emergency, or when necessary to travel on other streets to a destination for the purpose of loading or unloading goods, wares, or merchandise, and then only by such deviation from the nearest truck traffic route as is reasonably necessary. 
(d)  All persons operating trucks or truck trailers for the transportation of goods, wares, or merchandise, whose property or cargoes are taken on or loaded within the city for transportation outside the corporate limits, shall in every instance follow said truck route out of the city.  
Sec. 10-1-232. - Traction engines, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to roll or to move on, along, over, or across any of the paved, macadamized, concrete, or bitulithic streets in the city any traction engine, trailer, "snaggle-tooth" harrow or any other character of engine, roller, or machine having corrugated, spiked, "snaggle-tooth" or any other kind of tires or rollers that will indent or damage the streets. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 19-127)  
Sec. 10-1-233. - Transportation of flammables; routes designated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport gasoline, naphtha, kerosene, distillate, oil, or other flammable or explosive oil derivatives into or through the city by means of motor vehicles, motor trucks, or combination of motor truck and trailer or other vehicle, or to operate such vehicles as are customarily used for the transportation of such commodities except to regularly established automobile repair shops, over and upon any of the streets, avenues, or alleys of the city except as described in article P, schedule 13.  
Sec. 10-1-234. - Load restrictions upon vehicles using certain highways. 
When official traffic control devices are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified in article P, schedule 14(a); provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the operation of any vehicles performing necessary services for persons or organizations located on the streets or parts of streets which are designated as restricted.  
Sec. 10-1-235. - Load limit for bridges. 
When official traffic control devices are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to drive, operate or tow on any bridge within the corporate limits, any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a gross weight exceeding the safe load carrying capacity as established in article P, schedule 14(b) and posted at each end of said bridge.  
Sec. 10-1-236. - Restrictions upon use of streets by certain vehicles. 
(a)  The director of transportation is hereby authorized to determine and designate these heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles or other non-motorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  When official traffic control devices are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs as designated in article P, schedule 15.  
Sec. 10-1-237. - Pedestrian walkways and malls. 
Upon those streets, or parts of streets, or areas designated as pedestrian walkways and malls in article P, schedule 16, vehicular traffic, except emergency and service vehicles shall travel only in the direction indicated when signs indicating the direction of travel are erected and maintained. Signs indicating the designated pedestrian walkway and mall shall be erected and maintained at every intersection or point of traffic ingress.  
Secs. 10-1-238—10-1-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE N - Bicycles[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Bicycles ridden in city parking facilities, Sec. 10-1-204. 
 
Sec. 10-1-251. - Regulations for bicycles. 
(a)  It is an offense against the city for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article. 
(b)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Those regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.  
Sec. 10-1-252. - Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which, by their very nature, have no application.  
Sec. 10-1-253. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or "U" turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.  
Sec. 10-1-254. - Riding on bicycles. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.  
Sec. 10-1-255. - Riding on roadways and bicycle paths. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  Persons riding bicycles upon the roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(c)  Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(d)  All motorized vehicles are prohibited on any posted bicycle path.  
Sec. 10-1-256. - Speed. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.  
Sec. 10-1-257. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.  
Sec. 10-1-258. - Carrying articles. 
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from maintaining adequate control of the bicycle, for the safety of the rider and pedestrians in the area.  
Sec. 10-1-259. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.  
Sec. 10-1-260. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(b)  When official traffic control devices are in place on any sidewalk or roadway, prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall operate a bicycle in such restricted areas designated in article P, schedule 17(a).  
Sec. 10-1-261. - Lamps and other equipment on bicycles. 
(a)  Every bicycle, when in use at night time, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(b)  No person shall operated a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle. 
(c)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.  
Sec. 10-1-262. - Riding on handlebars prohibited. 
The operator of a bicycle when upon a street, shall not carry any person upon the handlebars or frame of his bicycle, nor shall any person so ride upon such bicycle.  
Sec. 10-1-263. - Bicycle; street lanes. 
The street or portions of streets designated in article P, schedule 17(b) are hereby established as bicycle-street lanes for the use of non-motorized bicycles requiring manual operation. When official traffic control devices are in place designating a bicycle-street lane, it shall be unlawful for any person to park, drive or enter any vehicle (except a bicycle as defined above) within a bicycle-street lane.  
Sec. 10-1-264. - Skateboards. 
(a)  "Skateboard" means any board, platform, or other device having one (1) or more wheels, or any other similar device, intended to be ridden by a person who propels himself or herself by pushing it forward and then riding upon it as it coasts. 
(b)  The use of a skateboard by any person shall be prohibited on the premises of the High Point Library at 901 N. Main Street including its parking lots, and in the following locations in the Central Business District: 
(1)  Any public sidewalk, street, parking lot, or parking deck, including the premises of the High Point Municipal Building at 211 S. Hamilton Street. 
(2)  On the premises of any business, residence, or other private property where one (1) or more signs are positioned to give notice and which contain the words "No Skateboards". Letters on the sign must be clearly legible and at least three (3) inches in height. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 02-45, § 1, 6-6-02)  
Secs. 10-1-265—10-1-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE O - Parades, Special Events And Picketing[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , adopted May 21, 2018, repealed §§ 10-1-271—10-1-283 and added §§ 10-1-271—10-1-290 as herein set out. Former §§ 10-1-271—10-1-283 pertained to parades and derived from the 1982 Code; Ord. No. 91-55, adopted Sep. 5, 1991 and Ord. No. 7022/13-54, adopted December 16, 2013. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 10-1-271. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, division 1 and division 2, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Appeals official means the city manager, or his designee who shall be a deputy city manager or assistant city manager. 
(2)  City means the City of High Point, North Carolina. 
(3)  City manager is the person selected and appointed by the High Point city council to fill the position of city manager or his or her designee. 
(4)  Parade means any march, demonstration, gathering, public assembly, procession or motorcade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof that has the potential to disrupt the normal flow of traffic upon any public street, provided the term shall not include: 
a.  Funeral processions; 
b.  Pickets as defined in subsection (8) below; 
c.  Footraces and bicycle races as defined in section 10-1-282 of this article; 
d.  Block parties as defined in section 10-1-283 of this article; and 
e.  Festivals as defined in section 10-1-284 of this article. 
(5)  Permit official means the person or persons designated by the city manager as being responsible for issuing and revoking permits under this article. The city manager may designate different persons as the permit official for different categories of permitted events and for different facilities or locations. The permit official shall not be the same designee as the appeals official. 
(6)  Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(7)  The terms picket, pickets, picketer, and picketing as used herein mean to make a public display or demonstration of sentiment for or against a person or cause, taking place in a particular location without procession to other locations, and includes those demonstrations which may include the distribution of leaflets or handbills, the display of signs and any oral communication or speech, which may involve an effort to persuade or influence, including all expressive and symbolic conduct, whether active or passive, upon those portions of the public street and sidewalk not used primarily for vehicular parking and moving traffic and not constituting a parade, as defined in section 10-1-271(5). 
(9)  Public street means any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-of-way, or median strip thereof. The terms "highway" and "street" and their cognates are synonymous as used herein. 
(10)  Sidewalk means any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved. 
(11)  Special event means parade as defined in section 10-1-271(4); footraces and bicycle races as defined in section 10-1-282 of this article; block parties as defined in section 10-1-283 of this article; and festivals as defined in section 10-1-284 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-272. - Parade permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or participate in a parade unless a permit allowing such activity has been obtained, and remains unrevoked, pursuant to this section. No person may conduct or otherwise participate in any parade except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(b)  Permit application. A person seeking a parade permit shall file an application with the permit official or designee on forms provided by the city and the application shall be signed by the applicant under oath at least 10 business days and not more than 180 days before the commencement of the event. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the permit official shall consider an application that is filed less than 10 business days before the commencement of the proposed event where the purpose of such event is a spontaneous response to a current event or where, after due consideration of the date, time, place, and nature of the parade, the anticipated number of participants, and the city services required in connection with the event, the permit official determines that the time from filing is sufficient to prepare for the parade pursuant to the standards set forth in subsection (c) below. 
The permit application must contain the following if applicable: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number for the person in charge of the proposed event and the name of the organization with which that person is affiliated or on whose behalf the person is applying (collectively "applicant"); 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number for an individual who shall be designated as the responsible planner and on-site manager for the event ("parade chairman"); 
(3)  The date, time, place, and route of the proposed event, including the location and time that the event will begin to assemble and disband; 
(4)  The anticipated number of persons, vehicles, and animals which will constitute such parade or demonstration and the type of animals and description of the vehicles; 
(5)  The location by street of any assembly areas for such parade or demonstration; 
(6)  Such other information, attachments, and submissions that are requested on the application form; and 
(7)  Payment of a nonrefundable application fee as set out in the city's special event policy. 
(c)  Permitting criteria. The permit official or city manager shall issue a permit for the proposed parade unless: 
(1)  The safe conduct of the parade will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a number of law enforcement personnel of the city to properly police the line of movement of the parade and of contiguous areas that adequate police protection cannot be provided to the remainder of the city; 
(3)  The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances and rescue units that adequate ambulance and rescue service to portions of the city and contiguous areas not occupied by the parade will be impeded; 
(4)  The application is not fully completed and executed or contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; 
(5)  The proposed event would conflict with previously planned programs organized, conducted, or sponsored by the City and previously scheduled at or near the same time and/or place or would conflict with an already permitted event under this section; 
(6)  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will substantially interfere with adequate police and fire protection of, or ambulance and rescue service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(7)  The parade is to be held for the primary purpose of advertising a product, goods, or an event, and is designed to be held primarily for private profit or gain; 
(8)  The conduct of the parade will interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment to such an extent that adequate fire protection cannot be provided to the city; or 
(9)  The proposed event would present an unreasonable danger to the public health and safety. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall authorize the permit official or city manager to deny a permit based upon political, social, religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual orientation or gender related grounds, or based upon the content of the views expressed. 
(Ord. No. 91-55, § 1, 9-5-91; Ord. No. 7022/13-54, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-273. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager or chief of police may immediately revoke any permit granted for a parade if: 
(a)  Any parade participant violates the standards for conduct of parades set out herein; or 
(b)  Any parade participant fails to comply with the formation, terms, and conditions set out in the application and permit or fails to comply with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-55, § 1, 9-5-91; Ord. No. 7022/13-54, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-274. - Parade costs. 
(a)  The applicant for permits pursuant to section 10-1-272 shall be responsible for reasonable costs associated with the parade including the hiring and paying off-duty law enforcement officers, or reimbursing the city for the costs of providing on-duty law enforcement officers and other necessary personnel and equipment, to appropriately police street closures and the safety and security of participants. The police and fire departments shall determine the number of officers, traffic control officers (in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 20-114.1), fire/EMS personnel, and transportation personnel needed to appropriately police street closures and for safety, security, and medical needs and the time when such services shall commence and end, taking into consideration the following: 
(1)  The proposed location of the route of the parade; 
(2)  The time of day that the parade is to take place; 
(3)  The date and day of the week proposed; 
(4)  The general traffic conditions in the area requested, both vehicular and pedestrian. 
(5)  The number of marked and unmarked intersections along the route requested, together with the traffic control devices present; 
(6)  If traffic must be completely rerouted from the area, then the number of marked and unmarked intersections and the traffic control devices are to be taken into consideration; 
(7)  The estimated number of participants; 
(8)  The nature, composition, format and configuration of the parade; 
(9)  The anticipated weather conditions; and 
(10)  The estimated time for the parade 
(b)  (1)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the permit official or city manager shall grant a waiver of costs for the services required by this subsection to an indigent applicant seeking a permit for a parade. An indigent applicant is any person who: 
(i)  If an individual, receives or is qualified to receive electronic food and nutrition benefits recognized by the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services, issued through Electronic Benefit Transfer cards; 
(ii)  If an individual, receives or is qualified to receive Work First Cash Assistance; 
(iiii)  If an individual, receives or is qualified to receive Supplemental Social Security Income; or 
(iv)  If not an individual, receives no membership fees, dues, or any other type of income and owns no assets, and is not a sole proprietorship, general partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or limited partnership organized under state law. 
(2)  An applicant requesting a waiver of costs on the basis of indigency shall inform the permit official and provide evidence of indigency. If it is later determined that there has been an intentional, material misrepresentation of the applicant's financial status or other information provided on the application, the city reserves the right to charge the organizers on appropriate fee based on actual events. 
(c)  The city may sponsor parades that are annual civic or community events provided to city residents generally around holidays. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-275. - Notice of action on permit application; appeal procedure. 
(a)  The permit official or city manager shall act upon the application as expeditiously as reasonably possible, and within three (3) working days after receipt, notifying the applicant in writing of his decision. The notice shall also inform the applicant of the appeal procedure available under subsection (b) of this section and the conference available under section 10-1-276 for an alternative permit. If the application is for a parade permit and is filed in less than 10 days prior to the proposed event as a spontaneous response, described in section 10-1-272(b), the permit official or city manager shall notify the Applicant in writing of the decision and basis for the decision within 24 hours of receipt of the application. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit immediately to the appeals official. The denied applicant shall make the appeal within five (5) days after receipt of the denial by filing a written notice with the city manager and a copy of the notice with the city clerk. 
(1)  Within five business days, or such longer period of time agreed to by the applicant, the appeals official shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing on whether to issue the permit or uphold the denial or revocation. The applicant shall have the right to present evidence at said hearing. The decision to issue or uphold the denial or revocation shall be based solely on the approval criteria set forth in this section. The appeals official shall render a decision on the appeal within five (5) business days after the date of the hearing. In the event that the purpose of the proposed event is a spontaneous response to a current event, or where other good and compelling causes are shown, the appeals official shall reasonably attempt to conduct the hearing and render a decision on the appeal as expeditiously as is practicable. 
(2)  The decision of the appeals official is subject to review in the Superior Court of Guilford County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari for review shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within 30 days after the applicant has received notice of the decision. Unless good cause exists to contest a petition for writ of certiorari, the city shall stipulate to certiorari no later than five (5) business days after the petitioner requests such a stipulation. The city shall transmit the record to the court no later than five (5) business days after receiving the order allowing certiorari. Notwithstanding the provisions of any local rule of the reviewing court that allows for a longer time period, the city shall file its brief within 15 days after it is served with the petitioner's brief. If the petitioner serves his or her brief by mail, the city shall add three (3) days to this time limit, in accordance with North Carolina General Statute 1A-1, Rule 5. If the local rule is subsequently amended to provide for a shorter time period for the filing of any brief, then the shorter time period shall control. The North Carolina Rules of Appellate Procedure shall govern an appeal by an applicant from the Superior Court of Guilford County. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-276. - Alternative permit. 
If the permit official or city manager denies an application for a parade permit based upon one (1) or more of the findings prescribed in section 10-1-272, the permit official or city manager shall, upon the request of the applicant, confer with applicant for the purpose of trying to negotiate modifications to the planned parade that will eliminate the objections found under section 10-1-272. The permit official or city manager is authorized to grant an alternative permit specifying a date, time, or route different from that contained in the application. The alternative permit is valid only upon the filing by the applicant with the permit official or city manager a written acceptance of the alternative permit. An alternative permit is void if not accepted in the manner prescribed in this section within three (3) working days after its issuance. An alternative permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-277. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions, and with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-278. - Duty of parade chairman. 
The person designated in the application as responsible for the physical conduct of the parade shall be responsible for monitoring the conduct of the participants in the parade. Upon actual notice of any violation, given to the responsible person by a law enforcement officer on the scene of said parade, such person shall make immediate bona fide attempts to correct the violation. It shall be unlawful for such responsible person to refuse to make such bona fide attempts to correct the violation. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-279. - Conduct during the parade. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in the parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parade or parade route. The city manager or designee shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The city manager shall cause signs to be posted to this effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended, any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-280. - Hand-carried signs. 
No sign or poster carried by hand in the parade shall be of greater density than eight (8) ply .030 thickness cardboard. No support for such sign or poster shall be of a metallic substance nor thicker than one (1) by three-fourth (¾) inches. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-281. - Parade route. 
Every parade shall follow the route designated and approved by the city manager or designee and prescribed on the parade permit. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-282. - Footraces and bicycle races. 
(a)  The term "footrace" as used in this section is defined as a group of three (3) or more runners or walkers competing against either each other or a time limit over a fixed course all or a part of which involves the use of city street right-of-way, city sidewalks, and greenways. This term shall include events connected to a footrace, such as untimed non-competitive "fun runs." 
(b)  The term "bicycle race" as used in this section is defined as a group of three (3) or more bicyclists competing against each other or a time limit over a fixed course all or a part of which involves the use of city street right-of-way, city sidewalks, and greenways. This term shall include untimed non-competitive bicycle events such as memorial rides. 
(c)  Application for a race covered by this section shall be made in writing at least 120 calendar days before the time at which the race shall be scheduled to begin and shall contain the information outlined in the city's special event policy. A race application may be accepted after this deadline only if allowed as a late application permitted under the city's special event policy. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application properly completed and timely filed as hereinabove set out, the city manager or designee shall issue a permit after the applicant has complied with all applicable requirements imposed in accordance with the city's special event policy. The permit shall contain all information stated on the application and shall be signed by the city manager or designee. 
(e)  The following standards shall apply to all footraces and bicycle races subject to this section conducted in the city: 
(1)  Every race shall follow a route approved by the city manager or designee in accordance with the standards set out below. 
(2)  The race applicant and all persons involved in conducting the race shall comply with all terms and conditions set out in the city's special event policy and all terms and conditions contained in the permit issued for the race. 
(3)  The organizer of an event subject to this section shall be responsible for reasonable costs associated with the foot races and bicycle races including the hiring and paying off-duty law enforcement officers, or reimbursing the city for the costs of providing on-duty law enforcement officers and other necessary personnel and equipment, to appropriately police street closures and the safety and security of participants. The police and fire departments shall determine the number of officers, traffic control officers (in accordance with N.C.G.S. 20-114.1), fire/EMS personnel, and transportation personnel needed to appropriately police street closures and for safety, security, and medical needs and the time when such services shall commence and end. The city may provide the services required by this subsection at no cost, or at a reduced cost, to the applicant should the city desire to provide such support to the event. 
(4)  The permit shall not be issued until the sponsor shall acquire sufficient insurance or approval by the city attorney to indemnify the city for damages or liability which the city might incur. 
(5)  The approval of any route shall be based on the safety of the participants and non-participants, the degree of disruption that the route will likely cause, the available access for cars and pedestrians, and the unique requirements of a specific event. 
(6)  The City Manager or designee's disapproval of a proposed route may be appealed to the city council. Appeals shall be made in person at a regularly scheduled city council meeting at least three (3) meetings prior to the proposed event date. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-283. - Block parties. 
(a)  The term "block party" as used in this section is defined as a planned gathering of persons in which a public street will be closed that is sponsored by a business, place of worship, non-profit organization or community interest group. 
(b)  Application for an event covered by this section shall be made in writing at least 10 business days before the time at which the event shall be scheduled to begin and shall contain the information outlined in the city's special event policy. An event application may be accepted after this deadline only if allowed as a late application permitted under the city's special event policy. 
(c)  The applicant is responsible for notifying all property owners or residents in the area to be blocked off of the event using a form provided by the city. Any opposition by property owners or residents with direct frontage and/or access to the street to be closed may result in permit denial. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application properly completed and timely filed as hereinabove set out, the city manager or designee shall issue a permit after the applicant has complied with all applicable requirements imposed in accordance with the city's special event policy. The permit shall contain all information stated on the application and shall be signed by the City manager or designee. 
(e)  The following standards shall apply to all block parties subject to this section conducted in the city: 
(1)  The block party may encompass an area of no greater than one block and the sponsoring organization must be located in that area; 
(2)  Block parties may have no more than 500 attendees at any one time; 
(3)  Block parties are still subject to all federal, state, and local laws, including the noise ordinance and alcohol laws. 
(4)  Police may end the party and order attendees to leave the street(s) if violation of this section occurs. After a reasonable time to allow for dispersal, the street(s) will be reopened and persons impeding the flow of traffic will be subject to arrest. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-284. - Festivals. 
(a)  The term "festival" as used in this section is defined as an outdoor concert, fair, community event, or similar event that is primarily commercial and/or recreational in nature. 
(b)  Application for a festival covered by this section shall be made in writing at least 120 calendar days before the time at which the festival shall be scheduled to begin and shall contain the information outlined in the city's special event policy. A festival application may be accepted after this deadline only if allowed as a late application permitted under the city's special event policy. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application properly completed and timely filed as hereinabove set out, the city manager or designee shall issue a permit after the applicant has complied with all applicable requirements imposed in accordance with the city's special event policy. The permit shall contain all information stated on the application and shall be signed by the city manager or designee. 
(d)  The following standards shall apply to all festivals subject to this section conducted in the city: 
(1)  The festival applicant and all persons involved in conducting the festival shall comply with all terms and conditions set out in the city's special event policy and all terms and conditions contained in the permit issued for the festival. 
(2)  The applicant shall be responsible for hiring and paying off-duty law enforcement officers, or reimbursing the city for the costs of providing on-duty law enforcement officers and other necessary personnel and equipment, to appropriately police street closures and the safety and security of participants and those in the vicinity of the event. The police and fire departments shall determine the number of officers, traffic control officers (in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 20-114.1), fire/EMS personnel, and transportation personnel needed to appropriately police street closures and for safety, security, and medical needs and the time when such services shall commence and end. The city may provide the services required by this subsection at no cost, or at a reduced cost, to the applicant should the city desire to provide such support to the event. 
(3)  The festival permit shall not be issued until the sponsor shall acquire sufficient insurance or approval by the city attorney to indemnify the city for damages or liability which the city might incur. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
DIVISION 2. - PICKETING 
 
Sec. 10-1-285. - Picketing permitted; notice of intent and receipt required. 
Peaceful picketing shall be permitted in the city provided the same is done under the following conditions: 
(a)  No picketing shall be conducted on a public street or sidewalk and no person shall participate in the same unless notice of intent to picket has been given to the city manager or designee, and unless a receipt of such notice has been issued, except where provided below. 
(b)  A group of 15 or more persons shall give notice of intent to picket. A group of fewer than 15 persons may give notice of intent to picket but is not required to do so. Whether a group consists of 15 or more persons such that notice is required shall be determined from the time immediately prior to initiating a picket. If a group of less than 14 persons begins to picket without providing notice and becomes a group of 15 persons or more, the failure to provide notice of the picket shall not be a violation of this section. Notice given shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, if any, of the organization or group sponsoring or proposing to picket unless the group indicates that it intends to picket anonymously, in which case no name is required; 
(2)  The location or locations in the city where the pickets propose to assemble and demonstrate; 
(3)  The date or dates on which the picketing is to occur; 
(4)  The name of the person and organization giving notice of intent to picket unless the person or organization indicates that it intends to picket anonymously, in which case no name is required; 
(5)  Whether or not persons below the age of eighteen (18) years are expected to participate; and 
(6)  The person or persons to be in charge of the activity and who will accompany it and carry any receipt of notice at all times. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any picketer, as defined herein, to engage in the activity prohibited under N.C.G.S. §14-277.4A. 
(d)  Upon the giving of notice of intent to picket, properly provided as hereinabove set out, the city manager or his designee shall immediately issue a receipt of notice. The receipt shall contain all information stated in the notice. Upon cessation of such picketing for a period of 24 hours or more, any notice previously provided shall no longer be effective for the purpose of section 10-1-285(a) and (b). 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-286. - Standards of conduct for picketing activity. 
(a)  Picketing shall be conducted only on portions of the public street and sidewalk not used primarily for vehicular parking or moving traffic. 
(b)  Picketers may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding 40 inches provided the words used are not fighting words or threats that would tend to provoke a reasonable person to breach the peace. 
(c)  If picketers promoting different objectives, causes, actions or policies desire to use a sidewalk that is already used for picketing, the second in time picketers shall maintain a minimum of 20 feet of space from the first in time pickets at all times and at all adjacent points of potential contact. The chief of police or designee shall aid picketers in creating a minimum of 20 feet of space between the picketers in order to ensure safety for all picketers promoting different objectives, law enforcement, and the public, without regard to the purpose or content of objectives promoted by either picketers. 
(d)  Picketers shall not at any time nor in any way obstruct, interfere with, or block: persons entering or exiting from vehicles; persons crossing streets or otherwise using the public street and/or sidewalk; the entrance or exit to any building or access to property abutting the street or sidewalk; or pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(e)  No person observing, engaging in, or assisting in picketing shall bring to or allow to remain in the immediate area of picketing any vicious animal. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a group of 15 or more persons to picket without filing a notice as required herein. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-287. - Hand-carried signs. 
No sign or poster carried by hand in the picket shall be of greater density than eight (8) ply .030 thickness cardboard. No support for such sign or poster shall be of a metallic substance nor thicker than one (1) by three-fourth (¾) inches. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-288. - Interference with picketers prohibited; police authority to disperse crowds; failure to leave when ordered declared offense. 
(a)  The police officers of the city may, in the event of violation of N.C.G.S. Ann. §14-288.4(a)(1) and §14-288.4(a)(2), direct the dispersal of persons so assembled and may arrest any person who fails to absent himself from the place of such assemblage when so directed by the police. 
(b)  Whenever the free passage of any public street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, whether or not the crowd assembles as a result of or in connection with picketing, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to so disperse or move on when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-289. - Severability. 
If any part, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article shall be held to be void, invalid, or unconstitutional by a valid judgment or decree of court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section and such remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1-290. - Criminal penalty. 
In accordance with N.C.G.S. §160A-175, violation of any provision of division 1 and division 2, with the exceptions as set forth herein, shall be a misdemeanor as provided in N.C.G.S. §14-4, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. Any violation set forth herein that is also a violation of any state law shall not be punishable under section 10-1-290 such that the violation would allow for duplicative punishments. 
(Ord. No. 7417/18-46 , 5-21-18)  
ARTICLE P - Schedules 
 
Sec. 10-1-291. - Traffic schedule adopted; city manager authorized to compile; to be on file in office of the director of transportation. 
The following traffic schedules, compiled under the direction of the city manager, and kept on file in the office of the director of transportation, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(1)  Traffic signals; 
(2)  Flashing signals; 
(3)  Speed control: 
a.  Speed limits on state system street; 
b.  Speed limits on city streets; 
c.  Speed limits in school zones (state system); 
d.  Speed limits in school zones (city system); 
e.  Speed limits in public parks; 
(4)  Turn control: 
a.  Left turns prohibited; 
b.  Right turns prohibited; 
c.  Right turn on red prohibited; 
d.  U-turns; 
e.  All turns prohibited; 
(5)  One way streets; 
(6)  Restricted lanes; 
(7)  Through streets; 
(8)  Stop signs; 
(9)  Yield signs; 
(10)  Pedestrian signals; 
(11)  Curb restrictions: 
a.  Angle parking; 
b.  Parking prohibited at all times; 
c.  Emergency stopping; 
d.  Parking prohibited at certain hours; 
e.  Stopping, standing or parking prohibited at certain times; 
f.  Parking adjacent to schools; 
g.  Two-hour parking zones; 
h.  One-hour parking zones; 
i.  Thirty-minute parking zones; 
j.  Fifteen-minute parking zones; 
k.  Parking meter zones; 
l.  Freight loading zones; 
m.  Passenger-curb loading zones; 
n.  Bus stops locations; 
o.  Taxi stands; 
p.  Loading and unloading prohibited during certain hours for certain type vehicles; certain size vehicles prohibited in residential districts; 
(12)  Truck routes; 
(13)  Flammable and combustible liquids routes; 
a.  Class I and II routes restricted to certain hours; 
b.  Class I and II routes unrestricted to time of day; 
(14)  Load restrictions using certain streets; 
(15)  Restrictions upon using certain streets; 
(16)  Pedestrian walkways and malls; 
(17)  Bicycle riding; 
(18)  Off-street parking facilities: 
a.  List of lots and type of facility; 
b.  Rate schedule; 
(19)  Peddling restricted; 
(20)  Major thoroughfares designated for supplemental regulations. 
(Ord. No. 86-19, § 1, 6-5-86; Ord. No. 91-76, § 1, 11-21-91) 
Editor's note— The schedules adopted by § 10-1-291 were readopted August 6, 1987.  
Secs. 10-1-292—10-1-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE Q - Railroads[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Driver's obedience to signal on approach of train, § 10-1-111; pedestrian's obedience to signals, § 10-1-136. 
 
Sec. 10-1-301. - Shifting trains; flagmen; obstructing crossings. 
Every railroad company while shifting cars across any public grade crossing within the corporate limits of the city, except where there is maintained and operated at any such crossing, gates, watchmen, bells, flashers, or other automatic signal devices, shall post a flagman ahead of each train or part of train which is moving to warn people of danger. The speed of every shifting train shall be limited and completely under the control of the engineer so that the engine or train can be stopped on short notice. No person, or railroad company, shall suffer any street, sidewalk or crossing within the city limits to become partially or wholly obstructed by cars, trucks, engines, etc., for more than five (5) minutes at a time. Any violation of this section shall subject the railway company to a fine of $25 for each offense.  
Sec. 10-1-302. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 90-83, adopted Oct. 4, 1990, repealed § 10-1-302 in its entirety. Formerly, § 10-1-302 pertained to speed limits of trains running through the city and adequate signals at grade crossings and derived from the 1982 Code.  
Sec. 10-1-303. - Automatic signals or flagmen at certain railroad crossings. 
All railroad companies shall be required to afford protection to the public by maintaining combined flashing and automatic gates and bell signals or by placing a flagman, properly equipped with danger signals, so as to adequately warn pedestrians, motorists and all other persons using such crossing of all approaching trains at all grade level crossings maintained by them within the city limits. 
(Code 1958, § 17-5)  
Sec. 10-1-304. - Duty of railroads to maintain crossings in safe conditions. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all railroad companies owning or operating railroads within the limits of the city to keep all grade crossings and overhead bridges, used by vehicles or pedestrians, or both, in a smooth, level, clean and perfectly safe condition at all times, by paving same with wood, brick, concrete, stone or other suitable material. The crossing shall be so maintained for the full width of the street and sidewalks and for the full distance of the railroad right-of-way on both sides of the tracks. 
(b)  Any railroad company failing to keep and observe the requirements of this section shall be subject to a penalty of $25 for each offense. Each day's failure or neglect on the part of any railroad company to keep and observe any of the requirements or provisions of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 17-6)  
ARTICLE R - State of Emergency 
 
Sec. 10-1-305. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6950/12-66, adopted Oct. 1, 2012, repealed § 10-1-305 which pertained to state of emergency and curfew authorized and derived from the original codification.  
ARTICLE S - Photographic Surveillance 
 
Sec. 10-1-306. - Traffic control photographic systems. 
(a)  Administration. The City of High Point shall implement a system for capturing traffic control violations, as defined under G.S. 20-158, with a traffic control photographic system that will use the photographic images as prima facie evidence of the traffic violations and will authorize the High Point Department of Transportation or an agent of the department to issue civil citations. 
The City of High Point Department of Transportation shall administer the traffic control photographic program and shall maintain a list of system locations where traffic control photographic systems are installed. 
Any citation for a violation for G.S. 20-158 or other traffic violation, issued by a duly authorized law enforcement officer at a system location shall be treated, pursuant to G.S. 20-176, as an infraction so long as the system photographic images are not used as prima facie evidence of the violation. 
The citation shall clearly state the manner in which the violation may be reviewed. The citation shall be processed by officials or agents of the city and shall be forwarded by personal service or first-class mail to the owner's address as given on the motor vehicle registration. 
(b)  Offense. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to cross the stop line at a system location when the traffic signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red light, or for a vehicle to violate any other traffic regulation specified in G.S. 20-158. 
(2)  The owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for a violation under this section, unless the owner can furnish evidence that the vehicle was in the care, custody or control of another person at the time of the violation, as describe in subsection (3). 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (2), the owner of the vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation if, within 30 days after notification of the violation, the owner furnishes the officials or agents of the city either of the following: 
(i)  An affidavit stating the name and address of the person or entity who had the care, custody, and control of the vehicle at the time of the violation; or 
(ii)  An affidavit stating that, at the time of the violation, the vehicle involved was stolen. The affidavit must be supported with evidence that supports the affidavit, including insurance or police report information. 
(4)  This section shall not apply, and the registered owner of the vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation, if notice of the violation is given to the registered owner of the vehicle more than 90 days after the date of the violation. 
(5)  The owner of a vehicle that has been leased or rented to another person or company shall not be liable for a violation pursuant to this section if, after receiving notification of the civil violation within 90 days of the date of occurrence, the owner, within 30 days thereafter, files with the officials or agents of the city an affidavit including the name and address of the persons or company that leased or rented the vehicle. If notification is given to the owner of the vehicle after 90 days have elapsed from the date of the violation, the owner is not required to provide the name and address of the lessee or renter, and the owner shall not be held responsible for the violation. 
(c)  Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be deemed a noncriminal violation for which a civil penalty of $50.00 shall be assessed, and for which no points authorized by G.S.20-16(c) shall be assigned to the owner or driver of the vehicle, nor insurance points as authorized by G.S. 58-36.65. Failure to pay the civil penalty or to respond to the citation within 21 days shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest responsibility for the violation and shall subject the owner to a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00. The city shall establish procedures for the collection of the civil penalties and shall enforce the penalties by a civil action in the nature of a debt. 
(d)  Nonjudicial administrative hearing. The City of High Point Department of Transportation shall establish an administrative process to review objections to citations or penalties issued or assessed. A notice requesting a hearing to review objections shall be filed within 21 days after notification of the violation. An individual desiring a nonjudicial hearing must post a bond in the amount of $50.00 before a hearing will be scheduled. The hearing officer's decision is subject to review in the Superior Court of Guilford County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 00-89, § 2, 7-20-00; Ord. No. 01-68, § 1, 8-16-01; Ord. No. 6071/03-45, § 1, 8-21-03; Ord. No. 6074/03-48, § 1, 9-2-03)  
Title 11 - LICENSING AND REGULATION  
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 11-1-1. - Vending machines or amusement devices, identification. 
(a)  Each coin-operated vending machine or amusement device (except as otherwise licensed) situated, operated, maintained or used within the city shall have conspicuously stamped upon it or affixed thereon for identification purposes the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the owner thereof. The identification shall be provided by the owner of the machine at his own expense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner and operator of any public premises to permit any coin-operated vending machine or amusement device on the premises unless the coin-operated vending machine or amusement device shall have conspicuously stamped upon it or affixed thereon for identification purposes the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the owner thereof, as required in (a) above.  
Sec. 11-1-2. - Dance halls and public dances; license required; fee; approval of city manager. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a dance hall, or to give a public dance where compensation is received for admittance by the sale of tickets, or refreshments, or otherwise, without first obtaining approval from the city manager and a license from the city collector. 
(b)  The license fee for public dance halls and public dances shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council.  
CHAPTER 2 - Taxicabs[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, adopted Aug. 5, 2004, amended ch. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 2, §§ 11-2-1—11-2-51, pertained to vehicles for hire, and derived from the 1958 Code, §§ 21-1—21-14, 21-16.1—21-30, 21-32—21-34, 21-36, 21-38—21-44, 21-46, 21-46.1; Ord. No. 97-37, § 1, adopted May 1, 1997; Ord. No. 97-77, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 1997; Ord. No. 98-37, § 1, 2, May 4, 1998; and Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, adopted Jan. 20, 2000. 
 
ARTICLE A - General Information 
 
Sec. 11-2-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the taxicab business in order to preserve the health and welfare of the citizens and visitors of High Point and the protection of their property, and to promote safe, reliable, and economically viable taxicab service. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
City means the City of High Point, North Carolina. 
City council means the City Council of the City of High Point, North Carolina. 
Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the city clerk upon approval by the city council to engage in the taxicab business as provided in this chapter. 
Driver means any person operating or in charge of a taxicab. 
Employee means any manager, dispatcher, mechanic, driver, contract driver, agent, or other individual who is compensated by a certificate holder in the conduct of its business. 
Limousine service means personal motor vehicle transportation service in which an agreement for transportation is entered into more than 24 hours before the service, and the motor vehicle is not owned or operated by a person to whom a certificate has been issued by the city. 
Manifest means the daily record prepared by the driver for the vehicle he or she operates. 
Owner means the person to whom a certificate has been issued. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association. 
Taxicab means any vehicle that solicits to carry, attempts to pick up, or picks up one (1) or more persons for transportation from one (1) place to another for a fee. This term excludes buses with seating capacities of 16 or more passengers (including the driver) operating upon fixed routes and between fixed termini. This term also excludes limousine service. The terms taxicab, taxi, and cab are synonymous. Evidence of intent to operate as a taxicab may include, but is not limited to, markings on a vehicle or sign, beckoning from or near a vehicle to pedestrians, or parking or stopping in a marked taxi stand. 
Taximeter means a mechanical device in a vehicle for the purpose of computing the fare for a trip upon the basis of distance traveled, waiting time, or both. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-3. - Compliance with chapter required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter, or to operate or allow to be operated a taxicab within the corporate limits of the city unless a certificate has been issued for its operation. This chapter shall not apply to taxicabs that enter the city solely to drop off passengers, if the taxicab is properly licensed by the jurisdiction in which the taxicab picked up the passenger(s). This chapter shall not apply to vehicle(s) operating under written contract with the International Home Furnishings Market Authority to provide transportation during the International Home Furnishings Markets; provided, however, that such vehicles may be restricted to designated areas of parking, stopping, passenger pick-up and passenger discharge by the director of transportation or the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-4. - Penalty. 
(a)  Pursuant to North Carolina General Statute 160A-175(c), and in addition to any other sanction imposed under this chapter, there is hereby imposed a civil penalty in the amount of $75.00 for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Civil penalties are to be paid to the city collections division or appealed to the city manager's office within 10 days of issuance of civil penalty notice. Failure to pay or appeal a civil penalty notice will result in the penalty being recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of a debt. 
(b)  In addition to civil penalty, any violation of this chapter shall also be punishable as a misdemeanor under NCGS 14-4, and shall subject the offender to a fine of not more than $500.00, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-5. - Designation of a taxicab inspector. 
The chief of police shall designate a taxicab inspector from within the police department, who shall be responsible for the inspection of taxicabs and the administration of this chapter. The taxicab inspector may be a civilian or sworn law enforcement employee of the police department. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the taxicab inspector and any city police officer. A civilian taxicab inspector is hereby given authority to issue a civil penalty for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Secs. 11-2-6—11-2-9. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
 
Sec. 11-2-10. - Requirements. 
(a)  In order to operate a taxicab company within the city, a person must apply for and receive a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the city council. 
(b)  Minimum eligibility requirements for a holder of a certificate shall include: 
(1)  Maintaining a fleet of at least seven (7) taxicabs; marked, state registered, and insured; 
(2)  Serving the entire geographical area of the city; 
(3)  Operating 24 hours a day, and seven (7) days a week; 
(4)  Operating a 24-hour dispatch system, seven (7) days a week; 
(5)  Being accessible by toll free calls from all High Point telephone numbers, 24 hours a day; 
(6)  Maintaining an office in the city for the operation of the taxicab business, which office, or other facilities shall be in continuous compliance with all zoning and other city regulations; and 
(7)  Being responsible, able and willing to comply with the provisions of this chapter as determined in the sole discretion of the city council. 
(c)  Each holder of a certificate shall upon issue thereof, and yearly thereafter, pay to the city a vehicle and records inspection fee of $15.00 per vehicle, based upon the maximum number of taxicabs permitted under the certificate. 
(d)  If an applicant has met all eligibility requirements under subsection (b) above except that the applicant has failed to maintain a fleet of seven (7) taxicabs, the city council may, upon request, grant a probationary license for a period of up to, but not exceeding, 12 months from the date in which the probationary license is granted. All probationary license holders shall abide by and be subject to all local and state laws governing taxicabs. At the end of the probationary period, the taxicab inspector will make a report to the city council on the applicant's status. If the applicant fails to meet or meets but fails to maintain the seven (7) taxicabs minimum requirement within the probationary period, the city council shall revoke the probationary license. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04; Ord. No. 7047/14-25A, § 1, 3-17-14)  
Sec. 11-2-11. - Application. 
(a)  Each initial or subsequent application for a certificate shall be accompanied by a receipt of payment to the city collections division of an application fee of $75.00. 
(b)  Application for a certificate shall be made to the city council by completing an application that is provided by the city manager's office. The completed application and any attachments are to be filed with the city manager's office. The applicant shall furnish to the city manager such other information as may be required. 
(c)  An application for a certificate shall be filed during the months of May or November. The city manager will forward the application to the taxicab inspector to review the sufficiency and veracity of the information contained therein. Submission of an application gives express permission from the applicant for the taxicab inspector to investigate any criminal, employment, or credit history of the applicant. 
(d)  Upon completion of review of the application, the taxicab inspector shall forward his or her findings to the city manager. The city manager shall refer applications submitted to city council for consideration as soon as practical but not later than 60 days after receiving the taxicab inspector's findings. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04; Ord. No. 7047/14-25A, § 2, 3-17-14)  
Sec. 11-2-12. - Public hearing on application. 
(a)  The city council shall conduct a public hearing for the purpose of considering any information pertinent to the question of issuance of a certificate, after notice has been given by mail to all holders of a certificate and all applicants for a certificate at the address shown on their certificate or application and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least once not less than 10 days prior to the hearing. Any certificate shall be issued only after it has passed by ordinance at two (2) regular meetings of city council. 
(b)  Any hearing may be continued from a time to time without further notice. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-13. - Determination of public convenience and necessity. 
The city council shall determine in its discretion whether a certificate shall be issued and shall consider: 
(1)  The adequacy of existing taxicab service and other forms of available public transportation. 
(2)  The probable permanence and quality of the services to be offered by the applicant. 
(3)  The adequacy of the applicant's commercial insurance. 
(4)  The number and condition of the vehicles and the location and characteristics of termini proposed to be used. 
(5)  The experience of the applicant in the taxicab industry. 
(6)  The applicant's character, experience, and ability to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-14. - Power of city council to grant or refuse certificate. 
(a)  The city council shall have the authority to grant a certificate as applied for, or to grant a certificate to the applicant for a lesser number of taxicabs than specified in the application, or to deny the application in the exercise of its sound discretion after consideration of the factors prescribed in section 11-2-13. 
(b)  Each certificate shall be granted for a maximum number of taxicabs, but not less than seven (7). 
(c)  A holder of a certificate may request an increase in the maximum allowable number of taxicabs according to the procedure in section 11-2-11. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-15. - Form and contents of certificate. 
The form of a certificate shall be prescribed by city council and shall contain the name and address of the owner and the maximum number of taxicabs allowed. It shall state that it is issued subject to the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws. A certificate shall be issued for an indefinite period and shall have no expiration; however, this does not waive any annual business license fees due. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-16. - Certificate constitutes franchise; subject to revocation. 
(a)  A certificate shall constitute a franchise from the city for the operation of taxicabs within the city up to the maximum number named in the certificate. The city council shall have the authority to revoke a certificate in its discretion. The city manager has the authority to suspend a certificate for up to 30 days, pending city council decision. Upon revocation or suspension, the certificate is to be turned over to the taxicab inspector and taxicab operations thereunder are to cease immediately. 
(b)  No certificate shall be revoked or suspended until the certificate holder has had at least five (5) days notice by personal service or by certified mail directed to the address on its application, stating briefly the basis for the revocation or suspension and the time and place of a hearing. After the hearing, the city council or the city manager shall have the power to revoke or suspend a certificate or to conditionally revoke or suspend the certificate upon compliance with an order as fixed by city council or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-17. - Transferability. 
A certificate may not be transferred or assigned without the prior approval of the city council. Change of company ownership shall automatically revoke a certificate granted under this chapter. The purchaser of a taxicab company shall not operate a taxicab until a certificate has been applied for and issued to the purchaser as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-18. - Causes for suspension, revocation and application denial. 
(a)  A certificate may be revoked or suspended by city council or the city manager for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to operate taxicabs on a 24-hour basis. 
(2)  Failure to maintain vehicles in good order and repair or as required by state law. 
(3)  Failure to maintain liability insurance as required by this chapter. 
(4)  Failure to pay business license fees. 
(5)  A pattern of traffic or safety violations by drivers. 
(6)  Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter. 
(7)  Unauthorized transfer of certificate. 
(8)  False or misleading statement on a certificate application. 
(9)  The certificate holder's conviction or charge of any of the following offenses: 
a.  Any felony. 
b.  Any state or city law relating to prostitution. 
c.  Any state or city law relating to the sale or possession of a controlled substance. 
d.  More than three (3) convictions of state or local traffic laws within a 12-month period. 
e.  Permitting operation of a taxicab by a person without a taxicab driver permit. 
(b)  The taxicab inspector is authorized to conduct an independent investigation into the facts of a potential violation, and report the findings to the city manager or city council. A court verdict of not guilty or a dismissal of a criminal charge shall not be considered as evidence that the act was not committed. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-19. - Criminal history check for certificate applicants. 
A criminal records check shall be performed on all certificate applicants. Fingerprint cards of the applicant shall be presented to the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation and the Federal Bureau of Investigation and processed as allowed by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-20. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11-2-21. - Certificate holder responsibilities. 
A certificate holder shall maintain on file for inspection by the taxicab inspector the names of all employees, drivers, their addresses, telephone numbers and driver license numbers. A certificate holder is to maintain a file of all complaints received for inspection by the taxicab inspector. Certificate holders are responsible for the actions of their employees when on-duty. 
A certificate holder is responsible for the conduct of its drivers. The certificate holder is also responsible for the condition of all vehicles and equipment operated as taxicabs by it. Actions of drivers or employees in violation of this chapter shall be imputed to the holder of a certificate whose responsibility it shall be to insure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-22. - Manifest records. 
Certificate holders shall collect driver manifests at the end of the driver's tour of duty. Manifest forms shall be supplied by the certificate holder to the drivers and contain the driver's name, cab number, beginning and ending times of duty, address of origin and destination of every trip, number of passengers, amount of fare for every trip, and any other information deemed necessary by the certificate holder or taxicab inspector. Manifests are to be kept on file for no less than 90 days, and are subject to inspection by the taxicab inspector or any city police officer. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-23. - Vehicle inspections by owner. 
Every certificate holder should institute a systematic and periodic inspection of its fleet to insure that all vehicles comply at all times with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Secs. 11-2-24—11-2-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C - Vehicle Specifications and Equipment 
 
Sec. 11-2-30. - Compliance with state law. 
No taxicab shall be operated in the city unless the vehicle complies with all applicable state statutes regarding vehicle registration, safety and emissions inspections, equipment regulations, and tax laws. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-31. - Financial responsibility. 
(a)  No person shall allow the operation of a taxicab within the city without complying with North Carolina General Statute 20-280. In addition to this compliance, no person shall allow the operation of a taxicab within the city unless there is on file with the taxicab inspector a commercial insurance policy, or satisfactory proof of policy, for the taxicab. This policy shall remain in full force and effect during the operation of the taxicab. The policy must maintain minimum commercial liability limits of $50,000 per person/$100,000 per accident/$50,000 property damage. 
(b)  Every driver of a taxicab being operated out of the city shall carry and produce to any requesting law enforcement officer a card listing the current auto insurance company and policy number covering the taxicab. Carrying and producing a state automobile registration card with current and correct insurance information shall be deemed to comply with this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04; Ord. No. 6837/11-45, § 2, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 6842/11-50, § 2, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 11-2-32. - Vehicle markings. 
(a)  Each certificate holder shall adopt a color and markings scheme for its taxicabs distinct from that of any other certificate holder. The paintings and markings are subject to the approval of the taxicab inspector. All taxicabs operating under one (1) certificate shall be identical in painting and markings. The name of the taxicab company and the taxicab vehicle number must be permanently marked on each side and the rear of the taxicab. The taxicab company's telephone number must be permanently marked on each side of the taxicab. All letters and numbers must be at least two (2) inches in height, sharply contrasted with the background, clearly visible and placed as directed by the taxicab inspector. No certificate holder may assign a specific vehicle number to more than one (1) taxicab. 
(b)  A taxicab may be equipped with, but shall not be required to have, an exterior top/advertisement light of a type approved by the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-33. - General vehicle requirements. 
(a)  Each taxicab must be clean, operable, and in good repair. The trunk must be clean and empty, except for one (1) spare tire and necessary emergency equipment. 
(b)  Each taxicab must have a minimum of three (3) doors, two (2) doors allowing entry to the driver's compartment and at least one (1) door allowing entry to the passenger's compartment. All doors of the taxicab must be operable from an interior and exterior handle. 
(c)  All seat safety belts that were originally installed by the vehicle manufacturer shall be accessible and in working order in each taxicab. 
(d)  The windshield and windows of each taxicab must be maintained free of cracks, scratches and any material or condition that reduces the clarity of vision of the driver. 
(e)  Each taxicab shall have the following appliances or devices in good working order with operable on and off controls, if applicable: 
(1)  All manufacturer's front windshield wipers. 
(2)  Windshield defroster. 
(3)  Passenger compartment heater. 
(4)  Air conditioner. 
(5)  Interior light, with operable on/off switch independent of the doors. 
(6)  Speedometer. 
(7)  A two-way radio mounted in the taxi. 
(f)  All upholstery covering or interior lining in a taxicab must be substantially free of cuts or tears and ceiling lining may not sag more than one (1) inch. 
(g)  All exterior paint and body of a taxicab shall be maintained in good condition, free of substantial rust, dents, scratches, chips and abrasions. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-34. - Taximeter. 
Every taxicab shall have installed in it an operable taximeter of a design approved by the taxicab inspector. The taximeter must be inspected by the taxicab inspector prior to use to determine fares. A taximeter shall be in such condition that it is not more than five (5) percent from absolute distance accuracy. All manufacturer's lights on the taximeter shall operate. The taximeter shall be accurate in accordance with the current waiting-time rate and distance rate as set by city council. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-35. - Display of rate. 
Every taxicab shall have displayed in or on the taxicab, clearly visible to passengers, the current rates of taxicab service. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-36. - Taxicab inspections. 
(a)  Before operation of a taxicab, it must have passed an inspection of equipment by the taxicab inspector. The taxicab inspector shall specify a date when the current inspection shall expire and another inspection shall be necessary. A certificate holder shall deliver all of its taxicabs in operation to a location designated by the taxicab inspector at a specified date and time for inspection. 
(b)  The taxicab inspector shall have the authority, at any time, to enter into or upon a taxicab at any location for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  A taxicab which is found to be unsafe in any way or not in compliance with this chapter may be ordered out of service by the taxicab inspector and operation of the taxicab before approval by a taxicab inspector shall be unlawful and subject the certificate holder and any other person allowing the operation of the taxicab to criminal and/or civil penalties. 
(d)  A taxicab inspection fee of $5.00 shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle to the city collections division for each regularly scheduled taxicab inspection and every initial inspection. Receipt of payment shall be presented to the taxicab inspector performing the inspection. Upon a failure to pass an inspection, a reinspection will be performed at no charge. A field inspection initiated by a taxicab inspector, at a time other than regularly scheduled inspections, shall be at no charge. A taxicab that has passed the most recent regularly scheduled inspection that is taken out of service by a taxicab inspector shall be reinspected at no charge. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Secs. 11-2-37—11-2-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE D - Taxicab Drivers 
 
Sec. 11-2-46. - Drivers, generally. 
Drivers of taxicabs shall be clean and neat in dress and person. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-47. - Taxi driver permit required. 
No person shall operate a taxicab without having in his or her possession a valid taxicab driver permit. Permits shall be valid for one (1) year from date of issuance and shall be renewed annually. The process and fee for new and renewal permits shall be $7.00. Permits are to be produced upon request by the taxicab inspector or a city police officer, and displayed to any requesting passenger or potential passenger. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-48. - Form of application for taxicab driver permit. 
(a)  Each applicant for a taxicab driver permit shall make application on a form provided by the police department. The application shall contain the applicant's name, address, physical condition, former employers, criminal history, and driver license number and state of issue, and any other information required on the application. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the applicant. The applicant shall be fingerprinted and photographed as directed by the taxicab inspector. The application is to be submitted to the taxicab inspector or his or her designee and approved or denied within 10 days. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04; Ord. No. 7506/19-23 , 3-4-19)  
Sec. 11-2-49. - Driver qualifications. 
(a)  Each applicant or holder of a taxicab driver permit shall: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age, and eligible to work in the United States. 
(2)  Have possessed a driver license for the past 12 months issued by any state of the United States. 
(3)  Not have committed an offense of driving while subject to an impairing substance or with an alcohol concentration of 0.08, or more, within five (5) years. 
(4)  Not have committed a felony within five (5) years. 
(5)  Not have committed an offense involving prostitution or controlled substances within five (5) years. 
(6)  Not have been convicted of more than two (2) motor vehicle moving violations in the past 12 months. 
(b)  A taxicab driver applicant must not be physically or mentally incapable of operating a taxicab. Upon request by the taxicab inspector, the applicant must submit a written opinion from a physician stating that the applicant is physically capable and/or mentally competent to operate a taxicab. 
(c)  The applicant shall not make a material false or misleading statement on the application for a taxicab driver permit. An applicant cannot submit more than one (1) application in any 90-day period. 
(d)  Upon denial or failure of application approval, the applicant may request a hearing in writing with the city manager, or his or her designee. A hearing shall be set within 10 days of such request, and notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail to the address as listed on the application. A decision shall be made within 15 days of the hearing. A taxicab driver whose driver permit is revoked by the taxicab inspector is also entitled to a hearing as outlined in this section, if the taxicab driver makes written request within 10 days of revocation. 
(e)  An applicant or taxicab driver shall have a valid North Carolina driver's license. Upon revocation of a driver's license by the North Carolina Division of Motor Vehicles or a court, a taxicab driver permit becomes immediately revoked. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-50. - Refusal of a driver permit. 
The taxi inspector or his or her designee may refuse to grant or renew a taxicab driver permit for any person who is not in compliance with section 11-2-49. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-51. - Criminal history check for driver applicants. 
A criminal records check shall be performed on all taxicab driver applicants. Fingerprint cards of the applicant shall be presented to the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation and the Federal Bureau of Investigation and processed as allowed by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-52. - Investigations of taxi drivers. 
The taxicab inspector is authorized to conduct independent investigations of a taxicab driver or permit applicant concerning violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-53. - Revocation of a driver permit. 
The taxicab inspector may revoke a taxicab driver permit for any violation enumerated in section 11-2-49. When a taxicab driver permit is revoked, the holder shall cease operation of taxicabs immediately and surrender the permit to the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-54. - Daily manifests. 
Every taxicab driver is to maintain a daily manifest in ink. The beginning tour of duty is to be filled out at the beginning of the driver's shift. The originating address of a trip is to be completed upon passenger pick up. The destination address and fare charged is to be completed immediately at the end of the trip. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-55. - Deception of passengers. 
No taxicab driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger or potential passenger as to the passenger's destination or the rate of fare to be charged, or shall convey any passenger to a place other than directed by the person paying for the fare. In no event shall any taxicab driver take a longer route to a destination than necessary, unless so requested by the passenger. Drivers are to be familiar with the city and all other requested destinations of a passenger(s). A taxicab driver's mistake in choosing a route shall not be cause for a taxicab driver to charge more than the fare for the most direct route. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-56. - Overcharging prohibited. 
No driver shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger a greater rate of fare than that which is currently allowed. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-57. - Method of determining fare. 
It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver to operate a taxicab unless a taximeter is used to determine the fare to be charged. The taximeter is to be a meter approved by a city taxicab inspector to be used in the specific taxicab in which it is being used. It is unlawful to operate a taxicab with a taximeter that has not been approved by a city taxicab inspector for that specific taxicab. It is unlawful for a driver to operate a taxicab in which the driver knows the taximeter in the taxicab is not accurate. 
For a destination that is outside the city limits, the driver shall provide the passenger(s) with a flat rate prior to transport. The rate must be agreed upon between the driver and the passenger before the trip begins. The agreement may include running the taximeter the entire trip, as opposed to a flat rate. The taximeter must be in activation while inside city limits, in the event the passenger(s) decides to terminate the trip before leaving the city. 
A driver may refuse any trip to a destination outside the city limits. 
Holders of a certificate are encouraged to establish rates to area airports and downtown cities to help prevent inconsistent rates for these areas and make these rates available to their dispatchers. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-58. - Restriction on number of passengers. 
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab at any one (1) time than the seating capacity of such vehicle allows, as set by the vehicle manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-59. - Accepting additional passengers. 
Whenever any taxicab is occupied by a passenger(s), the driver shall not permit any other person to occupy or ride in such taxicab if the original passenger(s) object thereto. If a child under 14 years of age is the original passenger, no other passenger shall be permitted in such taxicab without the consent of the parent or guardian of the original passenger. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-60. - Annoying manner of soliciting patronage prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit patronage for a taxicab in a loud or annoying tone of voice, or by any sign or in any manner to annoy any person or to obstruct the movement of any person. No person shall follow or touch another person or the luggage or belongings of another person for the purpose of soliciting taxicab service without the consent of that other person. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-61. - Refusal to carry orderly passenger. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to transport any orderly person, upon request, unless the taxicab is already engaged or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall prohibit the requirement of prepayment or deposit by a driver from a passenger. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-62. - Compliance with passenger requests. 
All drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of a passenger(s) as to the speed of travel and the route to be taken. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-63. - Limitation on hours of driving. 
It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver to continue on duty for more than 12 hours of active driving time or more than 16 hours of on-duty time during any 24-hour period. Each driver shall record the time of commencing active duty and the time of ending active duty on the driver manifest. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-64. - Use of tobacco. 
The use of cigarettes or cigars is prohibited by drivers while transporting a passenger. The use of tobacco is prohibited by a passenger(s) while in a taxicab, if so ordered by the driver. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-65. - Lost articles. 
Every driver of a taxicab shall thoroughly search the interior of such taxicab at the termination of each trip for any article of value that may be left in the taxicab by a passenger. An article found therein shall immediately be returned the passenger who left the article. If the owner of the article is not known or unable to be located, the driver shall deposit the article with the taxicab company owner at the end of the driver's tour of duty. The taxicab owner shall file a written notice with the taxicab inspector within 24 hours, describing the article, date and time of loss, and the origin and destination of the trip of the passenger who lost the article. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-66. - Furnishing receipt. 
When requested by a passenger, every driver shall give a legible receipt showing the taxicab company name, the driver's name, the taxicab number and any item for which a charge was made. The receipt shall also include that total amount paid and the date of such payment. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-67. - Attending taxicab by driver. 
No driver or any other person shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's seat of the taxicab or while standing within five (5) feet of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-68. - Receiving and discharging passengers. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a taxicab to receive or discharge passengers while impeding the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Drivers should receive and discharge passengers in appropriate taxicab stands, loading zones and curbsides out of the flow of traffic. Drivers should discourage passengers from entering and exiting taxicabs while stopped at traffic signals and in travel lanes. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-69. - Portable phone communication. 
Drivers may communicate with dispatchers and a potential passenger(s) by portable telephone communication, however, a driver shall not pick up or transport any passenger without first notifying his or her dispatcher of the trip and recording the trip as required by section 11-2-54. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-70. - Alcohol possession. 
It shall be unlawful for a driver to operate a taxicab, whether on duty or off duty, with any alcoholic beverage, whether opened or unopened, in the passenger compartment of the taxicab. This section shall not include nor prohibit the possession of an alcoholic beverage in the possession of a bona fide passenger. Drivers shall not allow passengers to violate city or state laws regarding alcoholic beverages, while in their taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Secs. 11-2-71—11-2-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE E - Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
Sec. 11-2-81. - Vehicle resembling a taxicab. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle, which is not a licensed taxicab, with painting or markings that would cause a reasonable person to believe that such vehicle is a taxicab. A city taxicab that ceases to be authorized as a taxicab shall have its colors and markings removed, changed, or altered so as not to resemble a taxicab before any operation in the city and may not be visible from any public way, until such removal, change, or alteration, is completed. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-82. - Defrauding taxicab. 
Any person who engages, uses, employs or hires a taxicab and then fails or refuses to pay the required fare with intent to cheat and defraud the taxicab owner or driver shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This section not only applies to intra-city trips, but also to legally licensed taxicabs from other jurisdictions that enter the city to reach a destination, where the failure or refusal to pay occurs within the city. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Secs. 11-2-83—11-2-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE F - Market Taxicabs 
 
Sec. 11-2-100. - Market taxicabs. 
During the International Home Furnishings Markets in the city, the city taxicab companies are not able to handle the greatly increased public transportation needs and therefore temporary taxicab permits are authorized as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-101. - Temporary taxicab licensing. 
(a)  An applicant for a temporary taxicab permit is required to be familiar with the provisions of this chapter. An applicant must submit a copy of state vehicle registration cards for each vehicle to be operated in the city as a taxicab. Each vehicle must be state-registered as a "for-hire" vehicle. A copy of an auto insurance certificate from an insurance company authorized to do business in North Carolina, with commercial liability limits in compliance with this chapter, must be submitted showing such coverage on each vehicle to be operated. A fee of $50.00 is to be tendered along with application to the city business license office for each vehicle. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection (a), an applicant for a temporary taxicab permit must comply with the following: 
(1)  All vehicles to be operated must have passed an inspection by a taxicab inspector of the jurisdiction where the vehicle is normally operated, substantially similar to that of inspections conducted on taxicabs in the City of High Point, as determined by the High Point taxicab inspector; or in the absence thereof, the vehicle must have an inspection certificate from the High Point taxicab inspector. 
(2)  A driver must have a taxicab driver permit in his or her possession while operating a taxicab, issued by a jurisdiction where the driver normally operates a taxicab, such permit obtained under regulations substantially similar to that of the City of High Point, as determined by the High Point taxicab inspector; or in the absence thereof, the driver shall obtain a High Point taxicab driver permit. 
(3)  All vehicles to be operated are to be permanently marked so as to be readily identifiable as a vehicle available to transport passengers for a fee. 
(4)  All vehicles licensed under this article are subject to all of the applicable regulations of this chapter. 
(5)  The taxicab inspector may implement rules from time to time that he or she deemed necessary to ensure the safety and efficiency of temporary taxicab service. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-102. - Temporary taxicab permit. 
The city business license office shall issue a temporary taxicab permits not to exceed the maximum number set by the taxi inspector. Temporary taxicab permits are not valid before 48 hours prior to the official opening day of the International Home Furnishings Market, as published by the International Home Furnishings Market Authority. Temporary taxicab permits expire 48 hours after the final day of said market. A temporary taxicab permit is only valid for one (1) market. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-103. - Temporary taxicab permit; transfer and revocation. 
Temporary taxicab permits are not transferable and must be affixed to the vehicles for which they were specifically issued. In the event a permit is not used or is lost, stolen, defaced, destroyed or revoked, the vehicle for which it was issued shall not be operated as a taxicab and another permit will not be issued for that vehicle and no refund will be given. A temporary taxicab permit may be revoked by the taxicab inspector for any violation of this chapter, without notice. There is no hearing or appeal for a revoked temporary taxicab permit. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-104. - Temporary taxicab regulations. 
(a)  In addition to all other rules of this chapter, a temporary taxicab permit holder shall comply by the following: 
(1)  Locations of receiving and discharging passengers will be set by the taxicab inspector and the director of transportation. 
(2)  Rules of order at all taxicab stands and throughout the downtown area, as set by the taxicab inspector, shall be observed. 
(3)  Drivers are to be familiar with the City of High Point, local airports, major landmarks, how to read a map, and the English language. 
(4)  Local trips may not be refused, except a trip of less than two (2) city blocks. 
(5)  Taxicabs are not to be left unattended in taxicab stands. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
Sec. 11-2-105. - Temporary taxicab permit holders; method of determining fare. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 11-2-57, a temporary taxicab permit holder shall determine the fare to be charged as directed by the taxicab inspector. This method may be by the requirement of a properly calibrated taximeter set to city rates, by a rate card provided by the taxicab inspector, or any other method determined by the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 6159/04-56, § 2, 8-5-04)  
CHAPTER 3 - Community Antenna Television[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-66, adopted July 7, 1998, repealed ch. 3, §§ 11-3-1—11-3-18, community antenna television, and adopted new §§ 11-3-1—11-3-52, community antenna television, as herein set out. The former ch. 3 derived from Ord. Nos. 89-135, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 7, 1989, and 95-88, § 1, adopted Oct. 5, 1995. 
 
Sec. 11-3-1. - Purpose. 
The City of High Point finds that the development of cable television system has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the people in the incorporated area of the City of High Point. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to advance and protect the public interest in these matters, and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. 
Further, it is recognized that cable television systems have the capacity to provide entertainment and information services to the city's residents, and may have the capacity to provide a variety of broad-band, interactive communications services to institutions and individuals. 
For these purposes, the following goals underlie the regulations contained herein: 
(1)  Cable television services should be provided to the maximum number of city residents at the most reasonable cost; 
(2)  The system should be capable of accommodating both the present and reasonably foreseeable future state-of-the-art cable television needs of the city; 
(3)  The system authorized by this chapter shall be responsive to the needs and interests of the local community, and shall provide the widest possible diversity of information sources and services to the public; 
(4)  Each of the goals enumerated in subsections (1)—(3) above shall be sought, taking into account the costs and benefits to the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-2. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of High Point Cable Television Ordinance," and it shall become a part of the ordinances of the city. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption for the grant of any new franchise or renewal of any franchise existing at the time of adoption. 
All ordinances or parts of the City of High Point Code in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, specifically chapter 3, sections 11-3-1 through 11-3-18, referred to as "The High Point CATV Franchise Ordinance." 
This chapter shall be governed by and subject to the Communications Act of 1984, as amended, including any future amendments relating to telecommunications and cable television communications, and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein unless otherwise defined by federal or state law. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
Access channels means any channels on the system provided herein by the operator for access use by the city, its agencies, and citizens, in accordance with the cable act. 
Additional service means any cable service other than basic service provided over the system. 
Basic service means a separately available tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of service. Basic service tier shall, at a minimum, consist of the following: All signals carried in fulfillment of the cable act, sections 614 and 615; any public, educational, and governmental access programming required in this chapter or the franchise; any signal of any television broadcast station that is provided by the cable operator to any subscriber, except a signal which is secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station. Additional signals may be added to the basic tier by the grantee. 
Cable act, see Communications Policy Act below. 
Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
Cablecast signal means a nonbroadcast signal that originates within the facilities of the system. 
Channel means a 6 Megahertz (MHz) frequency band, which is capable of carrying either one (1) standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other nonvideo signals or some combination of such signals. One channel of high definition television may utilize more than 6 MHz. 
Commercial subscriber means a subscriber who receives a service in a place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. 
Board means the City of High Point City Council. 
Communications policy act or cable act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Telecommunications Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 as they may be amended or succeeded. 
Converter means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set. 
City means the City of High Point, North Carolina, a political subdivision of the State of North Carolina. 
Discrete channel shall mean a channel which can only be received by the person and/or institution intended to receive signals on such channel. 
Downstream signal means a signal originating from or provided by the system to a subscriber terminal or other terminal including video, audio, or digital signals or any other type of data or information for either programs or other uses such as security alert services, etc. 
Drop shall mean a coaxial, fiber, or other connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user residence or place of business. 
Educational access channel means any channel designated for educational access use, in accordance with the cable act. 
Fair market value means the price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern based on the valuation prevailing in the industry at the time. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed successor. 
Franchise means the nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter to construct, operate and maintain a system along the public rights-of-way within all or a specified area in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by other ordinances and laws of the city, state or federal governments. 
Franchise area means the entire city for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise stated in the franchise, the franchise areas shall be the entire city, or any territories thereafter annexed by the city. 
Franchise fee means the percentage, as specified by the city, of the franchisee's gross annual revenues from all sources payable (as permitted by the cable act) in exchange for the rights granted pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
Franchisee or grantee means the natural person(s), partnership(s), domestic and foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s), or organization(s) of any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by the city and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
Government access channel means any channel specifically designated or dedicated for government access use, in accordance with the cable act. 
Grantor means City of High Point as represented by the city council acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
Gross annual revenues means all receipts received directly or indirectly by the grantee, from providing cable services within the city, including, but not limited to, basic subscriber and additional service monthly fees, pay cable fees, installation and reconnection fees, leased channel fees, converter rentals, and advertising revenues; provided, however, that this shall not include any taxes or copyright fees on services furnished by the grantee. 
Headend means the electronic control center of the system including components that amplify, filter, and convert incoming broadcast and other television and electronic signals for distribution over the cable system. 
Installation shall mean the connection of the system from the drop cable to subscriber's terminals. 
Monitoring means observing a communications signal, or the absence of a signal, where the observer is not a party to the communication, whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. 
Narrowcasting shall mean the ability to distribute cable programming to a particular segment or segments of the cable subscribers. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation or any lawful successor or transferee of said individual, partnership, association, organization or corporation. 
Plant mile means a linear mile of cable as measured on the street or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal. 
Public access channel means any channel designated or dedicated for access use by the general public or noncommercial organizations, in accordance with the cable act, which is made available for use without charge, on a nondiscriminatory basis, in accordance with the rules and regulations specified in the franchise and over which grantee has no editorial control. 
Public way or public rights-of-way means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkways, waterways, utility easements or other public right-of-way now or hereafter held by the city which shall entitle the city and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the "public way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain only such rights to use property in the city as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give or as granted by federal or state law. 
Reasonable notice shall be written notice addressed to the grantee at its principal office within the city or such other office as the grantee has designated to the city as the address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than seven (7) business days prior to that day in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of notice. In computing said seven (7) days, holidays recognized by the city shall be excluded. 
Resident means any person residing in the city as otherwise defined by applicable law. 
Residential subscriber means a subscriber who receives a service in an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession. 
Sale shall include any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
School means any state accredited public or nonprofit educational institution including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private. 
Service area means the entire geographic area within the franchise area. 
State means the State of North Carolina. 
State-of-the-art means that the franchisee shall construct, install and maintain its system in a manner which will continue to enable it to add new services and associated equipment as they are developed, available and when economically feasible and marketable to subscribers to the reasonable satisfaction of the franchisee. 
System, also referred to as "system," means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include any of the following: (a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; (b) a facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple dwelling units under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way; (c) a facility of a common carrier which is subject in whole or in part to the provision of title II of the cable act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent that such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or (d) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
Transfer means the disposal by the grantee, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, assets acquisition, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of 50 percent or more at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the system, or 50 percent cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interest to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Trunk line means the major distribution cable used in cable communications, which divides into feeder lines which are tapped for service to subscribers. 
Upstream signal means a signal originating from a subscriber terminal to another point in the system including video, audio, or digital signals or any other type of data or information for either programs or other uses such as security alert services, etc. 
User means a person or organization utilizing channel or equipment and facilities for purpose of producing and/or transmission of material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-4. - Grant of franchise. 
(a)  Grant. In the event that city shall grant to the grantee a nonexclusive, revocable for cause franchise to construct, operate, and maintain a system within the city said franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a system as regulated by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(b)  Event of conflict. The franchise shall be granted under the terms and conditions contained herein, consistent with and subject to all applicable statutory requirements. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of this chapter, the franchise, or the terms and conditions on which the city can grant a franchise, statutory requirements shall control. 
(c)  Generally applicable ordinances. Any franchise granted by the city is hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions now in effect and hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the city or other applicable law regarding permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction. 
(d)  Annexed area. Any person providing cable service under a valid franchise with a county other than Guilford County shall not be required to apply for or obtain a franchise under the provisions of this chapter for operating within an area of the city outside of Guilford County, provided that the person shall operate in compliance with the terms of its franchise with the county. No such person shall extend cable service into a portion of the city located within Guilford County unless a franchise has been granted pursuant to this chapter. 
Such person shall pay franchise fees to the city for operations within the city upon the same basis and terms as any and all cable operators with a franchise from the city. 
Such person, in the provision of cable service within the city, shall be subject to, and by the provision of such cable service agrees to be subject to, the terms of this chapter except those concerning the granting of a franchise. 
If such person's franchise with the county shall be discontinued for any reason, or if the cable operation extends into an area in the city within Guilford County, then the person shall apply for and receive a franchise from the city prior to or contemporaneously with the discontinuation of the county franchise or such extension. 
(Ord. No. 99-20, § 1, 2-4-99)  
Sec. 11-3-5. - Use of public rights-of-way. 
Insofar as permitted by law and for the purpose of operating and maintaining a system in the city, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public ways within the city such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary to the operation of the system, provided, however, that grantee complies with all design, construction, safety, and performance provisions contained in this chapter, the franchise agreement, and other applicable local ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-6. - Use of grantee facilities. 
No poles shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the city which shall not be unreasonably withheld, with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole of the grantee shall be a vested right and such poles shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the city reasonably determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. Grantee shall utilize existing poles and conduits, where possible. The city shall have the right, during the life of the franchise, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles owned by the grantee, any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable system operations of the grantee; provided the city shall at all times indemnify and hold grantee harmless against any and all claims which might arise as a result of the city's use. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-7. - Franchise required. 
No system shall be allowed to occupy or use the public ways of the city or be allowed to operate in the city without a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-8. - Term of franchise. 
The term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be stated in the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-9. - Franchise nonexclusive. 
A franchise is nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant at any time such additional franchises for a system it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-10. - Time is of the essence. 
Whenever this chapter or a franchise shall set forth any time for an act to be performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of the grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to invoke an appropriate penalty including possible revocation of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-11. - Law governs. 
In any controversy or dispute under this chapter, the law of the State of North Carolina shall apply to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-12. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter or a franchise is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any federal, state, or local statute or regulation, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding, statute, or regulation shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-13. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
(a)  Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder cannot be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including but not limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or other means without the prior consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  Transfer threshold. The grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed change in or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the disposal by the grantee, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of 50 percent or more, at one time, of the ownership or controlling interest in the system; or 50 percent cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interest to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. The city shall exercise its power to approve a transfer of ownership or control in a manner consistent with section 617 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 537). 
(c)  Process. Every transfer, sale, lease, assignment or disposition of, including but not limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or other means or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such transfer, sale, lease, assignment or disposition of, including but not limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or other means or acquisition of control of the grantee the city may inquire into the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the city in any such inquiry. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by the city as part of said inquiry may be grounds for denial of the proposed transfer, sale, lease, assignment or disposition of, including but not limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or other means or acquisition of control of the grantee. If the city finds that such transfer, after considering the legal, financial, character, technical, and other public interest qualifications of the applicant, is satisfactory, the city will transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as may be in the public interest. The consent of the city to such transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(d)  Assumption of control. The city agrees that any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the system shall have the right to notify the city that it or its designee satisfactory to the city will take control of and operate the system. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise obligations during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one (1) year, unless extended by the city at its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition for transfer of the franchise to another grantee. 
(e)  Regulation of transfer. The consent or approval of the city to any transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets, rights-of-way, or areas appurtenant thereto, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(f)  Construction requirement. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of construction of the proposed initial system. 
(g)  Signatory requirement. Any approval by the city of transfer shall be contingent upon the prospective controlling party becoming a signatory to the franchise. 
(h)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary no such consent shall be required for any transfer to any person controlling, controlled by or under the same common control of the grantee so long as the grantee continues to guarantee the performance, under the terms of the chapter and the franchise agreement of the transferee. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-14. - Franchise renewal. 
The grantee shall own the system, but shall have no further right to use the public ways after expiration of the franchise term. The city shall grant or deny renewal of the franchise of a grantee in accordance with section 626 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 546) or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-15. - Police powers. 
(a)  Acknowledgments. In accepting the franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public, and it agrees to comply with all applicable laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such power. 
(b)  Conflict. Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter or the franchise and any other present or future lawful exercise of the city's general police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to grantee or system which contains provisions inconsistent with this chapter shall prevail only if, upon such exercise, the city finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to health, safety, property or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-16. - Franchise fees. 
(a)  Because the city finds that: 
(1)  The public ways of the city and state to be used by the grantee in the operation of its system within the boundaries of the franchise area are valuable public properties acquired and maintained at great expense to its taxpayers; and 
(2)  The grant to the grantee to the limited use of public ways is valuable and without which the grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions; and 
(3)  The administration of this chapter and the franchise imposes upon the city additional regulatory responsibility and expense, and a grantee of any franchise shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount as designated in the franchise agreement. The city reserves the right to change the franchise fee as stated in the franchise agreement, by adopting an ordinance establishing the new franchise fee rate and allowing reasonable notice to the grantee for administration of the change. This franchise fee payment shall be in addition to any other fee and commence as of the effective date of the franchise or change in franchise fee. The city shall be furnished a statement of said payment by an officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross annual revenues and computations for the period covered by the payment. 
(b)  Franchise fee in addition to other tax. This payment shall be in addition to any other tax or payment of general applicability owed by the grantee to the city or other jurisdiction. Payment of the franchise fee made by grantee to the city shall be in addition to any and all taxes of general applicability which are now or may be required hereafter to be paid by any federal, state, or local law. 
(c)  Acceptance by the city. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
(d)  Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the city's primary depository bank plus three (3) percent during the period that such unpaid amount is owed. 
(e)  Quarterly payments. The franchise fee and any other costs, charges, or damages assessed shall be payable quarterly to the city. The grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross annual revenue within the franchise area during the period for which said quarterly payment is made, and said payment shall be made to the city not later than 45 days after the expiration of each calendar quarter. Quarterly computation dates are the last day in the months of March, June, September and December. 
(f)  Audits. The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee's records and to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter or the franchise. Audits shall be at the expense of the grantee if the additional amount due is greater than two (2) percent of the amount paid. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the city which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-17. - Forfeiture or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. The city reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in accordance with the Communications Policy Act and with the procedures set forth herein in the following circumstances, each of which represents a default and breach under this chapter and the franchise grant: 
(1)  Grantee's default in the performance of any of the material obligations under this chapter, the franchise or under such documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the city and the grantee, including timely payment of any amounts owed. 
(2)  Grantee's failure to provide or maintain in full force and effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the performance bond as required herein or by the franchise. 
(3)  Grantee's violation of any orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this chapter or the franchise after notice thereof, continuing and not being remedied within 60 days of notice. 
(4)  Grantee's fraud or any unfair or deceptive act or practice with regard to the city or grantee's subscribers under the laws of the state. 
(5)  Grantee's system construction schedule is delayed later than the schedule contained in the franchise or beyond any extended date set by the city. 
(6)  Grantee's insolvency, inability, or unwillingness to pay its debts; or [grantee] is adjudged bankrupt. 
(7)  Grantee's failure to restore service to the subscriber after 96 consecutive hours of interrupted service, except when written approval of such interruption is obtained from the city. 
(8)  Grantee's misrepresentation of a material fact in the application for or negotiation of the franchise or any extension or renewal thereof. 
(9)  Grantee's failure to provide cable services for any reason that is within the control of the grantee over the system. 
(b)  Effect of circumstances beyond control of grantee. The grantee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented or delayed due to an Act of God or for reasons beyond the grantee's control. A fault shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control if committed by a corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest, whether held directly or indirectly. 
(c)  Court order. Grantor and grantee will abide by the terms of any stay order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Procedure prior to revocation. 
(1)  The city shall make written demand that the grantee comply with any material requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand, the city shall place its intent to revoke the franchise upon a regular city council meeting agenda. The city shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to grantee at least 10 days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of intent to revoke and the reasons therefor, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the city clerk at least once 10 days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(2)  The city council shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. 
(3)  If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, as reasonably determined by the city, the city council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
(4)  If the city council shall determine that such failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the city council shall, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be revoked and terminated and bond forfeited either conditionally or unconditionally. 
(5)  If the revocation of the franchise depends upon a finding of fact, such finding of fact shall be made by the city only after an administrative hearing, providing the grantee with a full and fair opportunity to be heard, including without limitations the right to introduce evidence, the right to production of evidence and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of such hearings. The grantee shall have the right to appeal any such administrative decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Disposition of facilities. In the event a franchise is revoked or otherwise terminated, the city may, in its sole discretion, do any of the following: 
(1)  Purchase the system under the procedures set forth in this chapter, at a fair market price; 
(2)  Effect a transfer of the system to another person; 
(3)  Order the removal of the system facilities from the public ways within a reasonable period of time as determined by the city or require the original grantee to maintain and operate its system for a period of six (6) months or until such further time as is mutually agreed upon. 
(f)  Restoration of property. In removing its system, or part thereof, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good a condition or better as that existing prior to the grantee's removal of its system without affecting the electrical, telephone, or other cable, wires, or attachments. The city may inspect and approve the condition of the public ways and cables, wires, attachments, and poles after removal. The liability, indemnity, insurance and performance bond as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until the grantee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(g)  Restoration by city; reimbursement of costs. In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any restoration work required by the city within the time as may be established by the city and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may, following reasonable notice to the grantee, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the city the cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such cost, or the city may at its option recover such costs through the performance bond provided by grantee. 
(h)  Extended operation. Upon either the denial of renewal or revocation of a franchise, the city may require the grantee to continue to operate the system for a period of six (6) months from the date of such denial or revocation, or until such time beyond six (6) months as is mutually agreed upon. The grantee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-18. - Receivership and foreclosure. 
(a)  Termination by insolvency. The franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of the city, cease and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless: 
(1)  Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said 120 days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and 
(2)  Such receivers, or trustees shall, within said 120 days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and condition of the franchise. 
(b)  Termination by judicial action. In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee or any part thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the city may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee granted hereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless: 
(1)  The city shall have approved the transfer of the franchise as provided by this chapter; and 
(2)  Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the city to assume and be bound by every term, provision, and condition of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-19. - Equal opportunity policy. 
Equal opportunity employment shall be afforded by the grantee to all qualified persons, and no person shall be discriminated against in employment because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex, or handicap. Grantee shall comply with all equal opportunity provisions enacted by federal, state and local authorities, and in particular section 634 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 554), as well as all such provisions contained in this chapter and the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-20. - Notices. 
All notices from grantee to the city pursuant to this chapter and the franchise shall be to the city manager or his/her designee. Grantee shall maintain with the city, throughout the term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by mail which address shall be noted in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-21. - Failure of city to enforce this franchise, no waiver of the terms thereof. 
The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this chapter or the franchise by any failure of the city upon any one (1) or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-22. - Rights reserved to the grantor. 
(a)  Right of inspection of records. The city shall have the right to inspect all books, records, reports, maps, plans, financial statements, and other like materials of the grantee, at any time during normal business hours, when necessary to ascertain the grantee's compliance with this chapter, the franchise and all applicable laws. 
(b)  Right of inspection of construction. The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter and all applicable laws. 
(c)  Right of inspection of property. At all reasonable times, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the city of the system, together with any appurtenant property of grantee situated within or without the city when necessary to ascertain the grantee's compliance with this chapter, the franchise and all applicable laws. 
(d)  Right of intervention. The city shall have the right of intervention in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is party, and the grantee shall not oppose such intervention by the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-23. - No recourse against the grantor. 
Except when seeking equitable relief, the grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement of this chapter or the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-24. - Penalties. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall subject the grantee to all penalties provided by law and as enumerated in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-25. - Regulatory authority. 
(a)  The city shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the provisions of this chapter, the Communications Act, and all applicable law. This authority shall be vested in the City of High Point City Council and administered through the city manager or his/her designee in order to provide day-to-day administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any franchise granted hereunder, and to carry out the city's responsibilities with regard to cable television. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the local, state and federal government. In the event that any actions of the state or federal government or any agency thereof, or any court of competent jurisdiction upon final adjudication, substantially reduce in any way the power or authority of the city under this chapter or the franchise, or if in compliance with any local, state, or federal law or regulation, the grantee finds conflict with the terms of this chapter, the franchise, or any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the city of the point of conflict believed to exist between such action, law, or regulation and the laws or regulations of the city, this chapter and the franchise. The city or the grantee may notify the other party that it wishes to renegotiate those provisions which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations or other statutory authority. Thereafter, the grantee and the city shall negotiate in good faith in the development of alternate provisions which shall fairly restore the city to the maximum level of authority and power permitted by law. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to exercise the maximum authority, as may at any time be lawfully permissible, to regulate the system, the franchise and the grantee. Should applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time permit regulation not presently permitted to the city, the city may, following good faith negotiations, engage in any such additional regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not contemplated by this chapter or the franchise, including without limitation, regulation regarding franchise fees, taxes, programming, rates charged to subscribers and users, consumer protection, or any other similar or dissimilar matter. The city shall have the right to modify any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this chapter and the franchise in accordance with federal and state law, provided, however, no modifications shall increase the obligation of the grantee or limit the rights of the grantee hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-26. - Supervision of the franchise. 
(a)  The city shall have the following regulatory responsibility: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any franchise granted hereunder to the full extent necessary to assure compliance with the chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(2)  Award, renewal, extension, revocation, or termination of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the franchise, and other applicable law. 
(3)  Consent prior to transfer of any franchise granted hereunder. 
(4)  Performance evaluation of the grantee. 
(5)  Rate and service regulation, if applicable. 
(b)  The city also reserves the right to perform the following functions: 
(1)  Develop objectives and coordinate activities related to the operation of government access channels. 
(2)  Approve procedures and standards for public, educational and government access operations and services, including the use of dedicated channels and sharing of public facilities. 
(3)  Coordinate plans for expansion, interconnection and growth of cable services. 
(4)  Analyze the possibility of integrating cable communications with other city, state or regional cable television networks. 
(5)  Formulate and recommend long-range cable television policy for the city, and determine the city's view of the future cable-related needs and interests of the community. 
(6)  Provide the administrative effort necessary for the conduct of performance evaluations, and any other activities required for the administration of the franchise. 
(7)  Monitor grantee's process for handling citizen complaints and periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such complaints. 
(8)  Receive applications for rate increases, if applicable, and provide staff assistance in the analysis and recommendations thereto. 
(9)  Monitor grantee's adherence to operational standards, service requirements and line extension policies. 
(10)  Assure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(11)  Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as needed to insure compliance with this chapter and the franchise. 
(12)  Assure continuity in service. 
(13)  Receive for examination all data and reports required by this chapter. 
(c)  Cable TV advisory committee. The city may in its discretion establish a cable advisory committee. The duties of this committee may be reposed in an existing committee. The responsibilities of the committee shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Monitor and advise the city council and city administration on the provisions of this chapter and related ordinances. 
(2)  Serve as an advisory body for the public, educational, and governmental access channels of cable television and any institutional programming that may be developed. 
(3)  Advise the city government of objectives to be obtained in the city's system based upon its continued evaluation of the city's cable television franchise, cable technology, and the future cable-related needs and interests of the community. 
(4)  Prepare an annual report to the city council. 
(5)  Cooperate with the city and the grantee in fulfilling its responsibilities herein. 
(d)  Interconnectivity. Upon the request of the city, the grantee shall interconnect its system, for the purpose of sharing public, education or government access channels with any other like cable television facility operating in the city. The grantee further agrees that it will bear its share of the cost of any interconnection. Such costs will be allocated between and among the system being interconnected in an equitable manner. The grantee may not construct any physical facilities to provide an interconnection with other cable communications or data system until the plans for such interconnection have been approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-27. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Schedule filings. Grantee shall file with the city schedules which shall describe all services offered, all rates and charges of any kind, and all terms and conditions relating thereto. Grantee shall notify city and subscribers in writing at least 30 days prior to the implementation of any change in services offered, rate charges, or terms and conditions related thereto, as may be required by law. 
(b)  Nondiscriminatory rates. To the extent required by applicable federal or state law, grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the same general class of subscribers which must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from offering: (i) discounts to commercial and multiple family dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis; (ii) promotional discounts; (iii) reduced installation rates for subscribers who have multiple services; or (iv) discounts for senior citizens and/or low income residents. To the extent required by federal, state, or local law or regulation, grantee's charges and rates for all services shall be itemized on subscriber's monthly bills. 
(c)  City regulation. To the extent that federal or state law or regulation, and in particular section 626 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 543) and the regulations of the FCC, may now, or as the same may hereafter be amended to, authorize the city to regulate the rates for any particular service tiers, service packages, equipment, or any other services provided by grantee, the city shall have the right to exercise rate regulation to the full extent authorized by law, or to refrain from exercising such regulation for any period of time, at the sole discretion of the city. 
(d)  Ability to petition. If applicable, the city shall have the right to petition the FCC or other appropriate agency or organization to obtain rate regulation authority or to petition the federal body to review or regulate rates in the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-28. - Performance evaluations. 
(a)  Performance evaluations. The city and the grantee may, at the discretion of the city, hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions. 
(b)  Special evaluation sessions shall be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the city. 
(c)  Notice of public hearings on performance. All evaluation sessions before the city council shall be open to the public and announced once in a newspaper of general circulation and announced for five (5) consecutive days on the government access channel. 
(d)  Items for review. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, system performance and construction, grantee compliance with this chapter and the franchise, customer service and complaint response, subscriber privacy, services provided, programming offered, service rate structures, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and line extensions. 
(e)  Cooperation. During the review and evaluation by the city, the grantee shall fully cooperate with the city and shall provide such information and documents as the city may need to reasonably perform its review. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-29. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Performance bond. Upon the effective date of the franchise, the grantee shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of the franchise and any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and expense, and file with the city, a corporate surety bond in an amount no less than $50,000 and as specified in the franchise agreement to guarantee the faithful performance of the grantee of all its obligations provided under this chapter and the franchise. Failure to timely obtain, file and maintain said bond shall constitute a substantial violation within the meaning of this section. 
(b)  Conditions. The performance bond shall provide the following conditions: 
(1)  There shall be recoverable by the city jointly and severally from the principal and surety, any and all fines and liquidated damages due to the city and any and all damages, losses, costs, and expenses suffered or incurred by the city resulting from the failure of the grantee to: faithfully comply with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise; comply with all orders, permits and directives of any city agency or body having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults; pay fees due to the city; pay any claims, liens or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system. Such losses, costs and expenses shall include, but not be limited to, attorney's fees and other associated expenses. 
(2)  The total amount of the bond shall be forfeited in favor of the city in the event: 
a.  The grantee abandons the cable system at any time during the term of the franchise or any extension thereto; or 
b.  The grantee transfers the franchise without the express written consent of the city. 
(c)  Reduction of bond. Upon written application by the grantee, the city may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the bond to be reduced or waive the requirements for a performance bond subject to the following conditions: Reductions granted or denied upon application by the grantee shall be without prejudice to the grantee's subsequent applications or to the city's right to require the full bond without notice at any time thereafter. However, no application for reduction shall be made by the grantee within one (1) year of any prior application for reduction or within the first five (5) years of the franchise. 
(d)  Use of performance bond. Prior to drawing upon the performance bond for the purposes described in this section, the city shall notify the grantee in writing by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, that payment is due and the grantee shall make a full and complete payment. If the grantee does not make the payment within 10 days from the mailing of the notice, the city may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and penalties, from the performance bond. 
(e)  Notification. Within three (3) days of a withdrawal from the performance bond, the city shall send to the grantee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal. 
(f)  Replenishment of performance bond. No later than 30 days after mailing to the grantee by certified mail notification as described in (e) above of a withdrawal pursuant to paragraph (d) above, the grantee shall replenish the performance bond in an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn. Failure to make timely replenishment of such amount to the performance bond may constitute a substantial violation of this chapter. 
(g)  Nonrenewal, alteration, or cancellation of performance bond. The performance bond required herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the city and shall require 30 days written notice of any nonrenewal, alteration or cancellation to both the city and the grantee. The grantee shall, in the event of any such cancellation notice, obtain, pay all premiums for, and file with the city, written evidence of the issuance of replacement bond or policies within 30 days following receipt by the city or the grantee of any notice of cancellation, and failure to do so constitutes a substantial violation of this chapter. 
(h)  Inflation. To offset the effects of inflation the amounts of the bond provided for herein shall be increased by the annual rate of inflation at the end of every three-year period of the franchise, applicable to the next three-year period, upon the request of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-30. - Liability and insurance. 
(a)  Certificate of insurance. Prior to commencement of construction, but in no event later than 60 days after the effective date of the franchise and thereafter, grantee shall continuously maintain insurance as defined by this section and shall throughout the duration of the franchise and any extensions or renewals thereof, the grantee shall furnish to the city, certificates of insurance, approved by the city for all types of insurance required under this section. Failure to furnish said certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Filing. Any insurance policy or certificate thereof obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section shall be filed and maintained with the city manager or his/her designee during the term of the franchise, and may be changed from time to time to reflect changing liability limits and/or to compensate for inflation. Grantee shall immediately advise the city of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance. 
(c)  No limit of liability. Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the city hereunder, shall be construed to or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages. 
(d)  Enforcement. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the franchise shall contain the following, or a comparable, endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the insurance company nor the intention not to renew be stated by the insurance company until 30 days after receipt by the city manager, by registered or certified mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew." 
(e)  Hold harmless clause. All contractual liability insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the franchise shall include the following hold harmless clause: 
"The grantee agrees to indemnify, save harmless and defend the city, its officials, agents, servants, and employees, and each of them against and hold it and them harmless from any and all lawsuits, claims, demands, liabilities, losses and expenses, including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, for or on account of any injury to any person, or any death at any time resulting from such injury, or any damage to any property, which may arise or which may be alleged to have arisen out of or in connection with the work covered by the franchise and performed or caused to be performed. The foregoing indemnity shall apply except if such injury, death or damage is caused by the negligence or other fault of the city, its agents, servants, or employees, or any other person indemnified hereunder." 
(f)  State institution. All insurance policies provided under the provisions of this chapter or the franchise shall be written by companies authorized to do business in the state and approved by the state's commissioner of insurance. 
(g)  Named insured. At any time during the term of the franchise, the city may request and the grantee shall comply with such request, to name the city as an additional named insured for all insurance policies written under the provisions of this chapter or the franchise. 
(h)  Inflation. To offset the effects of inflation and to reflect changing liability limits, all of the coverages, limits, and amounts of the insurance provided for herein will be increased at the end of every three-year period of the franchise at the annual rate of inflation, applicable to the next three-year period, upon the request of the city. 
(i)  General liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agree that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general liability insurance insuring the grantee in the minimum of: 
(1)  $2,000,000 for property damage per occurrence; 
(2)  $2,000,000 for property damage aggregate; 
(3)  $4,000,000 for personal bodily injury or death to any one (1) person; and 
(4)  $5,000,000 bodily injury or death aggregate per single accident or occurrence. 
(j)  Policy inclusions. Such general liability insurance must include, at a minimum, coverage for all of the following: Comprehensive form, premises, operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, and personal injury. 
(k)  Automobile liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, automobile liability insurance for owned, nonowned, or rented vehicles used by grantee, its agents, officials, or employees in the minimum amount of: 
(1)  $1,000,000 for bodily injury and consequent death per occurrence; 
(2)  $1,000,000 for bodily injury and consequent death to any one (1) person. 
(3)  $500,000 for property damage per occurrence. 
(l)  Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, worker's compensation and employer's liability, valid in the state, in the minimum amount of: 
(1)  Statutory limit for worker's compensation. 
(2)  $100,000 for employer's liability. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-31. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards and commissions, and city employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages (including but not limited to costs and expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements and liabilities assumed by the city in connection therewith): 
(1)  To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of grantee, its servants, agents or employees, or to which grantee's negligence shall in any way contribute unless caused solely by negligence or other fault of the city, its agents, servants or employees, or any other person indemnified hereunder. 
(2)  Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation (excluding claims arising out of or relating to city programming). 
(3)  Arising out of grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of any federal, state, or local statute, ordinances, or regulation applicable to grantee in its business hereunder. 
(b)  The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following: 
The city shall give grantee reasonable notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the city from cooperating with grantee and participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at its sole cost and expense. No recovery by the city of any sum by reason of the liquidated damages required by this chapter shall be subject to litigation by the company, except that any sum so received by the city shall be deducted from any recovery which the city might have against the company under the terms of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-32. - Authority to construct. 
(a)  Authorization to commence construction and application procedures. Within 30 days of the acceptance by the grantee of an initial franchise, the grantee shall apply for any needed contracts for use of poles. Within 30 days after completion of the make-ready survey identifying the routes of the system facility, the grantee shall apply for all additional licenses from the state, city, or other necessary parties, such as the railroads for crossing under or over their property. In any event, all necessary applications for permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations shall be applied for in a timely fashion so that such filing and processing shall not interfere with or cause delay with the construction scheduled as outlined in the franchise. Failure to make such timely application and timely filing shall constitute a substantial violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Power to contract. Upon grant of the franchise and in order to construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the city, the grantee may enter into contracts with any public utility companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles or underground areas located within the city; obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate city, state, city, and federal officials necessary to cross or otherwise use highways or roads under their respective jurisdiction; obtain permission from the Federal Aviation Administration to erect and maintain antennas; and obtain whatever other permits a city, state or federal agency may require. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-33. - Construction and technical standards. 
(a)  Compliance with construction and technical standards. Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements and FCC technical standards. The grantee, through the system, shall provide uniform, strong signals which are free from any significant distortion and interference. The system shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained for 24 hours a day continuous operation. The system shall produce, for reception on subscriber's receivers which are in good working order, either monochrome or color pictures (providing the receiver is color capable) which are free from any significant interference or distortion which would cause any material degradation of video or audio quality. 
(b)  System design. Any system operating within the city shall at a minimum meet the following: 
(1)  The system will be spaced to permit a minimum operation, which shall be stated in the franchise agreement and will be capable of utilizing state-of-the-art technology. 
(2)  The system will utilize converters which will make the system adaptable for the development of future services. 
(c)  Poles. Grantee will comply with any permitting process then in effect for use of the public ways. 
(d)  Contractor qualifications. Any contractor or subcontractor proposed for work of construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and repair of equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the state, and all local ordinances. 
(e)  System equipment. The system erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of the public ways, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways. No pole or other fixtures placed in any public ways by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with normal travel on such public way. 
(f)  Maps. The city does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In public rights-of-way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by excavation. Grantee may make use of ULOCO or some other utilities location service and at grantee's expense. 
(g)  Quality of construction. Construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, in accordance with then current technological standards. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. 
(h)  Construction standards. Grantee shall at all times comply with: (1) National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); (2) National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); (3) Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction; (4) applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations; and standards as set forth in the franchise. 
(i)  Noninterference. In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area or other areas where the grantee may have equipment located. 
(j)  Antennas. Any antenna structure used in the system shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structure standards as required by federal and state law or regulation. 
(k)  OSHA. All worker facilities, conditions, and procedures that are used during construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the cable system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(l)  Standby power. The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power for a minimum of 24 hours for the headend. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-34. - System construction schedule. 
The franchise shall specify the construction schedule. Failure to comply with the construction schedule shall constitute a breach of the franchise and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-35. - Extension of service. 
The grantee shall provide service to all dwelling units where there are an average of 20 homes per mile. In such cases where residential density does not meet the requirement, consideration will be made for line extensions based on a cost share basis as may be specified in the franchise agreement. The grantee may not otherwise discriminate against low income or low density areas. For good cause, the grantee may request and the city manager may grant reasonable extension of time. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-36. - Use of streets. 
(a)  Underground installation. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the city where public utilities providing telephone and electric service are underground at the time of installation. In areas of the city where either telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation, Grantee may install its service above ground, provided that at such time as those facilities are required to be placed underground by the city or are placed underground, the grantee shall likewise place its services underground without direct additional cost to the city or to the individual subscribers so served within the city. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this chapter or the franchise, the grantee's system shall be located underground at the request of the adjacent property owner, provided that the excess cost over the aerial location shall be borne by the property owner making the request. 
(b)  Approvals. Prior to construction or alteration, grantee will obtain all required construction permits. 
(c)  Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property and utilities. The system shall be located, erected and maintained so that such facilities shall: 
(1)  Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives or persons; 
(2)  Not interfere with any improvements the city, or state may deem proper to make; 
(3)  Not interfere with the free and proper use of public ways except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair; 
(4)  Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair; and 
(5)  Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water or telephone facilities, easements, property rights, or other utilities facilities easements located within the city. 
(d)  Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any street or alley disturbed, consistent with the practices of local utilities. Such restoration shall be undertaken within no more than 10 business days after the damage is incurred and shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter. Such closing shall be at the expense of the grantee. 
(e)  Private property. Grantee shall be subject to all laws, ordinances or regulations regarding private property or regulations regarding private property in the course of constructing, installing, operating or maintaining the system. Grantee shall promptly repair or replace all private property, both real and personal, damaged or destroyed as a result of the construction, installation, operating, or maintenance of the system at its sole cost and expense. 
(f)  Relocation of the facilities. In the event that at any time during the period of the franchise, the city or state shall lawfully elect to alter, or change, the grade of any street, alley or other public ways, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the proper authority, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own cost and expense. 
(g)  Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wire to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 15 working days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(h)  Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority, except when in conflict with existing city ordinances, or other applicable law, to trim any trees upon and overhanging public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with system facilities, except that at the option of the city, such trimming may be done by it, or under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee. 
(i)  Easements. All necessary easements over and under private property shall be arranged for by the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-37. - Construction reporting requirements. 
(a)  Progress report. Within 30 days of the granting of an initial franchise agreement pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall provide the city with a written progress report detailing initial construction work completed to date. Such report shall include a description of the progress in applying for any necessary agreements, licenses, or certifications and any other information the city manager may deem necessary. The content and format of the report will be determined by the city manager and may be modified at his/her discretion. 
(b)  Time frame for reports. Such written progress reports shall be submitted to the city manager's office on a monthly basis throughout the entire construction process. The city manager or his/her designee may require more frequent reporting, if he/she determines it is necessary to better monitor the grantee's progress. 
(c)  Subscriber information. Prior to the commencement of initial system construction, the grantee shall produce an informational document to be distributed to all residents of the area to be under construction, which shall describe the activity that will be taking place. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-38. - Tests and performance monitoring. 
(a)  Tests. All testing of the system shall be done in accordance with the rules and regulations of the FCC. In addition, the city, in its discretion may require other testing and reports as it determines to be necessary to protect the interests of the citizens of the city and when necessary to ascertain grantee's compliance with this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(b)  FCC reports. A copy of any performance test reports required by the FCC shall be submitted to the city upon request and with reasonable notice. 
(c)  Complaints. Whenever there have been similar complaints made or when there exists other evidence, which, in the reasonable judgment of the city, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of the grantee's system, the city shall have the right and authority to compel the grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of its system. The city may require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal. Reports on such tests shall be delivered to the city no later than 30 days after the city formally notifies the grantee and shall include the following information: The nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system component was tested; the equipment used, and procedures employed in said testing; the results of such tests; and methods by which said complaints were resolved. Said tests and analyses shall be supervised by an engineer who shall sign all records of the special tests and forward same to the city with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending what actions should be taken by the city. All such tests shall be at the expense of the grantee. 
(d)  Consultants. The city shall have the right, at its expense, to employ or contract with qualified consultants and attorneys if necessary or desirable, to assist in the administration of this, or any other section of this chapter or the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-39. - General service standards. 
The city reserves the right to enforce all relevant service rules and regulations as set forth by federal, state, and local governments. These rules and regulations include, but are not limited to, FCC Customer Service Regulations, as hereafter amended by the FCC, and the city's rate and service regulation ordinance, as hereafter amended by the city from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-40. - Services to subscribers and users. 
(a)  Service. Concurrently with the activation of the system in the city, the grantee shall provide all services to subscribers as described herein and as specified in the franchise agreement at rates detailed in the rate schedule. 
(1)  The system shall carry the broad categories of programming and services listed in the franchise. Should the grantee desire to change the selection of programs or services offered on any of its tiers, it shall maintain the mix, quality and level of services provided over the system. Any such change in programs or services offered shall comply with the conditions and procedures contained in the franchise, and shall be reported to the city at least 30 days prior to the proposed implementation. The grantee shall use its good faith efforts to ensure diversity of programming. 
(2)  Basic service shall be offered to subscribers throughout the term of this chapter and the franchise. 
(3)  The grantee shall provide at the city's request and maintain at grantee's sole cost, as specified in the franchise agreement, the following access channels: 
a.  "Government Access Channel" 
b.  "Educational Access Channel" 
c.  "Public Access Channel" 
d.  The grantee shall make available leased access channels, as required by federal law. 
e.  The grantee shall fully provide, at a minimum, the services, facilities and equipment for public, educational and government access as indicated in the franchise. 
(b)  Emergency override. The grantee shall, without charge, provide, service and maintain public emergency override facilities to the city, as described in the franchise agreement and as prescribed by the communications act and the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-41. - Installations, connections, and other grantee services. 
(a)  Standard installations. Standard installation shall consist of a service not exceeding 200 feet from a single point or pedestal attachment to the customer's residence. Service drops in excess of 200 feet and concealed wiring in the home shall be charged to the subscriber based upon time and material. The desire of the subscriber as to the point of entry into the residence shall be observed whenever possible. Runs in building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible. The grantee shall use due care in the process of installation and shall repair any damage to the subscriber's property caused by said installation. Such restoration shall be undertaken within no more than 10 days after the damage is incurred and shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter. 
(b)  Deposits. Any deposit required by grantee of subscribers shall bear interest at a rate consistent with other service providers that require deposits, which interest shall belong to the subscriber. 
(c)  Antennas and antenna switches. The grantee shall not, as a condition to providing cable service, require any subscriber or potential subscriber, to remove any existing antenna structures for the receipt of over-the-air television signals. The grantee shall install, upon the request of the subscriber, an RF or antenna switch where required for the provision of services provided by the grantee as required by Federal law. 
(d)  Lockout devices. The grantee shall provide to the potential subscriber, as part of its installation literature, information concerning the availability of a lockout device for use by a subscriber. The grantee may require a reasonable deposit or purchase price for the use of this device, as set forth in the rate schedule. The lockout device described herein shall be made available to all subscribers requesting it beginning on the first day that any cable service is provided. 
(e)  Reconnection. Grantee shall restore service to subscribers wishing restoration of service provided subscriber shall first satisfy any previous obligations owed. 
(f)  Free disconnection. Subscribers shall have the right to have cable service disconnected without charge. Such disconnection shall be made as soon as practicable and in no case later than 15 days following notice to grantee of same. A refund of unused service charges shall be paid to the customer within 30 days from the date of termination of service. 
(g)  Delinquent accounts. Grantee shall use all reasonable efforts to collect on delinquent subscriber accounts. In all cases, the grantee shall provide the subscriber with at least 10 working days written notice prior to disconnection. The fee for reconnection shall not exceed the fee for a new connection. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-42. - Customer service standards. 
(a)  The grantee shall establish, operate and maintain in the city a business office and maintenance and repair facility for the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all aspects of the construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the system and for the payment of subscribers service charges. 
(b)  The grantee shall have a listed, local, toll-free, or collect telephone number for service calls and such telephone service shall be available 24 hours a day, seven (7) days a week according to FCC guidelines. Said number shall be made available to subscribers and the general public. 
(c)  The grantee shall respond to and resolve subscriber's complaints or requests for service in connection with repairs and maintenance and malfunctions of facilities. The grantee shall respond as quickly as possible to such complaints and requests, but shall in any case respond within the guidelines published by the FCC. Complaints or requests which may pose a potential health and safety hazard will be responded to immediately, following notification of the grantee. In connection with billing complaints, the grantee shall respond within time frame established by the FCC. 
(d)  The grantee shall prepare and file with the city copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection with the handling of inquiries, requests and complaints. The grantee shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints and furnish information concerning the city office responsible for the administration of the franchise, including, but not limited to, the address and telephone number of said office. 
(e)  The grantee shall keep full records, as prescribed by the FCC, in connection with customer service standards. 
(f)  The city may review and monitor unresolved customer complaints. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-43. - Continuity of service mandatory. 
(a)  It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive continuous, uninterrupted service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. 
(b)  In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify or sell the system, or the city gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew its franchise, the grantee shall cooperate with the city or new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers for a period of six (6) months or such other time as mutually agreed upon. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for the services when it no longer operates the system. 
(c)  Failure to provide continuity. In the event the grantee fails to operate the system for seven (7) consecutive days without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages incurred by the city as a the result of the grantee's failure to perform. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-44. - Protection of subscriber privacy mandatory. 
Grantee shall at all times protect the privacy of subscribers, as provided in this chapter and other applicable federal, state, and local laws, and in particular, section 631 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 551). 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-45. - Rights of individuals. 
(a)  Nondiscrimination required. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, or handicap, provided the subscriber shall pay all applicable fees for the service desired. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-46. - Books and records available to the grantor. 
(a)  The grantee shall maintain an office within the city. The city shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee when necessary to ascertain the grantee's compliance with this chapter or the franchise agreement. Access to the aforementioned records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that said records contain "proprietary" information. 
(b)  Grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine and copy or transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by grantee or under its control concerning the operations, finances, affairs, transactions or property of grantee. If any of such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the city shall determine that an examination of such maps or records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of their duties, then all travel and maintenance expenses necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by grantee. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-47. - Reports required. 
The grantee shall file with the city, upon reasonable request: 
(a)  Regulatory communications. All reports required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) including, but not limited to annual proof of performance tests and results, and Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) reports, and all petitions, applications and communications of all types submitted by grantee to the FCC, the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency, having jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of grantee's system. 
(b)  Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical miles of plant construction and plant in operation during the fiscal year will be made available at the local office of the cable operator for review by city officials as needed and upon reasonable request. 
(c)  Construction reports. Construction reports shall be sent to the city 30 days after the initial franchise agreement is awarded and monthly thereafter until construction is completed as specified in this chapter. 
(d)  Proof of performance tests. Proof of performance test results performed as required by the FCC shall be supplied to the city upon request. 
(e)  Test required by city. Tests required by city as specified in this chapter shall be submitted within 30 days of notification. 
(f)  Grantee rules. The grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms of regular subscriber service policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's policy in connection with its subscribers shall be in accordance with applicable state and federal laws, rules or regulations. 
(g)  Proof of bonds and insurance. Grantee shall submit to the city the required performance bond, or a certified copy thereof, and insurance certificates as required under the terms and conditions described in this chapter. 
(h)  Financial and ownership reports. The following financial reports for the franchise area shall be submitted to the city, upon reasonable notice and as required by the city: 
(1)  A statement of gross annual revenues verifying all revenues from the City of High Point franchise as certified by the Vice President for Finance or an officer of the grantee. 
(2)  An annual list of officers and members of the board of grantee and of any parent corporation. 
(i)  Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to ascertain grantee's compliance with this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-48. - Records required. 
The city may, from time to time, impose reasonable requests for information, records and documents as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to ascertain grantee's compliance with this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-49. - Public notice. 
Public notice of any public meeting relating to this chapter or the franchise shall be in compliance with the city's public notice requirements. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-50. - Captions. 
The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-51. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applicants for an initial franchise shall submit to the city, a written application utilizing the standard format provided by the city, at the time and place designated by the city for accepting applications. The application shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Applicant's proper business, corporate, or partnership name; 
(2)  If a corporation, applicant shall also state the corporation's process agent address for service of notice, provide a certified copy from the North Carolina Secretary of State of authorization to do business in the state; 
(3)  If a partnership, application shall also contain names and addresses of all partners, names and addresses of general partner(s) responsible for overseeing the management of the franchise; 
(4)  Financial statement certified by a certified public accountant; 
(5)  Insurance bonds and certificates; 
(6)  Any other material required by this chapter or reasonably requested by the city. 
(b)  In awarding a franchise, the city shall enter into agreement with franchisee upon any reasonable conditions it may require and subject to the provisions of this chapter and applicable law. 
(c)  An application fee in the amount of $6,000 shall be paid for each initial franchise at the time of application for franchise, which fee shall be in the form of cash, certified check, or money order to defer the cost of studying, investigating, and otherwise processing such application and which shall be in consideration thereof and not refundable or returnable in whole or in part. To offset the effects of inflation, the amount of the application fee provided for herein, is subject to reasonable increase in accord with the annual rate of inflation as decided by the city council. 
(d)  Any administrative fee associated with the renewal of a franchise agreement shall be negotiated in the renewed franchise agreement. 
(e)  Any conditions attached to the payment of an application fee shall be enumerated in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
Sec. 11-3-52. - Public hearings. 
Whenever a public hearing is required by this chapter and related communications ordinances, the public hearing must be advertised in a newspaper with general circulation within the city at least 10 working days before the hearing, the hearing shall be open to the public and provide for public comment and any reliable, relevant evidence that is not unduly repetitive shall be admissible. 
(Ord. No. 98-66, 7-2-98)  
CHAPTER 4 - Poolrooms and Bowling Alleys[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of amusement places, G.S. 160A-181. 
 
Sec. 11-4-1. - Definitions; exemptions. 
The term "billiard hall" or "bowling alley" shall embrace any room where one (1) or more billiard tables, pool tables or bowling alleys are kept, or any place where any person can play the game of billiards, pool or bowling by the payment of a fee, or charge, or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token, or where a charge is made for caring for clothing or any other property or for any service rendered, or where any person may gain admission by the payment of dues or subscriptions of membership in any society, club, or any organization; however, a room or rooms of fraternal orders, public recreation centers, Y.M.C.A., Y.W.C.A. sports organization where the doors are not locked or barred and outside windows are not shaded, and where no beer, wine or other beverage with alcoholic content is sold, or in any manner distributed to members or guests, and having their own bylaws, officers and organization dues, and charging no game fees, which may have one (1) or more tables of pool among other games and activities shall not be embraced in the term "billiard hall" or "bowling alley."  
Sec. 11-4-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 11-4-2, relating to hours of operation, was repealed by an ordinance adopted Feb. 17, 1983.  
Sec. 11-4-3. - License required. 
No person shall maintain or operate any pool or billiard table, bowling alley, or other table or alley for any game or play for which a charge is made, either directly or indirectly, unless he shall first have secured a license from the council to do so. Such license shall expire on June 30 each year, and shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 86-40, § 2, 9-4-86)  
Sec. 11-4-4. - Application for license. 
Applications for a license shall be made upon forms provided by the city manager, and shall contain all information necessary for the council to act intelligently upon the applications.  
Sec. 11-4-5. - When license refused. 
The council shall not issue a license to any person: 
(1)  Who has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; 
(2)  Who is not a citizen and resident of North Carolina; 
(3)  Who is of immoral character; or 
(4)  Who is a habitual user of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs.  
Sec. 11-4-6. - Form and content of license. 
Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall specify the premises for which it is issued, the name of the owner or operator, and the dates upon which the license begins and shall expire. The license shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises at all times.  
Sec. 11-4-7. - Certain prohibitions to be observed by licensee and employees. 
Licensees under this chapter shall not, and neither shall their employees: 
(1)  Suffer or permit any gambling on the licensed premises at any time; nor the sale or use of any racing, football or other parley cards or gambling boards; 
(2)  Suffer or permit the licensed premises to become disorderly; or permit any profane, obscene, or indecent language thereon; 
(3)  Suffer or permit any intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs to be sold or kept or consumed on the licensed premises; 
(4)  Employ in carrying on the business any person who has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; or 
(5)  Suffer or permit any keeley board, keno board or any other such board or device to be attached to or placed upon any tables.  
Sec. 11-4-8. - Rules for operation. 
The following rules shall be observed by all operators of pool rooms within the city: 
(1)  No screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions shall be placed between the entrance to the room where pool is played and the rear wall of such room. A clear view of the interior from the entrance to the rear of the room must be maintained at all times. 
(2)  No partitions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures where the public congregates shall be permitted. Provided, this shall not be construed so as to prohibit the maintenance of closets used exclusively for storage purposes, or of toilets. 
(3)  There shall not be permitted or maintained any open or secret connections through doors, windows, trap doors, hidden doors, panels, stairways or other devices within any place where gambling is conducted or where persons meet or congregate for immoral purposes.  
Sec. 11-4-9. - Licensee responsible. 
The acts and conduct of the agents and employees of the licensee in the conduct of the business shall be deemed to be the acts and conduct of the licensee.  
Sec. 11-4-10. - Revocation of licenses. 
A second conviction of a licensee, or his agent or employee, for any violation of any provision of this chapter shall by operation of law constitute an automatic revocation of the license of the licensee. In addition, the council may at any time, for cause, and after a hearing, of which the licensee shall be given such reasonable notice as the council may direct, revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter.  
CHAPTER 5 - Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Display of merchandise on streets and sidewalks, § 6-1-3. 
State Law reference— Regulation of solicitation campaigns and itinerant merchants, G.S. 160A-178. 
 
ARTICLE A - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 11-5-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Solicitor or canvasser. The "solicitor" or "canvasser" shall mean any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or from services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided that the definition shall include any person, who for himself, or for another person hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. This definition shall not apply to, and this article shall not apply to, the following persons: 
(1)  Those who solicit orders solely from industrial, commercial or professional establishments within the city; 
(2)  Those who solicit orders solely for agricultural or forest products; 
(3)  Those who solicit orders solely for any kind of insurance, if such individual is licensed by the state, county or city; and 
(4)  Those soliciting for schools, approved educational, religious or charitable organizations when the provisions of the business license tax ordinance have been complied with. 
(b)  Peddler. The word "peddler" shall mean any individual whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, in the city, selling or attempting to sell goods, wares and merchandise and personal property of any nature whatsoever for immediate delivery or delivery within 24 hours. This definition shall not apply to the following persons: 
(1)  Those who peddle solely to industrial, commercial or professional establishments within the city; 
(2)  Those who peddle solely agricultural or forest products which have not been subjected to manufacturing process; and 
(3)  Those peddling for schools or approved educational, religious or charitable organizations when the provisions of the business license tax ordinance have been complied with. 
(Code 1958, § 17A-1) 
Cross reference— Privilege license taxes, § 3-2-11 et seq.  
Sec. 11-5-2. - License required. 
Every person peddling, soliciting, canvassing or promoting the display or sale of arts and craft items and merchandise, wares or other tangible items in the city in connection with a flea market or rummage sale, shall obtain a license under the provisions of section 3-2-11 et seq. 
(1)  Exhibition show/sales; arts and crafts. Every person using any site or location for the purpose of promoting the display or sale of arts and crafts items on a permanent basis shall pay for such privilege a license fee per year of $50.00. 
When an exhibition of arts, crafts or other items of merchandise is totally sponsored by a non-profit organization conducting the exhibition show for charitable, cultural, religious or civic purposes, and no person or corporation outside of the organization is hired or engaged to promote such exhibit for a fee or percentage, and there is no buying, selling, trading or taking of orders for future delivery, the organization shall pay a license fee of $10.00 per year, provided that there are no more than six (6) two-day events scheduled per year. More than six (6) two-day events shall be considered a permanent basis. 
When an exhibition of arts, crafts or other items of merchandise is totally sponsored by a non-profit organization conducting the exhibition show for charitable, cultural, religious or civic purposes, and no person or corporation outside of the organization is hired or engaged to promote such exhibition for a fee or percentage, and there is any buying, selling, trading or taking of orders for future delivery, the organization shall pay a license fee of $10.00 per year, provided that there are no more than six (6) two-day events scheduled per year. More than six (6) two-day events shall be considered a permanent basis. 
When an exhibition of arts and crafts is totally sponsored by a promoter or general manager for non-profit for a group of exhibitors in the same location for show and/or sale either out of doors or in a building occupied in whole or in part, and no person or corporation is hired or engaged to promote such exhibition for a fee or percentage, and there is any buying, selling, trading or taking of orders for future delivery, the general manager or promoter shall pay a license fee of $10.00 per year, provided that there are no more than six (6) two-day events scheduled per year. More than six (2) two-day events shall be considered a permanent basis. 
Each such exhibitor shall be exempt from this or any other privilege license fee. Any other exemptions provided for by this article shall not apply to the license required by this section. 
In this section, "exhibition shows and sales" means an exhibition or show where arts and crafts are displayed for show and/or sale either out of doors or in a building occupied in whole or in part. 
(2)  Flea markets and rummage sales. Every person using any site or location for the purpose of promoting the display or sale of merchandise, wares or other tangible items in connection with a flea market or rummage sale shall pay a license tax of $25.00 per sale period. Sale period shall not exceed five (5) consecutive days. 
When a group of individuals place merchandise in the same location under one (1) general manager or promoter, the general manager or promoter shall pay a license fee of $25.00 per sale period. Sale period shall not exceed five (5) consecutive days. Any other exemptions provided for by this article shall not apply to the license required by this section. 
(Code 1958, § 17A-2; Ord. No. 89-105, § 1, 9-7-89)  
Sec. 11-5-3. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 17A-3)  
Sec. 11-5-4. - Application for permit; permit fee. 
(a)  Applicants for a permit under this article shall personally file with the director of police services (or designated agent) a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the director of police services, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)  If employed, or acting as agent, the name and address of the employer, or principal, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)  Length of time for which the permit is desired; 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery; 
(7)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant, taken within the 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguished manner; 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant, a copy to remain in the police department; 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinances, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; and 
(10)  A statement by a reputable physician of the city dated not more than 10 days prior to submission of the application certifying the applicant to be free of contagious, infectious or communicable disease. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, a fee as fixed from time to time by the council shall be paid to the director of police services to cover the cost of issuing the permit.  
Sec. 11-5-5. - Police rulings on applications and appeals therefrom. 
If the director of police services shall find the previous criminal record of the applicant justifies the conclusion that the health and safety of occupants of the places solicited might be menaced by commission of a breach of peace or some form of assault, he shall not approve the permit. Whenever an application for a permit is disapproved on this ground, the applicant shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the director of police services by filing with the council within 14 days after the applicant receives notice that the application has been disapproved, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing in the appeal and notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant by mailing the notice, postage paid, to the licensee at his last-known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision of the council on the appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 17A-6)  
Sec. 11-5-6. - Issuance and contents of permit; copy of ordinance. 
Upon receipt (and approval) of an application for a permit and payment of the prescribed fee therefor, the director of police services or his designated agent shall deliver to the applicant the following: 
(1)  A permit containing the signature of the issuing officer, the name, address and photograph of the applicant, the class (type) of permit issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance of the permit, the length of time the permit shall be in effect, and the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such business. 
(2)  A copy of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 17A-7)  
Sec. 11-5-7. - Duration of permit. 
The permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be effective during the fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending on the succeeding June 30 unless the applicant requests permission to do business for a lesser period, in which case the permit shall be valid for such period. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 17A-8)  
Sec. 11-5-8. - Permit to be produced when called for; enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer in the city or any tax collection officials of the city to require any person seen soliciting, canvassing or peddling to produce his permit and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 17A-9)  
Sec. 11-5-9. - Revocation of permit; grounds. 
The permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the director of police services and after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for permit; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conducting the business in an unlawful or abusive manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or menace to the health and enjoyment of the privacy of the home of any individual; or 
(5)  Conviction during the permit year of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 17A-10)  
Sec. 11-5-10. - Same—notice of hearing. 
Notice of hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage paid, to the person holding the permit at his last-known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 17A-11)  
Sec. 11-5-11. - Same—appeal on revocation. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the director of police services in the revocation of a permit as provided in section 11-5-9 shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to the person's last-known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal and notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided for notice of hearing on refusal to grant a permit. The decision of the council on the appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 17A-12)  
Sec. 11-5-12. - Renewal of permits. 
Permits shall be renewed without charge upon the application of permit holder at any time between June 1 and July 1 while the permit is in force. An applicant shall request renewal in writing and state at that time any changes applicable to his initial application for a permit. No other action on his part shall be deemed necessary. Upon application for renewal, the director of police services shall issue the applicant a renewal permit covering the period of the new year. 
(Code 1958, Sec. 17A-13)  
Secs. 11-5-13—11-5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Solicitations for Charitable, Patriotic, Religious, Educational or Philanthropic Purposes[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of this article were formerly designated as section 110.1 of the city business license tax ordinance. 
 
Sec. 11-5-21. - When permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, society, association, or corporation, or for any agent, member of representative thereof, directly or indirectly, to solicit property or financial assistance of any kind, to sell or offer to sell any article, tag, service, emblem, publication, ticket, advertisement, subscription, or anything of value, on the plea or the representation that such sale or solicitation, or the proceeds thereof, is for a charitable, educational, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose, on the streets, in any office or business building, by house to house canvass, or in any other public or private place, by telephone, personal solicitation, by mail, or in any other way, in the city, unless such person, organization, society, association or corporation shall have first duly secured a permit as provided in this subsection; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any established society, association or corporation that is organized and operated exclusively for religious, educational, philanthropic, benevolent, fraternal, charitable or reformatory purposes, not operated for pecuniary profit, where no part of the net earnings of which inure to the benefit of any person, private shareholder or individual, and where the solicitation of such organization shall be conducted solely among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for such solicitation or where such solicitation may be in the form of collections or contributions at the regular exercises or services of any church, religious society, lodge, benevolent order or fraternity or similar organizations, or of any branch thereof.  
Sec. 11-5-22. - Applications for permits. 
A written application for a permit to solicit for any cause whatever as provided in section 11-5-21 shall be sworn to and filed with the city clerk, and said application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of the organization applying for a permit to solicit and the address of its headquarters; 
(2)  Names and addresses of its principal officers and management; 
(3)  The purpose for which any receipts derived from such solicitation are to be used; 
(4)  The name of the person or persons by whom the receipts of such solicitation shall be disbursed; 
(5)  The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation; 
(6)  An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation; 
(7)  The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations; 
(8)  The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to anyone in connection with such solicitation, together with the manner in which such wages, fees, expenses, commissions or emoluments are to be expended, to whom paid, and the amount thereof; 
(9)  A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for the purposes set out in section 11-5-21 by the organization or persons seeking a permit for such solicitations, said statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and the final distribution thereof; 
(10)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable, religious, educational or philanthropic work being done by the applicant organization within the city; 
(11)  Such other information as may be required by the city clerk in order to fully determine the kind, character and worthiness of the proposed solicitations and as to whether or not such solicitation is in the interest of protecting the health, life and property of the citizens of High Point and in the interest of preserving and enforcing good government and for the security of the city and its inhabitants.  
Sec. 11-5-23. - When permit to be issued. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application as provided in section 11-5-22, the city clerk shall make or cause to be made such investigation as is deemed necessary in regard thereto in order to determine that such proposed solicitation is, in fact, to be conducted for a worthy charitable, educational, religious, philanthropic or patriotic purpose, and that the proceeds from such solicitation shall be used, and if the city clerk shall be satisifed that the cause for which such solicitation is to be made is, in fact, for a worthy charitable, educational, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose and that the proceeds derived from such solicitation will be used for such purpose, and that such solicitation is not promoted or conducted primarily for the private profit of its promoters, and that such solicitation will not be incompatible with the protection of health, life, and property of the citizens of the city, then the city clerk shall approve such application and shall issue a permit to such applicant for the proper period. 
(b)  Any worthy charitable, patriotic, religious, educational or philanthropic organization or representative thereof desiring to solicit at street intersections within the corporate limits must state this method of solicitation on the application. Before a permit will be issued, the applicant must first receive written authorization from the traffic division of the police department. The chief of police will designate the intersection or intersections where the solicitations can be held. It shall be unlawful for any organization or representative thereof to solicit at intersections within the corporate limits without prior authorization from the traffic division of the police department. 
(c)  Any person who acts as a professional solicitor shall be required to obtain a privilege license pursuant to title 3 of this Code, entitled "Financial Administration," and shall be charged a fee of $10.00 payable to the city collector. The applicant must also provide a copy of the professional fund-raising counsel license or professional solicitation license he or she has obtained from the North Carolina Department of Human Resources to obtain a privilege license. 
(d)  A "professional solicitor" means any person who, for a financial or other consideration, solicits or employs another to solicit contributions. A salaried employee of the person for whom the contributions are solicited or of its tax-exempt parent organization and the person for whom the contributions are solicited are not included within the term "professional solicitor." 
(Ord. No. 86-13, §§ 1, 2, 5-15-86; Ord. No. 91-74, § 1, 11-12-91)  
Sec. 11-5-24. - Period of permits; renewals. 
The city clerk shall determine from the application and from such facts as may be developed in connection with such application the period for which such permit shall be approved and granted provided, that such period shall not exceed three (3) calendar months; however, upon further application, information or reports as may be deemed necessary to safeguard the interest of the public and carry out the purposes of this subsection, the city clerk may renew and extend such permit for additional periods, not to exceed three (3) calendar months.  
Sec. 11-5-25. - Reports that may be required by city clerk. 
The city clerk may require from any permittee hereunder any reports or information at any time and at such intervals as in the discretion of the city clerk shall be necessary for the successful administration of the provisions of this article and the protection of the health, life and property of the citizens of the city.  
Sec. 11-5-26. - Permits not transferable. 
Any permit approved and issued under this article shall be nontransferable; however, this shall not prevent any permittee from using any number of solicitors and representatives as shall be reported to the city clerk.  
Sec. 11-5-27. - Denial or revocation of permits. 
(a)  If upon receipt of written information, complaints or upon investigation the city clerk shall find that any agent or representative of the applicant has not applied for and received a license required by the state, or if any agent or representative of the applicant has misrepresented or made untrue statements on the application, or if the city clerk determines that such solicitations may not be conducted in a manner inimical to the protection of health, life and property, or in the best interests of the citizens of this city, or will not be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article, then it shall be the duty of the city clerk to deny a permit. 
(b)  If, upon receipt of written information or upon investigation, the city clerk shall find that any agent or representative of the permittee is misrepresenting or making untrue statements with regard to solicitation, or has made untrue statements in the application, or that in any way the solicitation has been conducted or is being conducted in a manner inimical to the protection of the health, life and property of the citizens of the city and not in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article, or representing in any way that any permit granted hereunder is an endorsement of such solicitation, then it shall be the duty of the city clerk to revoke said permit; provided, however, that before any permit is revoked, the city clerk shall give the permittee 24 hours' notice in writing that a hearing is to be had; and that at said hearing the city clerk shall ascertain the facts, and if any reasons above set forth for revoking the permit are found to exist, the permit shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 86-13, §§ 3, 4, 5-15-86; Ord. No. 91-74, § 2, 11-21-91) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 86-13, adopted May 15, 1986, changed the title of § 11-5-27 from "Revocation of permits" to "Denial or revocation of permits."  
Sec. 11-5-28. - Appeal to council where permit refused or revoked. 
Any person or organization denied a permit, or whose permit has been revoked by the city clerk, any appeal to the city council.  
Secs. 11-5-29—11-5-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C - Produce Peddlers 
 
Sec. 11-5-41. - Permit—Required. 
All peddlers who produce their own fruits, vegetables, eggs, chickens and butter shall apply for and secure from the city collector a permit to peddler such fruits, vegetables, eggs, chickens and butter within the corporate limits. The permit shall be issued without cost to the applicant. 
(Code 1958, § 9-9)  
Sec. 11-5-42. - Same—Application. 
The application for a permit to peddle within the corporate limits shall be filed on a form provided by the city collector.  
Sec. 11-5-43. - Same—To be kept in possession of peddler; exhibition. 
The permit provided for in this article must be kept in the peddler's possession and must be exhibited on demand of any police or health officer of the city collector. 
(Code 1958, § 9-12)  
Sec. 11-5-44. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable. 
(Code 1958, § 9-13)  
Sec. 11-5-45. - Time limit for parking. 
It shall be unlawful for peddlers of produce to park any vehicle in any one (1) block for a longer period of time than 15 minutes except in areas designated by the city. 
(Code 1958, § 9-14)  
Sec. 11-5-46. - Peddling restricted to certain areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to peddle or sell fruits, vegetables, farm produce, candies or merchandise of any kind and description from wagons, trucks, automobiles, pushcarts or vehicles of any kind on any street designated as closed to vendors by the council in section 10-1-291(19) of title 10. A current list of those streets is available in the office of the city clerk, the city collector, and the director of transportation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to sell fruits, vegetables, farm produce, candies or merchandise of any kind and every kind and description from wagons, trucks, automobiles, pushcarts or vehicles on any of the other streets of the city by maintaining fixed locations on such streets for the purpose of offering such fruits, vegetables, farm produce, candies or merchandise for sale. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the peddling of fruits, vegetables, farm produce, candies or merchandise on the streets outside of the area restricted above when the seller thereof is engaged in canvassing from house to house and provided no fixed location is maintained at any point on such streets. 
(Code 1958, § 9-15; Ord. No. 86-19, § 2, 6-5-86)  
CHAPTER 6 - Massage Establishments 
 
Sec. 11-6-1. - Purpose; exemptions. 
To protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals, the following privilege license provisions and regulations are ordained for the privilege of carrying on the business, trade or profession of massagist and for the operation or carrying on of businesses, trades, or professions commonly known as massage parlors, health salons, physical culture studios, or similar establishments wherein massage or physical manipulation of the human body is carried on or practiced. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a regularly established and licensed hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, nor to an office or clinic operated and regularly used by a duly qualified and licensed medical practitioner, osteopath, chiropractor, physical therapist, or registered massage therapist in connection with the practice of those professions. 
(Ord. No. 92-84, § 1, 8-20-92)  
Sec. 11-6-2. - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Massage means the manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing, stroking, kneading, or tapping, by hand or mechanical device. 
(2)  Massage business means any establishment or business wherein massage is practiced, including establishments commonly known as health clubs, physical culture studios and massage studios. 
(3)  Business or profession of massage includes the massage or treatment of any person for a fee or in expectation of a gratuity from the person massaged. 
(4)  Massagist means any person engaged in the business or profession of massage. 
(5)  Registered massage therapist means a person who holds either (a) a diploma from a school approved by the American Massage Therapy Association Commission on Massage Training Accreditation/Approval (COMTAA); or (b) a diploma in massage therapy from an institution approved or licensed by the North Carolina Community College System; or (c) a current certification from the National Certification Examination for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork. 
(Ord. No. 95-20, § 1, 1-16-95)  
Sec. 11-6-3. - Licensing of massage business operators. 
(a)  No person, partnership, corporation or association shall operate a massage business as herein unless that person, partnership, corporation or association shall have first applied for and received the privilege license provided by this section. 
(b)  Every application for the privilege license prescribed herein shall be upon a form approved by the city manager and shall be filed with the city clerk. Every such application shall be made under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is a person, the name and residence address of the person. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or association, the name and residence address of all persons having any legal or beneficial interest in such applicant. 
(2)  The address of the premises where the massage business shall be located. 
(3)  A complete statement of all convictions of any persons whose name is required to be given in subparagraph (b)(1), for any felony, or prostitution or any violation of any law relative to prostitution. 
(4)  A complete statement of any revocation, by any governmental unit, of any license to operate a massage business or to engage in the business or profession of massage held by any person whose name is required to be given in subparagraph (b)(1) above. 
(5)  A complete statement of any conviction of any person whose name is required to be given in subparagraph (b)(1) above, for violation of any statute, law, ordinance or regulation of any government concerning the operation of a massage business or the business or profession of massage. 
(6)  The name and address of any massage business or other establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in subparagraph (b)(1) above, wherein the business or profession of massage is carried on. 
(7)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant. 
(c)  The city clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the police department for an investigative report; to the inspections department to determine compliance with all zoning and building regulations and ordinances; and to the fire department to determine compliance with any law relating to fire protection. The police and fire departments and the inspections department shall, within a reasonable time, not to exceed 45 days, report the results of their examinations to the city clerk. 
(d)  An application in proper form, accompanied by all reports required by this section, shall be submitted to the city council, which shall approve such application if the city council determines that: 
(1)  The application contains no misstatement of fact. 
(2)  The applicant, or any person having any legal or beneficial ownership interest in the applicant, has not been convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct, including but not limited to G.S. 14-177 through G.S. 14-202.1, Article 26, (Offenses Against Public Morality and Decency,) and G.S. 14-203 through 14-208, Article 27 (Prostitution), or section 11-6-12, or of any federal statute relative to prostitution, or of any violation of any law or ordinance of any governmental unit concerning or related to the business or profession of massage. 
(3)  The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable zoning, building, and fire prevention codes. 
(4)  The applicant or any person having a legal or beneficial ownership interest in the applicant has not, for the three (3) year period preceding the application, had a previously issued license for engaging in the business or profession of massage, revoked. 
(e)  Upon approval of the application by the city council, and upon receipt of a license fee as fixed from time to time by the city council, the city collector shall issue a privilege license to applicant. 
(f)  A license issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by action of the city council if the city council determines that: 
(1)  The licensee has violated any provisions of this section. 
(2)  The licensee, or any agent of the licensee, employs or permits to be on the premises of the applicant's massage business, any person practicing the business or profession of massage who has not been issued the privilege license required by 11-6-4 hereof, or whose license under the same subsection has been revoked. 
(3)  The license, or the legal or beneficial owner of an interest in the licensee is convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct, including but not limited to G.S. 14-177 through G.S. 14-202.1, Article 26 (Offenses Against Public Morality and Decency), and G.S. 14-203 through G.S. 14-208, Article 27, (Prostitution). 
(4)  Any employee of the licensee is convicted of any felony in connection with his or her employment, or is convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to G.S. 14-177 through G.S. 14-202.1, Article 26 (Offenses Against Public Morality and Decency), and G.S. 14-203 through G.S. 14-208, Article 27 (Prostitution), or of section 11-6-12. 
(5)  The licensee violates any zoning, building, or fire prevention ordinance. 
(g)  A license issued pursuant to this section is void if the licensee moves or ceases operating a massage parlor at the location required to be stated in the application for license pursuant to the subsection (b)(2). 
(Code 1958, Sec. 15-41)  
Sec. 11-6-4. - Licensing of massagists. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business or profession of massage unless that person shall have first applied for and received the privilege license provided by this section. 
(b)  The application for the license required by this section shall be upon a form approved by the city manager and shall be filed with the city clerk. The application shall be given under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, age and residence address of the applicant; 
(2)  A complete statement of the previous business or occupation of the applicant for the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of application, including any massage establishment experience. 
(3)  A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any felony or misdemeanor or violation of a local ordinance. 
(4)  A complete statement of any revocation of any license granted by any governmental unit to the applicant to engage in the business or profession of massage. 
(5)  The date and place of applicant's birth, the name of applicant's parents, and the residence address or addresses of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(c)  The applicant shall submit, as part of the application required in subsection (b) hereof, the following: 
(1)  Fingerprints of the applicant taken by the police department. 
(2)  Two (2) recent photographs of the applicant's head and shoulders, of a size and quality prescribed by the city manager. 
(3)  A medical certificate signed by a physician, licensed to practice in North Carolina; within seven (7) days of the date of the application. The certificate shall state that the applicant was examined by the certifying physician and that the applicant is free of communicable disease. The additional information required by this subsection shall be provided at the applicant's expense. 
(d)  The city clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the police department for an investigative report. The police department shall, within a reasonable time, not to exceed 45 days, report the results of its investigation to the city clerk. 
(e)  An application in proper form shall be submitted to the city council together with all reports required by this subsection. The city council shall approve such application if the council determines: 
(1)  That the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  The application contains no misstatement of fact. 
(3)  The applicant has not been convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to G.S. 14-177 through G.S. 14-202.1, Article 26 (Offenses Against Public Morality and Decency), and G.S. 14-203 through 14-208, Article 27 (Prostitution), or of section 11-6-12 or of any federal statute relating to prostitution, or for violation of any law or ordinance of any governmental unit concerning or related to the business or profession of massage. 
(4)  The applicant has not, for the three (3) year period preceding the application, has a previously issued license for engaging in the business or profession of massage, revoked. 
(5)  The applicant is free from communicable disease as evidenced by the medical certificate required herein. 
(6)  The applicant has not been previously convicted of any violation of any provision of this section. 
(f)  Upon approval of the application by the city council, and upon receipt of a license fee as fixed from time to time by the city council, the city collector shall issue a privilege license to the applicant. 
(g)  The city council shall have authority to direct that any person licensed under this section submit to a medical examination by a licensed physician approved by the city council. This authority shall be exercised only when the council has reason to believe that any such person has contracted a communicable disease. Refusal to submit to such examination shall be grounds for revocation of the license as provided in subsection (h) of this section. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every person licensed under this section shall file and continue to file with the city clerk a new medical certificate with application for renewal of the license prescribed by this section. Failure to file such updated certificates shall be grounds for revocation of such license as provided in subsection (h) of this section. 
(h)  A license issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by action of the city council if the city council determines: 
(1)  The licensee has violated any provision of this section. 
(2)  The licensee is afflicted with a communicable disease. 
(3)  The licensee has failed to be examined by a licensed physician when required by the city council pursuant to subsection (g) of this section, or has failed to file any medical certificate required by said subsection (g). 
(4)  The licensee has been convicted of a felony, or any crime involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to G.S. 14-177 through G.S. 14-202.1, Article 26 (Offenses Against Public Morality and Decency), and G.S. 14-203 through 14-208, Article 27 (Prostitution), or of violating section 11-6-12, or under any federal statute relating to prostitution, or for violation of any law or ordinance of any governmental unit related to the business or profession of massage. 
(Code 1968, Sec. 15-41)  
Sec. 11-6-5. - Employer to use only licensed employees. 
No person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under section 11-6-3 hereof, shall allow or permit any person to massage or treat any person upon the premises operated by the licensee unless the person giving the massage or treatment has complied with all requirements of licensing under section 11-6-4, including periodic medical examinations by a licensed physician. Violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued to such violator pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1968, Sec. 15-41)  
Sec. 11-6-6. - Posting of license. 
(a)  Every massagist shall post the license required by section 11-6-4 in his work area. 
(b)  Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under section 11-6-3 hereof, shall display the license in a prominent place.  
Sec. 11-6-7. - Notice and hearing. 
Before the city council revokes a license issued pursuant to this chapter, or if the city council determines reasonable grounds exist to deny an application for a license pursuant to this chapter, the city council shall cause a written notice to be sent by certified mail to the licensee affected or applicant affected, at the address stated in the license or application. The notice shall advise the affected party of a right to appear before the city council, with or without legal counsel, at a stated time and place, for the purpose of presenting any evidence relevant to such revocation or denial, and for the purpose of hearing all evidence submitted and examining or cross-examining any person providing such evidence. 
(Code 1968, Sec. 15-41)  
Sec. 11-6-8. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  No person licensed as a massagist under section 11-6-4 shall massage or treat any person, or engage in the business or profession of massage, before 8:00 a.m. or after 12:00 p.m., prevailing time. 
(b)  No person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under section 11-6-3, shall admit customers or prospective customers, or remain open for business, or allow, permit or condone any massage or treatment of any person upon the premises before 8:00 a.m. or after 12:00 p.m., prevailing time. 
(c)  No person in charge of managing a massage business upon the premises shall allow, permit, or condone any massage or treatment of any person before 8:00 a.m. or after 12:00 p.m., prevailing time. 
(Code 1968, Sec. 15-41)  
Sec. 11-6-9. - Patronage of massage businesses by minors and employment of minors. 
(a)  No person licensed as a masseur or masseuse under section 11-6-4, shall massage or treat any person under the age of 18 upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, or registered physical therapist, such order being dated and in the possession of the masseur or masseuse giving the massage or treatment. A violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued to such violator pursuant to this section. 
(b)  No person, corporation, partnership or association licensed under section 11-6-3 hereof, shall allow, permit or condone the massage or treatment of any person under the age of 18 upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, or registered physical therapist, such order being dated, and a true copy of such order being in the possession of the licensee before administration of any massage or treatment. A violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued to such violator pursuant to this section. 
(c)  No person, corporation, partnership or association licensed pursuant to section 11-6-3 shall employ any person under the age of 18 years in the operation of a massage business.  
Sec. 11-6-10. - Privilege license annual. 
The licenses required under this chapter are annual privilege licenses. Such licenses shall be due and payable in the same manner as prescribed for other privilege licenses issued by the city pursuant to the license and privilege tax ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1958, § 15-41)  
Sec. 11-6-11. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this section shall be punished by fine or imprisoned as provided by G.S. 14-4. 
(Code 1958, § 15-41)  
Sec. 11-6-12. - Severability. 
If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Code 1958, § 15-41)  
Sec. 11-6-13. - Massage of private parts for hire prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to massage or to offer to massage the private parts of another for hire. "Massage" means the manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping, by hand or mechanical device. "Private parts" means the penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva or vaginal area. The provisions of this section shall not apply to licensed medical practitioners, osteopaths or chiropractors, or persons operating at their direction, in connection with the practice of medicine, chiropractic, or osteopathy. 
(Code 1958, § 15-42)  
Sec. 11-6-14. - Massage of persons of opposite sex restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a license under this chapter to massage a person of the opposite sex except upon the signed order of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, or registered physical therapist, which order shall be dated and shall specifically state the number of massages, not to exceed 10. The date and hour of each massage given and the name of the operator shall be entered on such order by the establishment where the massages are given and shall be subject to inspection by police officers at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1958, § 15-43; Ord. No. 92-84, § 1, 8-20-92)  
CHAPTER 7 - Sexually Oriented Businesses 
 
Sec. 11-7-1. - Definitions. 
Adult arcade (also known as "peep show") means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to persons in booths or viewing rooms where the images so displayed depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial establishment that regularly features, exhibits, or displays as one of its principal business purposes: 
(1)  Persons who appear nude or semi-nude; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as one of its principal business purposes; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown as one of its principal business purposes that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features, exhibits, or displays, as one of its principal business purposes, persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances that expose or depict "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
Applicant means the person who will operate the sexually oriented business, and shall include each of the following persons associated with that business: 
(1)  The owner of a sole proprietorship; 
(2)  Each member of a firm, association, or general partnership; 
(3)  Each general partner in a limited partnership; 
(4)  Each officer, director, and owner of more than 10 percent of the stock of a corporation; 
(5)  The manager of an establishment operated by a corporation; 
(6)  Any manager who has been empowered as attorney-in-fact for a nonresident individual or partnership. 
Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of High Point or the designated agent of the chief of police. 
City clerk means the High Point City Clerk. 
Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a fulltime, parttime, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Escort means a person who, for tips or any other form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its principal business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; or 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means person(s) in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. "Nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of North Carolina or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
(1)  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
(2)  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and 
(3)  Where no more than one (1) nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one (1) time. 
Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human anus, male genitals, or female genitals; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus, male genitals, or female genitals. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex, or activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center, or any combination of the foregoing. 
Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  Persons other than those named as applicants for a license becoming associated with the business, as provided in the definition of applicant; except that a mere substitution of a person as manager of an establishment shall only require filing with the city clerk as provided in section 11-7-6(c); 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-2. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-3. - License required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city clerk pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form prescribed by the chief of police. An application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. 
(1)  The applicant and the applicant's spouse shall provide to the chief of police, fingerprints and/or any other necessary identification information which may be required by the chief of police. 
(2)  The chief of police shall check the state repository for criminal history to determine if an applicant and/or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving any offense described in Articles 7A, 26, 26A, 27, 37, or 39 of Chapter 14 of the North Carolina General Statutes; or, any similar offenses to those described herein under the criminal or penal code of North Carolina, other states, High Point, other cities, other countries, or facilitation, attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses for which: 
a.  Less than two (2) years have lapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five (5) years have lapsed since the date of conviction; 
c.  Less than five (5) years have lapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(c)  The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information as to enable the chief of police and the city clerk to determine whether each applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter. 
(d)  Each applicant must be qualified under section 11-7-4 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 5-5-94)  
Sec. 11-7-4. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Within 30 days after receipt of a completed application, the city clerk will approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant for a sexually oriented business license. The city clerk will approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  The application and investigation fee or the license fee required by this chapter have not been paid. 
(3)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(4)  An applicant has failed to provide information required in order to determine the qualifications of the applicant under this chapter for issuance of the license, or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(5)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with this chapter or other provisions of the High Point City Code. 
(6)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(7)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving: 
a.  Any offense described in Articles 7A, 26, 26A, 27, 37, or 39 of Chapter 14 of the North Carolina General Statutes; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of North Carolina, other states, High Point, other cities, or other countries; or facilitation, attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
for which: 
(i)  less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
(ii)  less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
(iii)  less than five (5) years have lapsed since the date of the least conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
b.  Reserved. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed above may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by this section has lapsed. 
(d)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the classification of sexually oriented business for which it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. Licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-5. - Appeal. 
An applicant whose application is denied, suspended, or revoked by the city clerk may appeal such action in writing within 30 days to the city council, which shall decide either to uphold the action or to issue the license no later than the second regular city council meeting after receipt of the appeal. The applicant or licensee shall have the right to present evidence before the city council. The decision to uphold the action of the city clerk or issue the license shall be based solely on the criteria established herein for the action by the city clerk. A suspension or revocation shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-6. - Fees. 
(a)  Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a $500.00 non-refundable application and investigation fee. 
(b)  In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the city clerk an annual non-refundable privilege license fee of $500.00 upon license issuance or renewal. 
(c)  A substitution of a manager of the business which occurs during the license year shall be filed with the city clerk within 30 days of its occurrence, and a $100.00 investigation fee paid. 
(d)  All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-7. - Inspection. 
(a)  A business license applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department or any other city, county, state, or federal department, division, or agency that enforces codes, regulations, or statutes relating to human health, safety or welfare, or structural safety to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if such person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by persons designated above. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by the customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-8. - Expiration of license. 
All licenses shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 11-7-3. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less then 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-9. - Suspension. 
The city clerk is authorized to, and will, suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the chief of police determines that a business licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter or with any other requirements of the High Point City Code, including those relating to buildings, electricity, plumbing, fire safety, and mechanical equipment; or 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; or 
(3)  Permitted illegal gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(4)  Demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-10. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city clerk is authorized to, and will, revoke a license if a cause for suspension in section 11-7-9 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The city clerk is authorized to, and will, revoke a sexually oriented business license if the chief of police determines that a business licensee: 
(1)  Gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the City during the application process; or 
(2)  Has allowed the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; or 
(3)  Has allowed prostitution on the premises; or 
(4)  Has operated or worked in the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; or 
(5)  Has been convicted of an offense named in section 11-7-4(a) for which the time period required in section 11-7-4(b) has not lapsed; or 
(6)  On two (2) or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime named in section 11-7-4 for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; or 
(7)  Has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, masturbation, oral copulation, or sodomy to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
(8)  Is delinquent in payment to the city of ad valorem taxes, sales taxes, or the annual license fee, or any other fee or tax related to the sexually oriented business or other business of the licensee. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the business licensee or employee allowed the act of sexual intercourse, masturbation, oral copulation, sodomy, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the city clerk revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city clerk finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the licensee may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection 11-7-4(a) an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under that subsection have elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-11. - Denial. 
If the city denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, or denies an appeal, the city will send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested written notice of the action. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-12. - Transfer of license. 
Unless a new application for a license is made, a licensee shall not transfer a license to another, nor shall a business licensee operate a different classification of a sexually oriented business than that designated in the application, or transfer ownership or control to another person(s), or operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. No sexually oriented business shall be operated under any name or conducted under any designation or classification not specified in the license for that business. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-13. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of one 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays, except to the extent allowed by North Carolina law and regulations pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages by the business if the sexually oriented business has a state ABC permit. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-14. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-15. - Additional regulations for adult theaters, adult cabarets, adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity in an adult cabaret, adult theater, or adult motion picture theater, or adult arcade. 
(b)  A licensee or employee commits an offense if the licensee or employee allows a person to appear in a state of nudity in an adult cabaret, adult theater, or adult motion picture theater, or adult arcade. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-16. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttal presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, such person rents or subrents a sleeping room to another and, within 10 hours from the time the room is rented, such person rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-17. - Additional regulations for all sexually oriented businesses. 
A person commits an offense if the person allows another person under the age of 18 years to enter or remain on or in the enclosed portion of a sexually oriented business; or for a person under the age of 18 years to enter or remain on or in the enclosed portion of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-18. - Regulations pertaining to sexually oriented businesses with viewing or other rooms. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which either: exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or has a room or booth (excluding restrooms) of less than 150 square feet to which patrons are admitted for any reason, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant(s). 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises and the employees who are present to ensure that no more than one (1) person occupies a room or booth at anytime, and that all other entrances to rooms, booths, or viewing areas (and to the aisles, walkways and hallways leading to rooms, booths or viewing areas) are maintained free of any obstruction such as a door, curtain, panel, board, slat, ribbon, cord, rope, chain, or other device. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restroom. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises have two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of all employees present in the premises to ensure that the line of sight and view area specified in subsection (a)(5) remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1) footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of all employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(9)  No operator, owner, or employee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between rooms or booths. 
(10)  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between rooms or booths. 
(11)  The operator or owner shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the rooms or booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(12)  The owner or operator shall cause all floor coverings in rooms, booths, and viewing areas to be non-porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(13)  The owner or operator shall cause all wall surfaces and seating surfaces in rooms, booths, and viewing areas to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, non-porous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (13) above commits an offense if the person fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-19. - Criminal penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of $500.00, or imprisonment, or both. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-20. - Civil injunction. 
Any person who violates this chapter is subject to a civil suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations and liability for licensing sanctions such as suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Sec. 11-7-21. - Liability for the conduct of others. 
A licensee of a sexually oriented business is jointly and individually liable for violations of and offenses under this chapter by the employees of the sexually oriented business, and for all civil and criminal sanctions or remedies for such violations and offenses, including but not limited to license suspension or revocation, prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 9-19-91)  
CHAPTER 8 - Sanitary Landfills 
 
Sec. 11-8-1. - Sanitary landfills franchise required. 
No sanitary landfill, as defined in Article 9, Chapter 130A, N.C. General Statutes, shall be operated within the corporate limits without a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
Sec. 11-8-2. - Term of franchise. 
The term of a franchise shall be stated in the franchise, but shall not exceed 30 years. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
Sec. 11-8-3. - Franchise nonexclusive. 
A franchise is non-exclusive. The city reserves the right in its discretion to grant additional franchises at any time. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
Sec. 11-8-4. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
(a)  Transfer of franchisee. Any franchise granted hereunder cannot be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including but no limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or other means without the prior consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  Transfer threshold. The grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed change in or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttal presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the disposal by the grantee, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of 50 percent or more, at one (1) time, of the ownership or controlling interest in the system; or 50 percent cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interest to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust of association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. The city shall exercise its power to approve a transfer of ownership or control in a manner consistent with Section 617 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 537). 
(c)  Process. Every transfer, sale, lease, assignment or disposition of, including but not limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or other means or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such transfer, sale, lease, assignment or disposition of, including but not limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or other means or acquisition of control of the grantee the city may inquire into the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the city in any such inquiry. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by the city as part of said inquiry may be grounds for denial of the proposed transfer, sale, lease, assignment or disposition of, including but not limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or other means or acquisition of control of the grantee. If the city finds that such transfer, after considering the legal, financial, character, technical, and other public interest qualifications of the applicant, is satisfactory, the city will transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as may be in the public interest. The consent of the city to such transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(d)  Assumption of control. The city agrees that any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the system shall have the right to notify the city that it or its designee satisfactory to the city will take control of and operate the system. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise obligations during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one (1) year, unless extended by the city at its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition for transfer of the franchise to another grantee. 
(e)  Signatory requirement. Any approval by the city or transfer shall be contingent upon the prospective controlling party becoming a signatory to the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
Sec. 11-8-5. - Contents of application. 
An application for a franchise shall include the following information: 
(1)  The qualifications of the applicant to operate a sanitary landfill, including information concerning the applicant's legal and financial status; the applicant's character, experience, and business reputation; technical expertise; and any other information relevant to the applicant's qualifications. 
(2)  A statement of the population to be served, including a description of the geographic area. 
(3)  A description of the volume and characteristics of the waste stream. 
(4)  A projection on the useful life of the landfill. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
Sec. 11-8-6. - Grantee of franchise. 
Upon review of the application and consideration of any other information or factors it deems relevant, the city council may issue a franchise in its discretion, and may include whatever requirements, restrictions, or provisions it deems advisable in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
Sec. 11-8-7. - Forfeiture or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds of revocation. The city reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in accordance with the procedures set forth herein in the following circumstances, each of which represents a default and breach under this chapter and the franchise grant: 
(1)  Grantee's default in the performance of any of the material obligations under this chapter, the franchise or under such documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the city and the grantee. 
(2)  Grantee's violation of any orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee after notice thereof, continuing and not being remedied within 60 days of notice. 
(3)  Grantee's fraud or any unfair or deceptive act or practice with regard to the city or the public under the laws of the state. 
(4)  Grantee's insolvency, inability, or unwillingness to pay its debts; or [grantee] is adjudged bankrupt. 
(5)  Grantee's misrepresentation of a material fact in the application for or negotiation of the franchise or any extension or renewal thereof. 
(b)  Procedure prior to revocation. 
(1)  The city shall make written demand that the grantee comply with any material requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand, the city shall place its intent to revoke the franchise upon a regular city council meeting agenda. The city shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to grantee at least 10 days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of intent to revoke and the reasons therefor, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the city clerk at least once 10 days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(2)  The city council shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. 
(3)  If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, as reasonably determined by the city, the city council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
(4)  If the city council shall determine that such failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the city council shall, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
Sec. 11-8-8. - Equal opportunity policy. 
Equal opportunity employment shall be afforded by the grantee to all qualified persons, and no person shall be discriminated against in employment because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex, or handicap. Grantee shall comply with all equal opportunity provisions enacted by federal, state and local authorities. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
Sec. 11-8-9. - Notices. 
All notices from grantee to the city pursuant to this chapter and the franchise shall be to the city manager or his/her designee. Grantee shall maintain with the city, throughout the term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by mail which address shall be noted in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
Sec. 11-8-10. - No recourse against the grantor. 
Except when seeking equitable relief, the grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement of this chapter or the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
Sec. 11-8-11. - Incorporation of provisions. 
The requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to be included and binding on the grantee of any franchise. 
(Ord. No. 01-107, § 1, 12-20-01)  
CHAPTER 9 - Furniture Market Street Vendors[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-74, § 1, adopted Aug. 15, 2002, set out provisions intended for use as tit. 11, ch. 8. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, said ordinance has been included herein as ch. 9 at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 11-9-1. - Furniture market street vendors. 
(a)  On Fred Alexander Place between Hamilton and Steele Streets and the 100 block of West Commerce Street, vendors using temporary or portable stands selling food and beverages only, may be permitted as provided in this section. 
(b)  Such vendors shall only be permitted during, and seven (7) days prior to, the dates of the semi-annual International Home Furnishings Market ("furniture market") as published by the International Home Furnishings Market Authority. 
(c)  No such vendor shall be permitted unless authorized by the International Home Furnishings Market Authority ("market authority") pursuant to standards contained in this section. 
(d)  In considering applications for permits for vendors, the market authority shall endeavor to preserve and enhance the public health, safety and welfare; the convenience of furniture market attendees, and shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Number of vendors; 
(2)  Types of food and beverage to be offered and their prices; 
(3)  Size and appearance of any temporary structure or stand to be used, including its potential to impede pedestrian traffic or vehicular access; 
(4)  Qualifications and experience of prospective vendors. 
(e)  Any vendor shall be approved by the Guilford County Board of Health and shall comply with all health laws and regulations. 
(f)  The market authority may impose additional requirements on vendors to effectuate the intent of this section, such as days and hours of operation. 
(g)  Any permitted vendor shall be issued a distinctive card or certificate which shall be prominently displayed when the vendor is in operation. 
(h)  The authority may revoke any permit for violation of the provisions of this chapter or requirements of the authority. 
(i)  All permits shall be valid for one (1) semi-annual market. 
(j)  The fee for each permit shall be $300.00, paid to the authority to defray the cost of administering this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-74, § 1, 8-15-02)  
CHAPTER 10 - Sale of Malt Beverages; Unfortified/Fortified Wine; Mixed Beverages 
 
Sec. 11-10-1. - Sale of malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, and mixed beverages. 
The sale of malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine and mixed beverages shall be allowed within High Point's corporate limits at any premise licensed pursuant to G.S. 18B-1001 on Sundays beginning at 10:00 a.m. 
( Ord. No. 7326/17-68 , § 1, 8-7-17)  
Title 12 - OFFENSES  
CHAPTER 1 - Specific Offenses[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 95-82, adopted Sep. 21, 1995, added § 12-1-3 and renumbered §§ 12-1-3—12-1-9 as §§ 12-1-4—12-1-10 herein. Subsequently, § 1 of Ord. No. 95-89, adopted Oct. 5, 1995, added § 12-1-5 and renumbered §§ 12-1-5—12-1-10 as §§ 12-1-6—12-1-11 as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 12-1-1. - Circuses, carnivals, shows, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits to exhibit or show, for private profit, in a tent or tents or other temporary structures, any circus, carnival or other show of like kind or description, including sideshows, vaudeville shows, museums, menageries, and like amusements or exhibitions; or to operate merry-go-rounds and Ferris wheels for private profit. 
(Code 1958, § 15-4)  
Sec. 12-1-2. - Injuring property of city. 
It shall be unlawful to injure, damage, deface, trespass on or break any property belonging to the city.  
Sec. 12-1-3. - Police animal protection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously taunt, torment, tease, beat, kick or strike, or attempt any of said acts toward any animal maintained by the High Point Police Department for use in the performance of the function or duties of the High Point Police Department. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined or imprisoned, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 95-82, § 1, 9-21-95)  
Sec. 12-1-4. - Public consumption of beer, wine, ale or any alcoholic beverage. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any beer, wine, ale or any alcoholic beverages (as defined under Chapter 18B of the General Statutes of North Carolina,) in or on any public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley or other public place within the city or on any city-owned property which is located inside or outside the High Point corporate limits. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply within a building on city-owned property or park, or at permitted sidewalk cafes, where appropriate ABC permits have been obtained as required by law for the consumption of beer, wine, ale or any alcoholic beverages for the period of time permitted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 95-82, § 1, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 6609/09-09, 3-5-09; Ord. No. 6758/10-106, § 1, 8-16-10)  
Sec. 12-1-5. - Possession and discharge of firearms, weapons. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess a weapon, as defined in G.S. 14-269, in or upon any building, park or other property, or their appurtenant premises, which is owned or otherwise under the legal control of the City of High Point. 
(b)  This prohibition shall not apply to the following persons: 
(1)  Officers and enlisted personnel of the armed forces of the United States when in discharge of their official duties as such and acting under orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons; 
(2)  Civil officers of the United States while in the discharge of their official duties; 
(3)  Officers and soldiers of the militia and the national guard when called into actual service; 
(4)  Sworn law enforcement officers; 
(5)  City animal control officers; 
(6)  Private security officers under contract with the city, while in the actual performance of their required duties. 
(c)  A conspicuous notice shall be posted upon property set forth in subsection (a) above stating: "Possession of weapons or carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited." 
(d)  Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined $500.00 or imprisoned for 30 days, or both. 
(e)  The carrying of a concealed handgun in accordance with G.S. 14-415.11 is prohibited in any building owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the city, and in or upon the recreational facilities operated by the city and specifically identified herein. Notice of this prohibition shall be posted in a conspicuous location at each entryway available to the general public at all buildings and at the primary points of public access to all other covered locations. Violation of this prohibition shall be prescribed by the applicable North Carolina General Statutes. 
Allen Jay Park, 1073 E. Springfield Road, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Armstrong Park, 305 E. Parkway Avenue, athletic field and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Brentwood Athletic Fields, 1300 Block of Brentwood Street, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
City Lake Park, 602 West Main Street, swimming pools and appurtenant facilities. 
Deep River Park, 1525 Skeet Club Road, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Burnett Park, 1051 Montlieu Avenue, athletic fields at all times. 
Harvell Park, 1215 Lincoln Drive, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Hedgecock Park, 300 West Parris Avenue, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
High Point Athletic Complex, 2920 School Park Road, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Johnson Street Athletic Complex, 4515 Johnson Street, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Macedonia Park, 306 Wise Avenue, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Miracle League Field, 2917 School Park Road, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Morehead Recreation Center Park (Leonard Street Fields), 101 Price Street, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Oak Hollow Campground, 3415 Centennial Street, swimming pool and appurtenant facilities. 
Oak Hollow Tennis Center, 3401 North Centennial Street, tennis courts and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Oakview Recreation Center Park, 503 James Road, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized athletic event. 
Washington Terrace Park, 101 Gordon Street, athletic fields during an organized athletic event, swimming pool and appurtenant facilities. 
Washington Terrace Pool, 108 Murray Street, swimming pool and appurtenant facilities. 
West End Park, 1701 Edgewood Drive, athletic fields and appurtenant facilities during an organized event. 
(f)  For purposes of section (e), the term "recreational facilities" and the restrictions on lawful possession of weapons for those facilities listed above includes only the following: 
(1)  An athletic field, including any appurtenant facilities such as restrooms, during an organized athletic event if the field had been scheduled for use with the municipality or county office responsible for operation of the park or recreational area. 
(2)  A swimming pool, including any appurtenant facilities used for dressing, storage of personal items, or other uses relating to the swimming pool. 
(3)  A facility used for athletic events, including, but not limited to, gymnasiums. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a current holder of a concealed carry weapons (CCW) permit recognized by the State of North Carolina from storing a firearm within a locked motor vehicle in a manner consistent with state law. 
(Ord. No. 95-89, § 1, 10-5-95; Ord. No. 6889/11-70, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-11; Ord. No. 7121/15-04, § 1, 2-2-15)  
Sec. 12-1-6. - Handicapped vehicle parking. 
Parking shall be permitted for the physically handicapped as defined by state law in those areas designated for the physically handicapped by the use of a sign or device set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and clearly marked for the spaces provided. It shall be a civil violation to park or leave standing any vehicle in a space designated for physically handicapped persons when such vehicle does not display the distinguishing license plate or placard as provided in North Carolina General Statutes section 20-37.6 and where appropriate signs or symbols giving notice thereof are erected marking the designated parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 91-75, § 1, 11-21-91; Ord. No. 95-82, § 1, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 95-89, § 1, 10-5-95)  
Sec. 12-1-7. - Firearms or other weapons, display and discharge prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, discharge or shoot within the city any gun, pistol, air gun, BB gun, pellet gun, bow and arrow, slingshot, or other similar contrivance of firearm, on or off his premises, except in legally established shooting galleries or ranges, in the discharge of duty by law enforcement officers, pursuant to lawful directions of law enforcement officers, or in lawful defense of person or property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to brandish or display in a threatening manner any firearm or dangerous weapon on any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public property within the city except as necessary and consistent with those conditions that would allow lawful discharge of such firearms or weapons pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  [ Reserved. ] 
(Ord. No. 12-2-82; Ord. No. 87-122, §§ 1, 2, 11-19-87; Ord. No. 95-82, § 1, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 95-89, § 1, 10-5-95)  
Sec. 12-1-8. - Smoking in theaters. 
It shall be unlawful to smoke or to carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe into any theater, moving picture show or any other auditorium. The provisions of this section shall apply to the dressing rooms or any part of the theater behind the curtain as well as in front of same, except in case of special rooms provided for that purpose and so designated. 
(Code 1958, § 8-26; Ord. No. 95-82, § 1, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 95-89, § 1, 10-5-95)  
Sec. 12-1-9. - Operation of motorcycles and minibikes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a minibike or motorcycle on the following property in the city: 
(1)  Any city-owned property, including parks, vacant lots, rights-of-way, but not including streets; 
(2)  Any vacant property (this includes any vacant lot, construction site, and any property with a structure not permanently occupied). 
(Code 1958, § 15-40; Ord. No. 95-82, § 1, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 95-89, § 1, 10-5-95)  
Sec. 12-1-10. - Offenses against public peace and order. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to make, permit, continue or cause to be made or create any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the city, with the exception of construction work done pursuant to a federal, state, county, or city contract which requires work to be performed during certain hours. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Unreasonably loud. Noise which is substantially incompatible with the time and location where created to the extent that it creates an actual or imminent interference with peace or good order. 
(2)  Disturbing. Noise which is perceived by a person of ordinary sensibilities as interrupting the normal peace and calm of the area. 
(3)  Unnecessary. Any excessive or unusually loud sound or any sound which is of such character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any person, and being a type of sound which could be lessened or otherwise controlled by the maker without unduly restricting his conduct. 
In determining whether a noise is unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary, the following factors incident to such noise are to be considered: time of day; proximity to residential structures; whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; the volume and intensity; whether the noise has been enhanced in volume or range by any type of electronic or mechanical means; the character and zoning of the area; whether the noise is related to the normal operation of a business or other labor activity; whether the noise is subject to being controlled without unreasonable effort or expense to the creator thereof. A continuing or non-resetting audible burglar or fire alarm shall not be considered a violation of this section, but may be a violation of the false alarm ordinance, city ordinance section 5-1-48. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn, whistle or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle or railroad train, except as a danger signal or as required by law, so as to create any unreasonable, loud or harsh sound or the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, stereos, etc. The playing of any radio, television set, record player, stereo or other sound reproduction system, musical instrument or sound-producing or sound-amplifying device on the premises of any dwelling, hotel or motel room, in such manner or with such volume, particularly but not limited to the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., if the sound generated is audible at a distance of 30 feet or more from the dwelling's property line, or, in the case of a hotel or motel room, the unit's most outer boundary wall. 
(2.1)  Sound-producing equipment in vehicles. The playing of any radio, cassette player, compact disc, video tape or disc, or other similar device for reproducing sound located on or in any motor vehicle on a public street, highway, within any public vehicular area, or on the premises of a private residence, if the sound generated or noise vibration there from is audible or can be felt at a distance of 30 feet or more from the radio, cassette player, compact disc, video tape or disc, or other similar device that is producing the sound. 
(3)  Pets. The keeping of any animal or bird, which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(4)  Use of vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, dirt bike, go-cart, recreational vehicle or any other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or operated in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, screeching of tires or other noise. 
(5)  Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except as a warning of danger. 
(6)  Exhaust discharge. The discharge into the open of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Compressed air devices. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(8)  Building operations. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential district between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day or in any district other than a residential district between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day, except with a permit from the city manager or his designee. 
(9)  Noises near schools, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, library, or court while the same is in session, or adjacent to any hospital, or any church during services, which unreasonably interferes with the operation or activities of such institution. 
(10)  Loading and unloading operations. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(11)  Bells and gongs. The sounding of any bell or gong which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(12)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, sale, display or advertisement of merchandise. 
(13)  Blowers, engines. The operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise emitting therefrom is sufficiently muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, so that the same shall not cause annoyance to the public nor unreasonably disturb the rest and quiet of persons on adjacent premises or within the vicinity thereof. 
(14)  Appliances and other mechanical devices. The operation of any noise-producing appliance or other mechanical device which, due to operational deficiencies, malfunction or other type of disrepair, causes loud and excessive noises in such a manner as to unreasonably annoy the public or disturb the rest and quiet of persons on adjacent premises or within the vicinity thereof. 
(15)  Loudspeakers or amplifiers. 
a.  It is prohibited within or from any commercial establishment or private entertainment or recreational venue to allow any loudspeaker or other mechanically-amplified device to be played so that the sound there from may be heard at a distance of 30 feet or more from the facility's property line, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  In the exercise of noncommercial free speech, loudspeakers or amplifiers may be used, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to speak into a loudspeaker or amplifier within the corporate limits of the city, when such loudspeaker or amplifier is so adjusted that the voice of the speaker is amplified to the extent that it is audible at a distance in excess of 150 feet from the person speaking; provided that such use in city recreational facilities shall be regulated by the rules of the city parks and recreation commission. 
[2.  Reserved.] 
(c)  Enforcement and repeated violations. Where there is a violation of any provision of this article, the city, at its discretion, may take one (1) or more of the following enforcement actions: 
(1)  A police officer may issue a citation as provided herein, subjecting the violator to a civil penalty of $200.00. A second violation by the same person or business within one (1) year of the first violation shall subject such person or business to a penalty of $400.00. All subsequent violations by the same person or business within one (1) year of the first violation shall subject such person or business to a civil penalty of $500.00. 
(2)  Failure to pay a civil penalty imposed under this section within 10 days may subject the offender to an additional $50.00 delinquency charge. Any unpaid penalty or delinquency charge may be recovered by the city in a civil action. 
(3)  The civil penalties imposed by this section and the proceeds therefrom as collected by payment, civil action or otherwise, shall belong to the city and shall be paid into the general fund of the city under such conditions as prescribed by the annual budget. 
(4)  In the alternative, pursuant to North Carolina General Statues, section 14-4, a violation of this section may be considered a misdemeanor. Such a misdemeanor is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment designated for a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Each separate day of a continued violation shall be a separate and distinct offense and shall give rise to a separate and distinct penalty. 
(Ord. No. 84-63, §§ 1, 2, 8-16-84; Ord. No. 93-100, § 1, 10-21-93; Ord. No. 94-7, § 1, 2-17-94; Ord. No. 96-54, § 1, 8-15-96; Ord. No. 95-82, § 1, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 95-89, § 1, 10-5-95; Ord. No. 6155/04-52, § 1, 7-8-04; Ord. No. 7224/16-44 , 7-18-16)  
Sec. 12-1-11. - Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, "public place" means any area available to the public for common usage and access, including any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, playground, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility, or the doorways, entranceways, stairway, staircase, hall, roof, elevator, courtyard, passageway or common area to any building which fronts on any of those places or any motor vehicle in or on any of those places, or any property owned by the City of High Point. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander about in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the intent to engage in a violation of any subdivision of the North Carolina Controlled Substance Act, N. C. General Statutes Chapter 90, Article 5. Such circumstances shall include the following when done for the purpose of violating the aforementioned state statutes: 
(1)  Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping, or attempting to stop passers-by, or repeatedly attempting to engage passers-by in conversation; or 
(2)  Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles; or 
(3)  Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other persons; or 
(4)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is engaging in an unlawful drug-related activity; or 
(5)  Such person repeatedly passes to or receives from passers-by, whether on foot, in a vehicle or by courier, money or objects; or 
(6)  Such person takes flight upon the approach or appearance of a law enforcement officer; or 
(7)  Such person is at a location frequented by persons who unlawfully use, possess, or sell drugs. 
(c)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(d)  If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 89-117, § 1, 10-5-89; Ord. No. 95-82, § 1, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 95-89, § 1, 10-5-95)  
Sec. 12-1-12. - Removal of graffiti. 
(a)  Graffiti means any inscription, word, figure, painting, or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property, by any aerosol paint container, broad tipped marker, stick on label, paint stick, etching equipment, brush or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or man-made surface, without the prior written consent of the property owner. 
(b)  Graffiti will not be construed to prohibit temporary, easily removable chalk or other water soluble markings on public or private sidewalks, streets or other paved surfaces which are used in connection with traditional children's activities, such as drawings, bases for kickball, hopscotch or similar activities, nor shall it be construed to prohibit temporary, easily removable chalk or other water soluble markings used in connection with any lawful business or public purpose or activity. 
(c)  Any person who applies graffiti to any natural or man-made surface of any city-owned or private property without the permission of the owner or occupant shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with the statutes relating to willful and wanton injury to property, N.C.G.S. 14-127, N.C.G.S. 14-160 or any other applicable statutes. 
(d)  Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the city or private property owner of the property involved. This notice may be given in any manner deemed appropriate by the city or private property owner. Such removal shall be done in a manner that effectively removes or obscures the graffiti. The costs of removal or obscuring shall be borne by the person applying the graffiti. Failure of any person to remove or obscure the graffiti or pay for such costs shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian shall also be responsible for the removal or obscuring and the costs thereof. 
(e)  In cases where the person applying graffiti is not identified prior to the removal of the graffiti by the city or private property owner, the person applying graffiti will be liable for the costs of said removal when later identified. Such liability for costs shall not affect or delay the city's enforcement of the nuisance abatement provisions of Chapter 3. Failure to pay shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 6573/08-58, § 1, 8-18-08; Ord. No. 6587/08-72, § 1, 11-3-08)  
Sec. 12-1-13. - Aggressive solicitation prohibited. 
(a)  The council finds that: 
(1)  Aggressive solicitation is disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses and contributes to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places and to a sense of fear, intimidation and disorder. 
(2)  Aggressive solicitation includes approaching or following pedestrians, repetitive soliciting despite refusals, the use of abusive or profane language to cause fear and intimidation, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(3)  The presence of individuals who solicit money from persons at or near banks, automated teller machines, public transportation facilities, and crosswalks is especially troublesome because of the enhanced fear of crime in a place that is confined, difficult to avoid, or where a person might find it necessary to wait. 
(4)  This section is intended to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation, and not to limit a constitutionally protected activity. 
(b)  In this section: 
(1)  Aggressive manner means: 
a.  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
b.  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is: 
(i)  Intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 
(ii)  Intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
c.  Continuing to solicit a person within five (5) feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response; 
d.  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation; 
e.  Using obscene or abusive language or gestures toward the person being solicited; 
f.  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that: 
(i)  Is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 
(ii)  Is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
(2)  Automated teller machine means a device, linked to a bank's account records, which is able to carry out banking transactions. 
(3)  Automated teller facility means the area comprised of one (1) or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space that is made available to banking customers. 
(4)  Bank includes a bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, credit union, trust company, or similar financial institution. 
(5)  Bus means a vehicle operated by a transit authority for public transportation. 
(6)  Check cashing business means a person in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration. 
(7)  Public area means an outdoor area to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, a sidewalk, street, highway, park, parking lot, alleyway, pedestrian way, or the common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, or shop. 
(8)  Solicit means to request, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication an immediate donation or transfer of money or another thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, and regardless of whether consideration is offered. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person solicits: 
(1)  In an aggressive manner in a public area; 
(2)  In a bus, at a bus station or stop, or at a facility operated by a transportation authority for passengers; 
(3)  Within 25 feet of: 
a.  An automated teller facility; 
b.  The entrance or exit of a bank; or 
c.  The entrance or exit of a check cashing business; or 
(4)  At a marked crosswalk. 
(5)  On either side of the street on a block where a school attended by minors or a child-care facility has an entrance or exit; 
(d)  A culpable mental state is not required, and need not be proved, for an offense under subsection (c)(2), (3), or (4). 
(e)  This section is not intended to proscribe a demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered. 
(f)  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 6596/08-81, 11-18-08)  
Sec. 12-1-14. - Urinating or defecating on any public place. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any public place, sidewalk, street, alley or right of way, or in any public building, except in toilet facilities, or upon private property in a location visible from any public place. "Public place" means property owned by the city, the state, a county or federal government, including leaseholds and easements. 
(b)  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 6609/09-09, 3-5-09)  
CHAPTER 2 - Animals[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate animals, G.S. 160A-186. 
 
ARTICLE A - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 12-2-1. - Running at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any animal or fowl, including dogs, to allow the same to run at large in the city; and it shall be the duty of the police department to take up and deliver to the place designated by the director of police services or his designated agent, any such animal or fowl found running at large. Each person owning or controlling an animal or fowl (except dogs) shall keep the animal or fowl in a substantial pen, coop or enclosure at all times. 
(b)  The phrase "at large" shall mean, in connection with this article, a dog that is not in an enclosure or otherwise confined, or is not under the control of the owner or other person by means of a leash, cord or chain. 
(Code 1958, § 4-1)  
Sec. 12-2-2. - Requirements of pens and enclosures for chickens, pigeons, rabbits, etc. 
(a)  The maintenance of any chicken house, chicken yard, pen or other enclosure ("enclosure") in which chickens, or other fowl, pigeons, rabbits or other small animals are kept in a manner as to produce obnoxious odors or which is or may become a breeding place for flies is hereby prohibited. This subsection shall not prohibit the keeping of such animals in sanitary conditions that remain in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep enclosures for fowl and/or small animals under this section within 40 feet of any dwelling house or structure used as a dwelling house, unless the house or structure is occupied by the owner of the animal or fowl. 
(c)  The keeping of chickens under this section shall be limited to hens and the keeping male chickens (roosters) shall be prohibited. A maximum of five (5) chickens may be kept per dwelling house and in no event shall the keeping of any animals under this section be allowed for any multifamily dwelling structures. 
(d)  Any enclosure under this section must be located in the back yard of the dwelling house and must be of sufficient height and material as to prevent the animals from leaving the enclosure and prevent predators or rodents from entering the enclosure. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the dwelling house keeping the chickens to ensure that the enclosure is maintained in a clean and sanitary manner. All enclosures under this section must be physically separate from the dwelling house. 
(e)  No commercial sale of chickens or chicken products, except eggs, is allowed under this section. Eggs may only be sold by the owner of the chickens that produced them and only in places that are allowed under Chapter 9 of the High Point Code of Ordinances. The slaughtering of chickens on the premises is allowed under the conditions set forth below: 
(1)  Slaughter must be for personal consumption only and must be done on the property of the owner of the chickens being slaughtered. 
(2)  Slaughter shall not be visible from any public area, public right-of-way, or any adjacent property. 
(3)  Slaughter must be performed in a sanitary manner with proper disposal of all waste materials. 
(f)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any agricultural or rural zoning districts as described in the City of High Point's development ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 7097/14-76, § 1, 9-15-14; Ord. No. 7185/16-05 , § 1, 1-19-16)  
Sec. 12-2-3. - Keeping of hogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pigs within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1958, § 4-5)  
Sec. 12-2-4. - Keeping of certain animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any lions, tigers, elephants, bears, or other nondomesticated animals in any residential area within the corporate limits of the city. However, this shall not apply to animals in a municipal zoo. 
(Code 1958, § 4-7.1) 
State Law reference— Keeping of wild animals, G.S. 160A-187.  
Sec. 12-2-5. - Violations; civil penalty. 
(a)  Violation of any section of this chapter shall be deemed unlawful and shall result in a fixed civil penalty charge in the amount of $50.00. When the owner or agent charged with a violation under this section, makes proper payment of the amount as charged, the obligation thereunto shall be discharged. If such charge has not been paid within 10 days, the violation shall be deemed to be delinquent and subject to the additional penalties as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The city tax collector may accept payments in full and final settlement of the claim or claims, right or rights of action which the city may have to enforce such penalties by civil action in the nature of the debt. A failure to pay the penalty within the prescribed time shall subject the offender to a civil action in the nature of debt, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the court. However, in the event the offender desires to make payment after the civil action has been commenced but prior to trial disposition, a penalty of $50.00 in addition to the one imposed for payment within 10 days shall apply in such cases. Acceptance of the additional penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all claims or right of action arising out of contended violations. 
(c)  A violation listed in this chapter shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable under North Carolina General Statutes 14-4, but instead shall be subject to the civil penalties fixed by subsection (a) of this section and the civil remedies provided by North Carolina General Statutes, Section 160A-175. Any properly designated city official is authorized to take legal action in the nature of a civil suit for the collection of a debt when the civil penalty, including the delinquent civil penalty, has not been paid. 
(d)  The civil penalties imposed by this section and the proceeds therefrom, as collected by payment of civil action or otherwise, shall belong to the city and shall be paid into the general fund of the city under such conditions as prescribed by the annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 93-102, § 1, 10-21-93)  
Secs. 12-2-6—12-2-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B - Dogs 
 
Sec. 12-2-11. - "Dog" and "owner" defined. 
(a)  The word "dog" whenever used in this article shall include all animals of the canine species, both male and female. 
(b)  The word "owner" shall include any person who shall harbor or suffer or permit any dog to remain on any premises within the city under his charge or control. 
(Code 1958, § 4-8)  
Sec. 12-2-12. - License—Required; register book to be kept. 
Every person who owns or keeps any dog within the city shall register the same with the finance department on or before July 1 of each year and shall pay the finance department a license fee as provided for in the following sections. 
The finance department shall keep a dog register book, in which shall be listed all licensed dogs, prescribed by name, breed, color and sex, and shall also enter therein the name and address of the owner as given and the number of the license tag.  
Sec. 12-2-13. - Same—Fee; when payable; half year licenses and fees. 
(a)  No license fee shall be charged for any dog, whether male or female, until the dog attains the age of four (4) months. The annual license fee to be paid shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council. The license fee shall be due and payable to the city collector on July 1 of each year and if not paid by August 1 of each year the fee shall be increased 50 percent. 
(b)  When a dog is acquired after July 1 of any license year, the dog shall be registered and the license fee shall be due and payable on or before the fifteenth day after the date of acquiring the dog; provided, that the license fee shall be one-half of the yearly fee if the dog is acquired during the last half of any license year.  
Sec. 12-2-14. - Tags required; city collector to furnish. 
The city collector shall provide each and every year the number of tags as may be necessary, of a material, size and shape as shall be deemed expedient, having stamped thereon the year for which the tag is issued, a serial number and the letters "City of High Point Dog Tag," and it shall be the duty of the city collector to deliver one tag to the person so paying a license fee upon any dog without any extra charge; provided that if any tag is broken or lost, the tag shall be replaced with a new tag without cost after a receipt has been produced showing the original tag number, date fee was paid, and a full description of the dog. The new tag number will be placed on receipt and marked "no charge." It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of each dog for which the tag is issued to cause the dog to wear the tag constantly. The tag shall not be issued unless the owner or person making applications therefor shall present to the city collector, a certificate or other evidence issued by a duly appointed rabies inspector, showing that the dog for which the metal tag is issued has been vaccinated by the administration of anti-rabies vaccine within a period of three (3) years prior to such application. 
(Code 1958, § 4-11)  
Sec. 12-2-15. - Dogs without tag deemed unlicensed; violations; civil penalty. 
(a)  Every owner or keeper of a licensed dog shall keep and maintain a collar around the neck of the dog, with the tag securely attached thereto, and every dog found in the city without a tag shall be deemed an unlicensed dog and in violation of this section. The owner thereof shall be required to purchase a tag and pay the impounding fee if the dog is impounded or relinquish the dog to be disposed of. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be deemed unlawful and shall result in a fixed civil penalty charge in the amount of $15.00. When the owner or keeper charged with a violation under this section, makes proper payment of the amount as charged, the obligation thereunto shall be discharged. If such charge has not been paid within 10 days, the violation shall be deemed to be delinquent and subject to the additional penalties as provided in this section. 
(c)  The city tax collector may accept payments in full and final settlement of the claim or claims, right or rights of action which the city may have to enforce such penalties by civil action in the nature of the debt. A failure to pay the penalty within the prescribed time shall subject the offender to a civil action in the nature of debt, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the court. However, in the event the offender desires to make payment after the civil action has been commenced but prior to trial disposition, a penalty of $25.00 in addition to the one imposed for payment within 10 days shall apply in such cases. Acceptance of the additional penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all claims or right of action arising out of contended violations. 
(d)  A violation listed in this section shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable under North Carolina General Statutes [section] 14-4, but instead shall be subject to the civil penalties fixed by subsection (b) of this section and the civil remedies provided by North Carolina General Statutes, section 160A-175. Any properly designated city official is authorized to take legal action in the nature of a civil suit for the collection of a debt when the civil penalty, including the delinquent civil penalty, has not been paid. 
(e)  The civil penalties imposed by this section and the proceeds therefrom as collected by payment, civil action or otherwise, shall belong to the city and shall be paid into the general fund of the city under such conditions as prescribed by the annual budget. 
(Code 1958, § 4-12; Ord. No. 93-101, § 1, 10-21-93)  
Sec. 12-2-16. - Impounding. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control specialist to capture and impound in the county animal shelter each and every unlicensed dog or any dog found unlawfully at large in the city as provided in this chapter. The animal control specialist shall thereupon notify each owner of a dog so taken, if the name of the owner is ascertained. 
(b)  It shall be lawful for the animal control specialist or police officers of the city to tranquilize or kill any dog at large within the city which cannot safely be taken up and impounded.  
Sec. 12-2-17. - Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Dangerous dog means: 
a.  A dog that: 
1.  Without provocation has killed or inflicted severe injury on a person; or 
2.  Is determined pursuant to this section to be potentially dangerous because the dog has engaged in one (1) or more of the behaviors listed in subdivision (2) of this subsection. 
b.  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting. 
(2)  Potentially dangerous dog means a dog determined pursuant to this section to have: 
a.  Inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization; or 
b.  Killed or inflicted severe injury upon a domestic animal when not on the owner's real property; or 
c.  Approached a person when not on the owner's property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
d.  Displayed a propensity or disposition to attack unprovoked by approaching or charging towards a person in a vicious or menacing fashion in an apparent attitude of attack, whether or not the dog is on the owner's property or under restraint. 
(3)  [Threatening behavior.] For purposes of subsections (2)(c) and (d) hereof, the following examples of a dog's behavior, while not to be deemed exclusive, shall be considered in the determination as to whether the dog is potentially dangerous: Snarling, baring of teeth, snapping, growling; or straining or lunging against a leash, other restraint, or fence in an attempt to free itself. 
(4)  Owner means any person or legal entity that has a possessory property right in a dog. 
(5)  Owner's real property means any real property owned or leased by the owner of the dog, but does not include any public right-of-way or a common area of a condominium, apartment complex, or townhouse development. 
(6)  Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization. 
(7)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
a.  A dog being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties; 
b.  A dog being used in a lawful hunt; 
c.  A dog where the injury or damage inflicted by the dog was sustained by a domestic animal while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog; or 
d.  A dog where the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time of the injury, was committing a willful trespass or other tort; was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(b)  General provisions. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or in any way maintain or harbor any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog as defined in this article, except as provided in this section. 
(c)  Enforcement. If an animal control officer or law enforcement officer has determined that a dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous, then the animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall notify the owner immediately in writing. The owner shall turn the animal over to the county animal shelter within 24 hours of such notification. Upon the failure of the owner to surrender said animal, an animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall have authority to apply for an appropriate court order to seize the dog and deliver it to the county animal shelter. After six (6) working days, the county animal shelter shall have the duty to dispose of the dog in one (1) of the following ways: 
(1)  By the humane destruction of the dog; or 
(2)  By giving the dog to an individual or organization, subject to the protective and inspection conditions required by the Humane Society for the well-being of the dog and for the protection of the public, for the purpose of preserving and taking care of the dog. In this case, the animal control officer will notify the appropriate authorities in the jurisdiction where the individual or organization receiving the dog shall be located. 
(d)  Appeal. Any person who owns a dog that has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous by an animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall have the right to appeal this decision and request a hearing contesting that determination by submitting a written request to the city manager within five (5) working days of the determination that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous. Submission by the owner of a request for a hearing shall stay the requirement that the dog be delivered to the animal control shelter while the appeal is pending before the hearing panel. 
(e)  Hearing procedures upon appeal. The manager shall immediately notify the mayor, who shall name a hearing panel comprised of three (3) citizens to hear the appeal within 10 working days. The hearing panel shall conduct a hearing to determine if the animal control officer's or law enforcement officer's determination that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous is correct. If the dog is judged not to be dangerous or potentially dangerous, it shall be returned to the owner without charge. If the hearing panel determines the dog to be dangerous or potentially dangerous, then the dog shall be delivered to the county animal shelter, which shall keep the dog for 30 days and then dispose of the dog according to this section or return it to the owner upon notification by the city that a proper enclosure has been erected for the dog. 
(f)  Enclosures for dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. In the event that a dog has been determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous, the owner may regain possession of the dog subject to the following conditions. The owner must erect, within 30 days of any final determination, a proper structure and display warning signs as defined within this section. This structure must be inspected and approved by the city building inspection department as meeting the following requirements and standards: 
(1)  The structure must be a minimum size of 15 feet by 6 feet with a floor consisting of a concrete pad at least 4 inches thick. If more than one (1) dog is to be kept in the enclosure, the floor area must provide at least 45 square feet for each dog. The walls and roof of the structure must be constructed of welded chain link of a minimum thickness of 12 gauge supported by galvanized steel poles at least two and one-half (2½) inches in diameter. The vertical support poles must be sunk in concrete-filled holes at least 18 inches deep and at least 8 inches in diameter. The chain link fencing must be anchored to the concrete pad with galvanized steel anchors placed at intervals of no more than 12 inches along the perimeter of the pad. The entire structure must be freestanding and not be attached or anchored to any existing fence, building, or structure. The structure must provide self-contained shelter for the dog(s). The structure must be secured by a child-resistant lock. 
(2)  A warning sign at least 120 square inches must be visible from each exposure of the structure which is visible to any adjoining property. Each sign must have a graphic representation of a dog such that the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog can be communicated to those who cannot read, including young children. 
(3)  The owner of the dog shall be responsible for ensuring that the enclosure is maintained in such condition as to meet the requirements of this article. Failure to maintain or repair the enclosure shall constitute a misdemeanor by the owner. 
Prior to the inspection of the enclosure by the building and inspection department, the owners shall pay the current fee for the inspection of an accessory building. The dog shall not be returned to the owner's property until such time as this shelter and warning signs have been approved. While the structure is being approved, the dog must be boarded at the county animal shelter at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 92-83, § 1, 8-20-92; Ord. No. 93-27 § 1, 3-4-93)  
Sec. 12-2-18. - Tethering of dogs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to restrain a dog using a chain, wire or other type of tethering device in a manner prohibited by this subsection. 
(a)  No person shall tether, fasten, chain, tie, or restrain a dog, or cause such restraining of a dog, to a tree, fence, post, dog house, or other stationary object. During periods of tethering that are lawful under this subsection, any tethering device used shall be at least 10 feet in length and attached in such a manner as to prevent strangulation or other injury to the dog or entanglement with objects. 
(b)  No person shall tether, fasten, chain, tie, or restrain a dog, or cause such restraining of a dog, to a cable trolley system that allows movement of the restraining device. During periods of tethering that are lawful under this subsection, the length of the cable along which the tethering device can move must be at least 10 feet, and the tethering device must be of such length that the dog is able to move 10 feet away from the cable perpendicularly and attached in such a manner as to prevent strangulation or other injury to the dog and entanglement with objects. During periods of lawful tethering under this subsection, tethers must be made of rope, twine, cord, or similar material with a swivel on one end or must be made of a chain that is at least 10 feet in length with swivels on both ends and which does not exceed 10 percent of the dog's body weight. All collars or harnesses used for the purpose of the lawful tethering of a dog must be made of nylon or leather. 
(c)  No person shall tether a dog with a chain or wire or other device to, or cause such attachment to, any collar other than a buckle type collar or body harness. 
(d)  No person shall tether with a chain or a wire or other device to, or cause such attachment to, a head harness, choke-type collar or pronged collar to a dog. 
(e)  No person shall tether with a chain, wire, or other device to a dog where the weight of the tethering device and the collar combined exceeds 10 percent of the dog's body weight. 
(f)  No person shall tether with a chain, wire, or other device, a dog in such a manner that does not allow the dog access to adequate food, water and shelter. 
(g)  No person shall tether a sick, diseased, and/or injured dog, or puppy (a dog that is one (1) year of age or younger). 
(h)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, a person may, subject to the following provisions, and subject to the requirement that any stationary tethering device used shall be at least 10 feet in length, and subject to the requirements for any cable trolley system used where the length of the cable along which the tethering device can move must be at least 10 feet, and the tethering device must be of such length that the dog is able to move 10 feet away from the cable perpendicularly, may: 
(1)  Tether and restrain a dog while actively engaging in: 
(i)  Usage of the dog in shepherding or herding livestock; or 
(ii)  Use of the dog in the business of cultivating agricultural products, if the restraining is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog; or 
(iii)  Use of the dog in lawful hunting activities if the restraint is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog; or 
(iv)  Use of the dog at a dog training or performance events, including but not limited to, the field trials and obedience trials where tethering does not occur for a period exceeding seven (7) consecutive days; or 
(v)  Camping or other recreational activities where tethering is required by the camping or recreational area where the dog is located. 
(2)  Tether and restrain a dog during any lawful activity where a tethered dog is in visual range of its owner or keeper, and the owner or keeper is located outside with the dog. After taking possession of a dog that appears to be a stray dog and after having advised animal control authorities of the capture of the dog, tether and restrain the dog in accordance with the provisions of this subsection for a period not to exceed seven (7) days as the person having taken possession of the dog is seeking the identity of the dog. 
(3)  Tether while walking a dog with a handheld leash. 
(i)  An owner that is found in violation of the regulations described in section 12-2-18 shall be subject to the following fees: 
(1)  1st offense: Subject to citation and $100.00 fee (if the dog is not spayed or neutered, the fee may be voided in lieu of the owner having the pet spayed or neutered by a veterinarian and providing to the animal control officer documented proof of such within 14 days). 
2nd offense: Subject to citation and $250.00 fee. 
3rd and subsequent offenses: Subject to a class 3 misdemeanor and fine of up to $500.00. 
(2)  The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law and shall not prevent the city from proceeding in a criminal action against any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7163/15-46 , § 1, 8-17-15)  
CHAPTER 3 - Public Nuisances[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 2004, amended ch. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 3, §§ 12-3-1—12-3-7, pertained to trash and weeds, and derived from 1958 Code, §§ 10-16—10-20 and 10-22; Ord. No. 87-84, adopted Sept. 3, 1987; Ord. No. 94-65, § 1, adopted Aug. 18, 1994; and Ord. No. 97-17, § 1, adopted Mar. 20, 1997. 
 
Sec. 12-3-1. - Conditions constituting a public nuisance. 
The existence of any of the following conditions on any land within the corporate limits, or one (1) mile thereof, is hereby declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or safety, and to constitute a public nuisance: 
(1)  A place of dense growth of weeds, grass or other noxious vegetation exceeding 12 inches in height, provided this condition shall not apply to those lands certified, dedicated or designated by the city or other appropriate governmental agency as vegetative buffer, floodplain, stream buffer, open space or other natural or environmentally sensitive area established to protect the public or protect and preserve natural greenways, floodways, streams or water quality. 
(2)  Any concentration of rubbish, trash, junk, mattresses, boxes, old clothes, rags or any other combustible material or objects of like kind causing or threatening to cause a fire hazard; or causing or threatening to cause the accumulation of stagnant water; or causing or threatening to cause the inhabitation therein of mosquitoes, rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind. 
(3)  Any concentration of animal or vegetable matter that is offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitance therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind. 
(4)  The open storage of any furniture, appliances or metal products of any kind or nature which have jagged edges of metal, glass, or areas of potential confinement by children or other persons. 
(5)  The open storage of building material, firewood or other similar materials not elevated a minimum of six (6) inches off the ground. 
(6)  Any unused, abandoned or open water supply well which poses a potential hazard for water contamination or safety. 
(7)  Any accumulation of fallen trees, dead trees, sections of tree trunks or tree limbs on a parcel of land, provided this condition shall not apply to accumulations of less than two (2) cubic yards or to natural accumulations on parcels of land or portions thereof that are predominately wooded. 
(8)  Any unsecured building including but not limited to houses, apartments, nonresidential buildings and accessory buildings, which contribute to or are likely to contribute to blighted neighborhood conditions such as vagrancy, trash accumulation, alcohol or illegal drug use, trespassing, prostitution, or other criminal activities. 
(9)  Any structure, the remains of a structure, or portion thereof that is in a damaged condition as the result of fire, wind, flood, or other disaster that remains in an un-repaired state for a period of 30 days from the date of the disaster and that has one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Glass, metal or other sharp objects in an accessible area; 
b.  Unstable structures or damaged trees which may fall or collapse; 
c.  Holes, excavations, surviving foundations or walls that may collapse or create heights in excess of three (3) feet in areas where they may be scaled; 
d.  Any substance that is hazardous or harmful to humans or pets; and 
e.  Any open or accessible utility line such as natural gas, water, sewer or electrical. 
(10)  Any accumulation of debris from the demolition of any structure, including but not limited to partially demolished walls, foundations, basements, building materials and other rubbish after the cessation of all active demolition activity on the property. 
(11)  Any swimming pool or its appurtenances which is dangerous or prejudicial to public health and safety, including but not limited to pools with stagnant water, debris, dead animals or structural deficiencies. 
(12)  Any discharge of pollutants or non-stormwater materials to the stormwater drainage system. Examples of illicit discharges include but are not limited to oil, anti-freeze, chemicals, animal waste, paints, and litter. 
(13)  Any connections to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system that allow the discharge of non-stormwater. Prohibited connections include, but are not limited to: floor drains, waste water from washing machines or sanitary sewers, wash water from commercial vehicle washing or steam cleaning, and waste water from septic systems. 
(14)  Any graffiti, as defined in section 12-1-12. 
(15)  Any condition detrimental to the public health which violates the rules and regulations of the county health department or that injures or causes discomfort to the community at large, endangers life, generates disease or has a detrimental effect on the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 6541/08-26, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 6573/08-58, § 2, 8-18-08)  
Sec. 12-3-2. - Enforcement authority; right of entry. 
(a)  It is the duty of the director of planning and development, or his designee, to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specified, and shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this chapter, including the authority to make all inspections necessary to determine whether the provisions of this chapter are being met. The director, or his designee, shall be authorized to enter upon and within premises and buildings for the purpose of making examinations and investigations; provided that such entries shall be made at reasonable hours in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to persons in possession. 
(b)  In the event of a stormwater violation, as defined in sections 12-3-1(12) and 12-3-1(13), the director of public services will enforce all provisions as described in the above section. 
(Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 6541/08-26, 5-19-08)  
Sec. 12-3-3. - Notice to abate; emergency abatement by the city. 
(a)  If any person shall violate the provisions of section 12-3-1, it shall be the duty of the director of planning and development or his designated representative to give notice to the owner or to any person in possession of the subject property, as provided by section 12-3-4, directing that all unlawful conditions existing thereupon be abated within 10 days from the date of such notice; provided, that if, in the opinion of the director of planning and development or his designee, the unlawful condition is such that it is of imminent danger or peril to the public, then any authorized planning and development representative may, without notice, proceed to abate the same, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the property as is provided in section 12-3-6. 
(b)  In the event of a stormwater violation, as defined in sections 12-3-1(12) and 12-3-1(13), the director of public services will enforce all provisions as described in the above section. 
(Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 6541/08-26, 5-19-08)  
Sec. 12-3-4. - Service of notice. 
(a)  The owner of subject property, as shown on county tax records, shall be notified of violation of section 12-3-1 by personal delivery of said notice or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If such notice is refused or is returned unclaimed, then said property shall be posted with notice. If the name of the owner cannot be ascertained, with reasonable diligence, then the notice shall be served on any person in possession of the subject property, or, if there is no person in possession of it, by posting the notice on the subject property. If any such property is owned by a corporation, the notice shall be served upon the registered agent, or, in the absence thereof, notice shall be served upon the corporation. 
(b)  Any such notice may be served by any authorized representative of the planning and development department or by any police officer of the city. 
(c)  Any insubstantial defect in the method of giving the notice required by section 12-3-4, or in the form thereof, shall not prevent the city, in any case where the work of abating an unlawful condition upon any property is undertaken by the city or its contractor, from collecting the cost thereof from the owner, nor shall it affect the validity of the lien on the property for such cost. 
(Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, 9-7-04)  
Sec. 12-3-5. - Chronic violators. 
The city may notify a chronic violator of section 12-3-1 that, if the violator's property is found to be in violation of section 12-3-1, the city shall, without further notice in the calendar year in which the notice is given, take action to remedy the violation and the expense of the action shall become a lien upon the property in accordance with G.S. 160A-193. The initial annual notice shall be served by registered or certified mail. A chronic violator is a person who owns property whereupon, in the previous calendar year, the city gave a notice of violation at least three (3) times under section 12-3-3. 
(Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, 9-7-04)  
Sec. 12-3-6. - Abatement by city where owner fails to abate. 
(a)  Upon the failure of the owner or person in possession of any premises to abate any unlawful condition existing thereupon within the time prescribed by section 12-3-3, except for the removal of a swimming pool in violation of subsection 12-3-1(11), it shall be the duty of the director of public services or an authorized public services representative to cause the removal and abatement of such unlawful condition therefrom. 
(b)  Upon the failure of the owner to remove or demolish a swimming pool or its appurtenances in violation of subsection 12-3-1(11), it shall be the duty of the director of public services or an authorized public services representative to cause the removal and abatement of such unlawful condition provided that an ordinance ordering the director to effectuate this action has been approved by city council. 
(c)  Upon the completion of such removal and abatement, the director of public services or his designated representative shall deliver to the city collector a statement showing the actual cost of the abatement of the unlawful condition plus an additional fee to cover the cost of notice and cost of collection. The city collector shall thereupon mail to the owner of the subject property a bill covering the cost, if with reasonable diligence the name and address of such owner can be ascertained, and the amount of the bill shall become a lien upon the subject property, and if not paid with 30 days shall be collected as in the manner provided for the collection of delinquent taxes. 
(d)  The expense of the action is also a lien on any other real property owned by the person in default within the city limits or within one (1) mile of the city limits, except for the person's primary residence. A lien established pursuant to this section is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment. This section shall not apply if the person in default can show that the nuisance was created solely by the actions of another. 
(e)  The director of public services, or his designee or agent, may enter upon the premises involved for the purpose of abating the nuisance found to exist under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, 9-7-04)  
Sec. 12-3-7. - Appeals. 
Within the 10-day period mentioned in section 12-3-3 hereof, the owner of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the findings of the director of planning and development. An appeal stays the abatement of the nuisances by the director of public services or public services department until a final determination by the city manager. In the event no appeal is taken, the director of public services, or his designee or agent, may proceed to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, 9-7-04)  
Sec. 12-3-8. - County health officer may exercise current authority. 
It is the intention of this chapter that any authorized representative of the director of planning and development shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter but a county health officer shall, in any case where it deems advisable to act, have all the authority conferred by this chapter upon the director of planning and development or his designated representative and any notice served for the purpose of this officer by, or by authority of, the county health officer and any charge made by the county officer in accordance with the provisions of subsection 12-3-6(c), shall be as valid as if made by the director of planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, 9-7-04)  
Sec. 12-3-9. - Civil penalties. 
An owner that fails to comply with an order to abate any unlawful condition described in section 12-3-1 shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for the first day following the expiration of an order to abate. In each instance, a penalty of $25.00 per day shall be imposed for each subsequent day that the nuisance remains unabated. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within 10 days after being notified of the amount due, the city may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. 
(Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, 9-7-04)  
Sec. 12-3-10. - Procedures in addition to other remedies. 
The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of public nuisances and this chapter shall not prevent the city from proceeding in a criminal action against any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6168/04-65, § 1, 9-7-04)  
CHAPTER 4 - Paraphernalia Intended for Illegal Drug Use 
 
Sec. 12-4-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled substance, the possession of which would constitute a violation of the laws of the State of North Carolina. It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances; 
(3)  Isomerization devices used for, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(6)  Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(7)  Separation gins and snifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body. 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips. Meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs; 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(b)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the following factors, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, should be considered: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance; 
(3)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this Act; 
(4)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
(5)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the laws of the State of North Carolina, relating to controlled substances; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this ordinance shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
(7)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
(8)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(9)  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(11)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ration of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(12)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
(13)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Ord. of 6-5-80)  
Sec. 12-4-2. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body, a controlled substance, the possession of which would be a violation of the laws of the State of North Carolina. Each separate and distinct item of drug paraphernalia unlawfully possessed shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 6-5-80)  
Sec. 12-4-3. - Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body, a controlled substance, the possession of which would be a violation of the laws of the State of North Carolina. Each separate and distinct item of drug paraphernalia unlawfully delivered or possessed with intent to deliver shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 6-5-80)  
Sec. 12-4-4. - Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. 
It shall be unlawful and constitute an additional violation for any person 18 years of age or over, who violates section 12-4-3, to knowingly deliver drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three (3) years his junior. 
(Ord. of 6-5-80)  
CHAPTER 5 - Smoking Prohibited in Specified Places 
 
Sec. 12-5-1. - Generally. 
No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe in any of the following places: 
(1)  Elevators, regardless of capacity, for use by the general public. 
(2)  Enclosed public areas of museums, public libraries, the Piedmont Environmental Center, and the Roy B. Culler Senior Center. 
(3)  Public seating areas and adjacent aisles of the High Point Theatre. 
(4)  Retail stores designed and arranged to accommodate more than 200 persons, or in which 25 persons or more are regularly employed. The prohibition of this subparagraph shall not apply to: (a) Smoking rooms, restrooms, restaurants, executive offices or beauty parlors in retail stores when specifically approved by the fire marshal by written order to the person having control of the premises upon a finding that such use therein does not constitute a fire hazard; or (b) those areas of enclosed shopping centers or malls that are external to the retail stores and are used by customers as a route of travel from one (1) store to another and consist primarily of walkways and seating arrangements. 
(5)  Duly designated nonsmoking area of a restaurant. For this purpose, the owner of every restaurant, whether currently in existence or to be established in the future, with an indoor seating capacity of 50 or more seats shall designate a nonsmoking area consisting of at least 25 percent of the indoor seating capacity of the restaurant. In areas where smoking is prohibited, existing physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be used to the greatest extent possible to minimize the smoke in adjacent nonsmoking areas. Provided, this section shall not apply to the bar or lounge area of a restaurant (a separate area primarily devoted to serving alcoholic beverages); and neither shall the seating capacity of a bar or lounge area nor rooms used for private functions or banquets be included in the calculation of the total seating capacity of the restaurant. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 1, 8-19-93)  
Sec. 12-5-2. - Placarding required. 
(a)  Every person having control of premises upon which smoking or the carrying of lighted objects is prohibited by or under the authority of this chapter shall conspicuously display upon the premises signs reading "Nonsmoking Area—Smoking Prohibited by Law." Such signs must be of standard size and lettering approved by the fire marshal. 
(b)  Sign removal prohibited. No person shall remove or deface any sign required to be erected by or under the authority of this section. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 1, 8-19-93)  
Sec. 12-5-3. - Penalties. 
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to payment of a civil penalty of $25.00, and shall also constitute a misdemeanor. Any person, or his agent, having control of any premises or place who knowingly permits a violation without requesting the violator to comply shall be subject to payment of the civil penalty provided for herein. Any duly authorized local government official is authorized either to send the civil penalty citation to the violator by certified mail or personally deliver such citation to the violator stating the nature of the violation, the amount of the penalty, and directing that the violator pay the penalty to the city tax collector's office within 14 days of receipt. Each day's continuing violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 93-79, § 1, 8-19-93) 


City of High Point Development Ordinance 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This Development Ordinance was made possible, in part, through a Community Challenge Planning Grant from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development with the assistance of Clarion Associates and Code Wright Planners. 
The following is a list of individuals who participated in the drafting and adoption of the Ordinance: 
  
UPDATE ADVISORY COMMITTEE Greg Adzima William Bencini Heath Carrier Dorothy Darr Cynthia Davis Jason Ewing Peter Freeman Greg Garrett Bert Hayes Mark Lindsay Carson Lomax Jerry Mingo Keith Price Dan Pritchett Judy Stalder Tom Terrell Jay Wagner Mark Walsh CITY COUNCIL William Bencini, Mayor Latimer Alexander Cynthia Davis Jeff Golden Christopher Williams Alyce Hill Jay Wagner James Davis Jason Ewing PLANNING AND ZONING 
COMMISSION James Armstrong Ozzie Hough Tom Kirkman John McKenzie Andrew Putnam Edward Squires Marie Stone Mark Walsh  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Ordinance No. 7206/16-26 
    WHEREAS, the existing Development Ordinance was adopted by the City Council on January 7, 1992 and subsequently amended; 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of High Point adopted the Core City Plan on February 8, 2007 which called for numerous changes in existing Development Ordinance standards to promote and enable a strong and stable urban core; 
    WHEREAS, an assessment of the existing Development Ordinance was conducted in 2009 and later updated in 2012 that defined the scope of needed ordinance revisions and established the objectives for a new Development Ordinance; 
    WHEREAS, an advisory committee was formed to review and recommend changes to the draft ordinance prepared by the City's consultant; 
    WHEREAS, numerous community sessions were held over a three-year period with various stakeholders and underrepresented populations in the city along with general public meetings to solicit comments on regulatory changes and on the draft ordinance; 
    WHEREAS, based upon the comments and recommended changes solicited the consultants produced a public hearing draft Development Ordinance for the Planning & Zoning Commission's consideration; 
    WHEREAS, notice was published in the High Point Enterprise on January 31, 2016 and February 3, 2016 and a public hearing was held before the Planning and Zoning Commission on February 9, 2016 pursuant to Chapter 160A-387 of the General Statutes of North Carolina; 
    WHEREAS, the Planning and Zoning Commission recommended a new Development Ordinance for adoption to City Council on March 22, 2016; and 
    WHEREAS, notice was published in the High Point Enterprise on May 1, 2016; May 4, 2016 and May 11, 2016 and a public hearing was held on the Planning & Zoning Commission's recommended Development Ordinance before the City Council on May 16, 2016 pursuant to Chapter 160A-364 of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HIGH POINT THAT: 
    SECTION 1. A technical ordinance entitled "Development Ordinance" is hereby adopted and shall consist of: 
A. High Point Development Ordinance Planning & Zoning Commission Recommended Draft dated March 22, 2016. 
    SECTION 2. The Code of Ordinances of the City of High Point Title 9 "Development" Chapters 1 through 10, which constituted the existing Development Ordinance, are hereby repealed. 
    SECTION 3. The Code of Ordinances of the City of High Point Title 9 "Development" is hereby amended to add a new Chapter 1 "Development Ordinance" as follows: 
Chapter 1 Development Ordinance 
The Development Ordinance is hereby adopted as a technical ordinance that is available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk. 
    SECTION 4. The Code of Ordinances of the City of High Point Title 9 "Development" Chapter 11 "Development Inspection Regulations" shall be recodified as Chapter 2 "Inspection Regulations" including Articles A through K. 
    SECTION 5. The Code of Ordinances of the City of High Point Title 9 "Development" Appendices 1 through 16 are hereby deleted from the Code of Ordinances, however, Appendix 8 Street Closing Policy", Appendix 9 "Street Name and Address Assignment Standards", Appendix 13 "Traffic Impact Analysis Policy", and 16 "City of High Point Water & Sewer Utility Extension Policy", which were previously adopted as policies by the City Council, shall remain in effect as policies but not contained within the Code of Ordinances. 
    SECTION 6. For a period of one year from the effective date of this ordinance, property owners shall have the option to decline use of the zoning district uses and standards of the new Development Ordinance, specifically Chapter 3 "Zoning Districts", Chapter 4 "Uses", and Chapter 5 "Development Standards", and elect to use the zoning district uses and standards of the existing Development Ordnance, specifically Chapter 4 "Zoning Regulations" and Chapter 5 "Zoning: Other Standards" as it applied to property on the effective date of this ordinance. The property owner's election to use the existing Development Ordinance zoning district uses and standards shall be established in writing at the time an application for a permit or land development plan is submitted and such existing Development Ordinance regulations shall be utilized in whole and not in part for the entire project. 
    SECTION 7. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
    SECTION 8. This ordinance shall become effective on January 1, 2017 
Adopted by the High Point City Council 
This the 16th day of May 2016 
/s/   
      William S. Bencini, Jr., Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Lisa Vierling, City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of the Development Ordinance to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Development Ordinance and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Development Ordinance will be able to gain a more complete picture of the volume's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 7266/17-08 1-17-2017 Included 7286/17-28  4- 3-2017 Included 7287/17-29  4- 3-2017 Included Supp. No. 2 7299/17-41  5-15-2017 Included 7302/17-44  6- 5-2017 Included 7363/17-106 11-20-2017 Included 7365/17-108 11-20-2017 Included Supp. No. 3 7389/18-18  2-19-2018 Included 7399/18-28  3-19-2018 Included 7415/18-44  5-21-2018 Included Supp. No. 4 7476/18-105 12- 3-2018 Included 7488/19-05  2- 4-2019 Included 7489/19-06  2- 4-2019 Included  
CHAPTER 1: - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1.1. - Title 
This Ordinance shall be officially known as the "Development Ordinance of the City of High Point" and may be referred to as "the Development Ordinance," "this Ordinance," and several abbreviated references ("the DO," "this DO," or "DO.") 
1.2. - Authority 

1.2.1. - General Authority 
This Ordinance consolidates the City's zoning, subdivision, and flood damage prevention regulations, as authorized by the North Carolina General Statutes. It is adopted in accordance with: 
A.  The General Assembly The authority granted to the City of High Point by the General Assembly of the State of North Carolina; 
B.  The North Carolina Statutes The North Carolina General Statutes, including: 
1.  Chapter 160A, Article 8 (Police Powers); 
2.  Chapter 160A, Article 19 (Planning and Regulation of Development); 
3.  Chapter 143, Article 21 (Water and Air Resources); 
4.  Chapter 113A, Article 4 (Sedimentation and Pollution Control); 
C.  The City Charter The High Point City Charter; 
D.  Other Relevant Laws   
1.  All other relevant laws of the State of North Carolina; and 
2.  Any special legislation enacted by the General Assembly. 
1.2.2. - References to North Carolina General Statutes 
Whenever any provision of this Ordinance refers to or cites a section of the North Carolina General Statutes and that section is later amended or superseded, this Ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section. 
1.3. - General Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens and landowners of the City of High Point, and to implement the policies and objectives of City-adopted plans addressing the City's growth and development. More specifically, the intent of this Ordinance is to: 
A.  Foster convenient, compatible, and efficient relationships among land uses; 
B.  Support and encourage a strong and diverse economy; 
C.  Better manage and lessen congestion in the streets; 
D.  Improve and revitalize the city's central core area, as identified in the Core City Plan; 
E.  Ensure the provision of adequate open space between uses for light, air, and fire safety; 
F.  Secure the safety of landowners and residents from flooding, fire, seismic activity, and dangers presented from extreme weather events, to the extent possible; 
G.  Encourage urban densities in appropriate locations such as the Core City area; 
H.  Facilitate the adequate and economic provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public services; 
I.  Improve development quality and the quality of life for city residents and visitors; 
J.  Protect water quality within the Watershed Critical Areas and the General Watershed Areas of designated water supply watersheds; 
K.  Preserve and enhance visual attractiveness and economic vitality; 
L.  Preserve the neighborhood character and quality of residential communities while providing increased housing choices indicated in adopted policy guidance, as appropriate; 
M.  Establish new compact, mixed-use centers in appropriate locations, as identified in adopted policy guidance; 
N.  Maintain and enhance the character of distinct areas in the city through an emphasis on design and form standards; 
O.  Require appropriate setbacks for buildings and other structures to facilitate the safe movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, provide adequate fire lanes, and ensure adequate distance from dust, noise, and fumes created by vehicular traffic; 
P.  Protect and revitalize the city's neighborhoods and gateways; 
Q.  Add flexibility and provide incentives for beneficial redevelopment, development that incorporates sustainable features, and increased pedestrian-orientation; 
R.  Protect existing established development and neighborhoods from incompatible infill and redevelopment; and 
S.  Protect open space, natural resources, and rural character, where appropriate. 
1.4. - Applicability 

1.4.1. - Effective Date 
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect on January 1, 2017, and repeals and replaces the High Point Development Ordinance, as originally adopted on January 7, 1992, and subsequently amended. 
1.4.2. - General Applicability 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the development of all land within the corporate limits and the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City of High Point unless it is expressly exempted by a specific section or subsection of this Ordinance. 
1.4.3. - Application to Governmental Units 
Except as stated elsewhere, this Ordinance shall apply to: 
A.  The City of High Point Development by the City or its agencies or departments; 
B.  Local and State Government Development of buildings by state or city agencies or departments, public colleges or universities, or other political subdivisions of the State, in accordance with the standards in Section 160A-392 of the North Carolina General Statutes; and 
C.  The Federal Government Development owned or held in tenancy by the government of the United States, its agencies, departments, or corporate services, to the full extent permitted by federal law. 
1.4.4. - No Development Until Compliance With All Applicable Law 
A.  No Land Developed Unless exempted, no land shall be developed without compliance with this Ordinance and all other applicable City, State, and federal regulations. 
B.  No Use or Occupancy No person shall use, occupy, or divide any land or a building or authorize or permit the use, occupancy, or division of land or a building under their control, except in accordance with this Ordinance. 
C.  No Building Constructed No building, or portion thereof, shall be erected, used, occupied, maintained, moved, or altered except in conformity with the applicable regulations in this Ordinance. 
1.4.5. - Annexation 
A.  County Regulations Prevail If any portion of the territory subject to county jurisdiction is annexed by the City or taken into the City's ETJ, county regulations and powers of enforcement shall remain in effect until one of the following occurs: 
1.  The City has adopted regulations for the area; or 
2.  A period of 60 days has elapsed following the effective date of annexation or extension of the ETJ. 
B.  Utility Connection Required The City shall require annexed land to connect to or use public utilities (potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater, etc.), as appropriate. 
1.5. - Conformance With City Adopted Policy Guidance 

1.5.1. - Adopted Policy Guidance 
The administration, enforcement, and amendment of this Ordinance shall be accomplished in accordance with the City's adopted planning policy framework. The Community Growth Vision Statement provides overarching policy guidance. The comprehensive plan (also referred to as the Land Use Plan ) sets out general goals for desired uses of land and resource protection strategies. Area plans provide strategic planning policy guidance for specific parts of the City, and system plans address planning issues related to the City's infrastructure systems. Figure 1.5.1, Planning Policy Framework, illustrates the relationship of these planning documents to one another. 
FIGURE 1.5.1, PLANNING POLICY FRAMEWORK

(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
1.5.2. - Conformance 
A.  Consistency This Ordinance is intended to ensure that all development within the City is consistent with the goals, objectives, policies, strategies, and actions contained in the City's adopted policy guidance. 
B.  Amendment Upon Inconsistency To the extent this Ordinance is or becomes inconsistent with the adopted policy guidance, it should be amended to remain consistent. All amendments to this Ordinance's text or to the Official Zoning Map should maintain and enhance consistency between this Ordinance and adopted policy guidance. 
1.6. - Development Guide 
The purpose of the Development Guide is to supplement and assist the use of this Ordinance. The Planning and Development Director is authorized to establish the content and form for each type of development application reviewed under this Ordinance. The Planning and Development Director shall prepare and maintain a Development Guide that sets forth the procedures, specifications, and practices necessary for the effective and efficient administration of this Ordinance. 
1.7. - Relationship to Other Laws, Agreements or Rights 

1.7.1. - Minimum Requirements 
In the application of this Ordinance, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements and shall not be deemed to limit or repeal any other powers or authority granted under the North Carolina General Statutes. 
1.7.2. - Conflicts with Other City Codes or Laws 
If a provision of this Ordinance is inconsistent with another provision of this Ordinance, or with a provision found in other adopted ordinances of the City, the more restrictive provision shall govern unless the terms of the more restrictive provision specifies otherwise. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or burdens, or more stringent controls. 
1.7.3. - Review of Private Agreements 
The City may review private agreements, such as those related to maintenance of private common open space, shared parking, or cross access easements, but the City is not responsible for monitoring or enforcing private covenants and restrictions. 
1.7.4. - Conflicts with State or Federal Law 
If a provision of this Ordinance is inconsistent with state or federal law, the more restrictive provision controls, to the extent permitted by law. 
1.7.5. - Existing Agreements or Vested Rights 
Nothing in this Ordinance is intended to repeal, supersede, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing private agreements or vested rights, provided such agreements or vested rights are lawfully established and remain in effect. 
1.8. - Transitional Provisions 

1.8.1. - Prior Violations Continue 
Any prior violation of the previous ordinance shall continue to be a violation under this Ordinance, unless the development complies with this Ordinance. Violations of this Ordinance shall be subject to Chapter 9: Enforcement. 
1.8.2. - Existing Nonconformities 
If any use, structure, lot or sign, legally existed on the effective date of this Ordinance, but does not fully comply with the standards of this Ordinance, the use, structure, lot or sign, is considered nonconforming under this Ordinance and shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 8: Nonconformities. 
1.8.3. - Pending Complete Applications 
A.  Final Action Pending Except for applications for subdivision, any development application accepted as complete before January 1, 2017, but still pending final action as of that date, shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the regulations in effect when the application was accepted as complete. To the extent such an application is approved and proposes development that does not comply with this Ordinance, the subsequent development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Chapter 8: Nonconformities. 
B.  Complete Applications Completed applications shall be processed in good faith and shall comply with any time frames for review, approval, and completion as established in the regulations in effect at the time of the application is deemed by the Planning and Development Director to be complete. If the application fails to comply with the required time frames, it shall expire and future development shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
C.  Review Under this Ordinance An applicant with a pending application accepted before January 1, 2017 may opt to have the proposed development reviewed under this Ordinance by submitting a written request to the Planning and Development Director. 
D.  Subdivision Applications Applications for subdivision approval still pending final action as of January 1, 2017 shall be reviewed under either the rules in place at the time the application was deemed by the Planning and Development Director to be complete or this Ordinance, at the choice of the applicant. To the extent such an application is approved and proposes development that does not comply with this Ordinance, the development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Chapter 8: Nonconformities. 
1.8.4. - Approved Applications 
A.  Valid Until Expiration Any development approvals or permits granted before January 1, 2017 shall remain valid until their expiration date. Developments with valid approvals or permits shall be carried out in accordance with the terms and conditions of their approval and the development standards in effect at the time of approval, provided the approval or permit is valid and has not expired. 
B.  Expiration If the prior approval expires or is revoked (e.g., for failure to comply with the terms and conditions of approval), any subsequent development of the site shall comply with this Ordinance. 
C.  Nonconforming Development To the extent a prior-approved application proposes development that does not comply with this Ordinance, the subsequent development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Chapter 8: Nonconformities. 
1.8.5. - Prior-Approved Conditional Use Zoning 
A.  Subject to Existing Conditions A conditional use zoning approval (and associated conditional use permit) approved before January 1, 2011 shall be translated to the corresponding new zoning district classification. It shall continue to be subject to all conditions in the conditional use permit. 
B.  Amendment A conditional use zoning (and associated conditional use permit) approved before January 1, 2011 must be amended through an amendment to the Official Zoning Map in accordance with Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment. 
1.8.6. - Prior-Approved Conditional Zoning 
A.  Subject to Existing Conditions A conditional zoning approved before January 1, 2017 shall be translated to the corresponding new zoning district classification. It shall continue to be subject to all conditions of approval. 
B.  Minor Changes Unless prohibited by City Council as part of the original approval, a conditional rezoning approved before January 1, 2017 may include minor changes from the approved conditions in accordance with the standards in Section 2.4.6 F.1, Minor Changes. 
C.  Amendment To the extent a landowner proposes development that is not allowed by a conditional zoning approved before January 1, 2017, it must be amended in accordance with Section 2.4.6 F.2, Material Changes are Amendments. 
1.8.7. - Prior Approved Planned Unit Development and Traditional Neighborhood District 
A.  Classification Retained A PDR, PDM, PDL, or TN district subject to a master or general development plan approved before January 1, 2017 shall retain the PDR, PDM, PDL, or TN classification and continue to be subject to the master plan or general development plan and all associated conditions of approval. 
B.  Amendment of Conditional Use Zoning Amendments to a PDR, PDM, or PDL district established through a conditional use zoning classification (and a conditional use permit) approved before January 1, 2011 shall be subject to the standards in Section 1.8.5, Prior-Approved Conditional Use Zoning. 
C.  Amendment of Conditional Zoning Amendments to a PDR, PDM, or PDL district established through a conditional zoning classification approved before January 1, 2017 shall be subject to the standards in Section 1.8.6, Prior-Approved Conditional Zoning. 
D.  Amendment of TN District Amendments to a TN district approved before January 1, 2017 shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment. 
1.8.8. - Existing Uses 
If a use was a lawfully established permitted use before January 1, 2017 and is subsequently made a special use in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, the use shall be considered a lawfully-established special use. 
1.9. - Transition to New Zoning Districts 

1.9.1. - District Translation Table 
On January 1, 2017, land zoned with a zoning district classification from the previous ordinance shall be translated or reclassified to one of the zoning district classifications in this Ordinance as set forth in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts. Table 1.9.1, Zoning District Translation, summarizes the translation or reclassification of the zoning districts used in the previous ordinance to the zoning districts used in this Ordinance. (For example, Table 1.9.1 shows that all lands classified as Agricultural (AG) in the previous ordinance (under the column titled "Former Zoning District") are now classified Agricultural/Rural (AGR) in this Ordinance (under the column titled "Current Zoning District"). 
TABLE 1.9.1: ZONING DISTRICT TRANSLATION 
FORMER ZONING DISTRICT CURRENT ZONING DISTRICT RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS Residential Single Family - 40 (RS-40) Residential Single Family - 3 (R-3) Residential Single Family - 20 (RS-20) Residential Single Family - 15 (RS-15) Residential Single Family - 12 (RS-12) Residential Single Family - 9 (RS-9) Residential Single Family - 5 (R-5) Residential Single Family - 7 (RS-7) Residential Single Family - 5 (RS-5) Residential Single Family - 7 (R-7) Residential Multifamily - 5 (RM-5) Residential Multi-Family - 5 (RM-5) Residential Multifamily - 8 (RM-8) Residential Multi-Family - 16 (RM-16) Residential Multifamily - 12 (RM-12) Residential Multifamily - 18 (RM-18) Residential Multi-Family - 26 (RM-26) Residential Multifamily - 26 (RM-26) BUSINESS DISTRICTS Limited Office (LO) Transitional Office (TO) General Office Moderate Intensity (GO-M) Office & Institutional (OI) General Office High Intensity (GO-H) Neighborhood Business (NB) Limited Business (LB) Limited Business (LB) General Business (GB) General Business (GB) Highway Business (HB) Shopping Center (SC) Retail Center (RC) Central Business (CB) Central Business (CB) Corporate Park (CP) Employment Center (EC) Light Industrial (LI) Light Industrial (LI) Heavy Industrial (HI) Heavy Industrial (HI) SPECIAL DISTRICTS Agricultural (AG) Agricultural/Rural (AGR) Public and Institutional (PI) Institutional (I) Main Street (MS) Main Street (MS) Mixed-Use (MX) Parks and Natural Resources (PNR) PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS Planned Unit Development - Residential (PDR) Planned Unit Development - Mixed (PDM) Planned Unit Development - Limited (PDL) Traditional Neighborhood (TN) Planned Development-Core City (PD-CC) Planned Development-Periphery (PD-P) OVERLAY DISTRICTS Historic District (HD) Local Historic Overlay (LHO) Scenic Corridor District (SR) Gateway Corridor Overlay (GCO) Airport District (AR) Airport Overlay (ARO) Manufactured Housing District (MH) Manufactured Housing Overlay (MHO) Watershed Critical Area District (WCA) Watershed Overlay (WSO) General Watershed Area District (GWA) Mixed-Use Center Overlay District (MUC) Neighborhood Conservation Overlay (NCO)  
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
  
1.10. - Vested Rights 
Vested rights under this Ordinance shall be established only in accordance with the following. 

1.10.1. - Building Permit 
The issuance of a building permit establishes a vested right to development in accordance with Section 160A-385.1 of the North Carolina General Statutes, as long as the development complies with the terms and conditions of approval of that building permit. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 1, 1-17-2017) 
1.10.2. - Vested Rights Certificate 
A vested right for a site plan, preliminary plat, or group development plan may be established in accordance with Section 2.4.17, Vested Rights Certificate. 
1.10.3. - Common Law Vesting 
A common law vested right is established only when the following can be demonstrated by the landowner: 
A.  There is an affirmative governmental act by the City in the form of an approval of a permit or development approval under this Ordinance; and 
B.  The landowner relies on this affirmative governmental act in good faith and makes substantial expenditures to develop the land; and 
C.  It would be inequitable to prevent the landowner from proceeding to develop the land consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit or development approval relied upon. 
1.10.4. - Prior Vesting 
Amendments, supplements, repeals, or other changes in zoning regulations and zoning boundaries shall not be applicable or enforceable without the consent of the landowner with regard to lots for which building permits or vested rights certificates have been issued (pursuant to state law) prior to the enactment of the ordinance making the change(s), so long as the vested rights, building permit, or vested rights certificate remain valid and unexpired. 
1.11. - Severability 
The legislative intent of the City Council in adopting this Ordinance is that all provisions shall regulate development in accordance with the existing and future needs of the City as established in this Ordinance, and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the landowners and residents of High Point. If any section, subsection, sentence, boundary, or clause of this Ordinance is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the Ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance and any section, subsection, sentence, boundary, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, boundaries, clauses, or phrases are declared invalid. 
CHAPTER 2: - ADMINISTRATION 
2.1. - Summary Development Review Table 

2.1.1. - Table Contents 
Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table, identifies the review authority for development applications reviewed under this Ordinance. The table also identifies: 
A.  The relevant section of this Ordinance where procedural information may be found; 
B.  Whether or not a pre-application conference is mandatory or optional; 
C.  If a citizen information meeting is required as part of an application's review procedure; 
D.  If a public hearing is required; and 
E.  If a required public hearing is conducted as a quasi-judicial public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
2.1.2. - Additional Information 
Detailed information on each development review procedure is included in Section 2.4, Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision, and Section 2.5, Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision. 
TABLE 2.1.2: SUMMARY DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TABLE 
Pre-application Conference & Citizen Information Meeting: M = Mandatory O = Optional 
Type of Action: C = Comment R = Recommendation D = Decision A = Appeal 
Type of Hearing: { } = Public Hearing [ ] = Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing 
Table symbols: "·" = not applicable / / = see notes 
Procedure 
Section Reference Pre-application Conference Citizen Information Meeting Review Authorities 
Staff 
Decision-Making Bodies 
Planning and Development Director Engineering Services Director Technical Review Committee (TRC) Urban Forestry Committee (UFC) Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) Planning & Zoning Commission (P&Z) City Council Board of Adjustment (BOA) PROCEDURES SUBJECT TO DECISION-MAKING BODY REVIEW AND DECISION Alternate design 2.4.2 M · R · · · · · · [D] Appeal 2.4.2 O · C /1/ C /1/ · · · · · [D] Beneficial Use Determination 2.4.3 O · · · · · · · D · Certificate of Appropriateness 2.4.4 O · R · · · [D] · · [A] Conditional Zoning 2.4.5 M M R · · · R /2/ {R} {D} · Development Agreement 2.4.6 M · R · · · · {R} {D} · Land Use Plan Amendment 2.4.7 M O R · · · · {R} {D} · Planned Development 2.4.8 M M R · C · R /2/ {R} {D} · Reasonable Accommodation 2.4.9 M · R · · · · · · [D] Right-of-Way Encroachment 2.4.10 O · R · D /3/ · · · {D} · Special Use 2.4.11 M M R · · · · · · [D] Street Abandonment 2.4.12 M · R · C · · {R} {D} · Street Name Change 2.4.13 M · R · · · · {D} · · Text Amendment 2.4.14 M · R · · · · {R} {D} · Variance 2.4.15 M M R · · · · · · [D] Vested Rights Certificate 2.4.16 M · R · · · · · [D] · Voluntary Annexation 2.4.17 M · R · C · · · {D} · Watershed Variance 2.4.18 O · · · D /5/ · · · D /5/ · Zoning Map Amendment 2.4.19 M M /6/ R · · · R /2/ {R} {D} · PROCEDURES SUBJECT TO STAFF REVIEW AND DECISION Administrative Adjustment 2.5.2 O · D · · · · · · [A] Building Permit 2.5.3 O · D · · · · · · · Determination 2.5.4 O · D · · · · · · [A] Easement Reconveyance 2.5.5 O · · · D · · · · [A] Exclusion Map 2.5.6 O · D · · · · · · [A] Final Plat 2.5.7 O · D · · · · · · [A] Floodplain Development Permit 2.5.8 O · · D · · · · · [A] Group Development 2.5.9 O · · · D · · · · [A] Land Disturbance Permit 2.5.10 O · · D · · · · · [A] Preliminary Plat 2.5.11 O · · · D · · · · [A] Public Tree Certificate 2.5.12 O · · · · D · · · [A] Sign Permit 2.5.13 O · D · · · · · · [A] Site Plan 2.5.14 O · · · D · · · · [A] Zoning Compliance Permit 2.5.15 O · D · · · · · · [A] NOTES: /1/ The decision-making director provides comments on appeals. /2/ The Historic Preservation Commission provides a recommendation on applications associated with a local historic district and comments on applications associated with a landmark. /3/ The Technical Review Committee decides right-of-way encroachments for features located below ground and comments on above ground right-of-way encroachments. /4/ The Engineering Director provides a recommendation on variance requests involving the flood damage prevention provisions. /5/ The Technical Review Committee decides minor watershed variances and provides a recommendation to the City Council on major watershed variances. Major watershed variances require approval by the City Council prior to consideration by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission. /6/ Only zoning map amendment applications seeking to re-designate land to a more intense zoning district designation are subject to a citizen information meeting requirement.  
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 2, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 1.A, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 1.A, 2.A, 12-3-2018) 
2.2. - Review Authorities 

2.2.1. - Overview 
The following review authorities have powers and responsibilities in administering and reviewing development applications under this Ordinance: 
A.  City Council; 
B.  Planning and Zoning Commission (P&Z); 
C.  Board of Adjustment (BOA); 
D.  Historic Preservation Commission (HPC); 
E.  Technical Review Committee (TRC); 
F.  Urban Forestry Committee (UFC); 
G.  Planning and Development Director; 
H.  Engineering Services Director; 
I.  Public Services Director; and 
J.  Transportation Director. 
2.2.2. - City Council 
To exercise the authority granted the City Council by State law, the Council shall have the powers and duties under this Ordinance set out in Table 2.2.2, City Council. 
TABLE 2.2.2: CITY COUNCIL 
A. POWERS AND
DUTIES 1. APPLICATION REVIEW AND DECISION - TO INITIATE, REVIEW, AND DECIDE APPLICATIONS FOR: (a) Beneficial use determination; (h) Street abandonments; (b) Conditional zonings; (i) Text amendments; (c) Development agreements; (j) Vested rights certificates; (d) Land use plan amendments; (k) Voluntary annexations; (e) Planned developments; (l) Watershed variances (major); and (f) Right-of-way encroachments (m) Zoning map amendments. (g) Special uses; 2. OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES - THE CITY COUNCIL SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To approve, by resolution, a schedule of fees governing:  (1) Applications for permits and other development approvals reviewed under this Ordinance; and  (2) Civil penalties for violations of this Ordinance. (b) To take any other action not delegated to the P&Z, BOA, HPC, UFC, TRC, Planning and Development Director, Engineering Services Director, or Public Services Director, as the City Council may deem desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this Ordinance. B. CONFLICT OF
INTEREST 1. PRACTICE (a) A member shall not participate in or vote on any matter that has a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member. (b) If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that member does not recuse himself or herself, then the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.  
2.2.3. - Planning and Zoning Commission (P&Z) 
The P&Z is hereby established in accordance with Section 160A-361 of the North Carolina General Statutes. Table 2.2.3, Planning and Zoning Commission (P&Z), sets out the P&Z's powers and duties, composition, and rules of procedure. 
TABLE 2.2.3: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION (P&Z) 
A. POWERS AND
DUTIES 1. APPLICATION REVIEW AND DECISION - TO REVIEW AND DECIDE APPLICATIONS FOR: (a) Street name changes for existing streets. 2. RECOMMENDATION AUTHORITY - TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE CITY COUNCIL ON THE FOLLOWING APPLICATIONS: (a) Conditional zonings; (e) Street abandonments; (b) Development agreements; (f) Text amendments; (c) Land use plan amendments; (g) Vested rights certificates; 
and (d) Planned developments; (h) Zoning map amendments. 3. OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES - THE P&Z SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To develop a comprehensive plan for the territory under its jurisdiction, subject to specific direction from the City Council. (b) To make such other studies and plans and to review such other related matters as directed by the City Council. (c) To exercise other powers and authority provided to it by the City Council, this Ordinance, or State law. B. COMPOSITION 1. MEMBERSHIP: (a) The P&Z shall consist of 9 regular members. 2. RESIDENCE LOCATION AND APPOINTMENT: (a) 8 members shall be residents of the City of High Point and shall be appointed by the City Council. (b) 1 member shall be a resident of the ETJ and shall be appointed by the Guilford County Board of Commissioners, in accordance with Section 160A-362 of the North Carolina General Statutes. (c) The ETJ member shall have the same rights, privileges, and duties as the other members. (d) If a City resident member moves outside the City, or the ETJ member moves outside the ETJ, the move constitutes a resignation, effective upon the date a replacement is appointed in accordance with the procedures of this section. 3. ALTERNATE MEMBERS: (a) The City Council may appoint alternate members to serve in the absence or temporary disqualification of regular members. (b) Each alternate member attending a meeting and serving in the absence of a regular member may exercise all the powers and duties of a regular member. 4. MEMBER TERMS: (a) Members may serve a 3-year term and shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed, provided that upon initial appointment their terms of office may be staggered. (b) The terms of all members shall not expire at the same time. (c) Vacancies shall be filled by a new member or an alternate member appointed to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 5. OFFICERS: (a) The P&Z shall elect, from its members, a Chair and Vice Chair for a 1 year term of office commencing on July 1. (b) The Chair shall preside over all meetings. (c) In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall preside over meetings. (d) If both the Chair and Vice-Chair are absent, the P&Z membership shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting Chair for the meeting. 6. STAFF - THE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR SHALL: (a) Provide administrative support to the P&Z; (b) Record the minutes of all meetings; (c) Conduct all correspondence of the P&Z; (d) Supervise all clerical work; and (e) Provide other technical support, as needed. C. RULES OF
PROCEDURE 1. SCHEDULE: (a) The P&Z shall hold at least 1 regular meeting in each month unless the Chair determines that there are no agenda items for consideration. 2. PUBLICATION OF NOTICE: (a) Notice of all meetings shall be provided in accordance with State law. 3. OPEN MEETINGS: (a) All hearings shall be open to the public. 4. OFFICIAL RECORD: (a) The P&Z shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every action or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact. (b) The P&Z shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. (c) All records and minutes shall be public record. 5. QUORUM: (a) No official business of the P&Z may be conducted without a quorum present. (b) A quorum is the majority of the P&Z membership, excluding vacancies. 6. VOTING: (a) An affirmative vote of the majority of P&Z members present and constituting a quorum is required for all decisions. (b) The Chair shall vote as any other member. (c) The ETJ member shall vote on all matters as any other member. (d) The ETJ member shall be required to vote on all matters involving land located within the ETJ. 7. CONTINUANCE: (a) The P&Z may continue a public hearing or delay voting on any matter to a subsequent meeting upon showing of good cause, in accordance with Section 2.3.13, Deferral and Continuance. 8. ABSENCE: (a) Members shall inform the Planning and Development Director of any anticipated absence immediately after receipt of the agenda. (b) A regular member who misses 3 consecutive regular meetings or 33 percent or more of the regular meetings in a calendar year shall lose their status as a voting member until reinstated. (c) Absences due to sickness, death in the family, or other emergencies of a similar nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall not affect the member's status on the P&Z; except that in the event of a long illness or other such case resulting in a prolonged absence, the member may be replaced. 9. SPECIAL COMMITTEES: (a) The P&Z may establish special committees to assist it in studying specific issues. (b) The membership of a special committee is not limited to P&Z members. (c) In establishing these committees, the P&Z may not delegate its official powers and duties. 10. COMPENSATION: (a) Compensation for members may be provided for by the City Council. 11. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: (a) A member shall not participate in or vote on any matter that has a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member. (b) If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that member does not recuse himself or herself, then the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection. 12. RULES OF PROCEDURE: (a) The P&Z shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs and establish its organization, committees, procedures, meeting notice, and meeting conduct. (b) The P&Z's rules of procedure shall be made available for public inspection in the Planning and Development Department.  
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 2, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 2.B, 12-3-2018) 
2.2.4. - Board of Adjustment (BOA) 
The BOA is hereby established in accordance with Section 160A-388 of the North Carolina General Statutes. Table 2.2.4, Board of Adjustment (BOA), sets out the BOA's powers and duties, composition, and rules of procedure. 
TABLE 2.2.4: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (BOA) 
A. POWERS AND
DUTIES 1. APPLICATION REVIEW AND DECISION - TO REVIEW AND DECIDE APPLICATIONS FOR: (a) Appeals on decisions of the Planning and Development Director, Engineering Services Director, Public Services Director, Transportation Director, TRC, HPC, or UFC; (b) Reasonable accommodations; and (c) Variances. 2. OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Planning and Development Director with regard to High Point City Code Title 9, Chapter 11, Article E (Minimum Housing Code) provisions. (b) To exercise other powers and authority provided to it by the City Council, this Ordinance, or state law. B. COMPOSITION 1. MEMBERSHIP: (a) The BOA shall consist of 5 regular members and up to 4 alternate members. 2. RESIDENCE LOCATION AND APPOINTMENT: (a) At least 4 members shall be residents of the City of High Point and shall be appointed by the City Council. (b) At least 1 member shall be a resident of the ETJ and shall be appointed by the Guilford County Board of Commissioners, in accordance with Section 160A-362 of the North Carolina General Statutes. (c) The ETJ member shall have the same rights, privileges, and duties as the other members. 3. ALTERNATE MEMBERS: (a) The City Council may appoint alternate members to serve in the absence or temporary disqualification of regular members. (b) Each alternate member attending a meeting and serving in the absence of a regular member has and may exercise all the powers and duties of a regular member. 4. MEMBER TERMS: (a) Members may serve a 3-year term and shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed, provided that upon initial appointment the terms of office may be staggered. (b) The terms of all members shall not expire at the same time. (c) Vacancies shall be filled by a new member or an alternate member appointed to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 5. OFFICERS: (a) The BOA shall elect from its members a Chair and Vice Chair for a 1 year term of office commencing on July 1. (b) The Chair shall preside over all meetings. (c) In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall preside over meetings. (d) If both the Chair and Vice-Chair are absent, the BOA membership shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting Chair for the meeting. 6. STAFF - THE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR SHALL: (a) Provide administrative support to the BOA; (b) Record the minutes of all meetings; (c) Conduct all correspondence of the BOA; (d) Supervise all clerical work; and (e) Provide other technical support, as needed. C. RULES OF
PROCEDURE 1. SCHEDULE: (a) The BOA shall hold at least 1 regular meeting in each month unless the Chair determines that there are no agenda items for consideration. 2. PUBLICATION OF NOTICE: (a) Notice of all meetings shall be provided in accordance with state law. 3. OPEN MEETINGS: (a) All meetings and hearings shall be open to the public. 4. OFFICIAL RECORD: (a) The BOA shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every action or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact. (b) The BOA shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. (c) All records and minutes shall be public record. 5. QUORUM: (a) No official business of the BOA may be conducted without a quorum present. (b) A quorum is the majority of the BOA membership, excluding vacancies. 6. VOTING: (a) The concurring vote of 4 / 5 of the total number of BOA members shall be necessary to grant a variance. (b) A majority vote of the BOA members present and constituting a quorum shall be required to approve an appeal reversing or modifying a decision. (c) Vacant positions on the BOA and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the BOA for the calculation of the required majority if there are no qualified alternate members available to take the place of such members. (d) The Chair shall vote as any other member. (e) An ETJ member shall vote on all matters as any other member. (f) The ETJ member shall be required to vote on all matters involving land located within the ETJ. 7. OATHS: (a) When required, the Chair shall administer required oaths to witnesses in any matter coming before the BOA. 8. CONTINUANCE: (a) The BOA may continue a public hearing or delay voting on any matter to a subsequent meeting, upon a showing of good cause, in accordance with Section 2.3.13, Deferral and Continuance. 9. ABSENCE: (a) Members shall inform the Planning and Development Director of any anticipated absence immediately after receipt of the agenda. (b) A regular member who misses 3 consecutive regular meetings or 33 percent or more of the regular meetings in a calendar year loses their status as a voting member until reinstated. (c) Absences due to sickness, death in the family, or other emergencies of a similar nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall not affect the member's status on the BOA; except that in the event of a long illness or other such case resulting in a prolonged absence, the member may be replaced. 10. SPECIAL COMMITTEES: (a) The BOA may establish special committees to assist it in studying specific issues. (b) The membership of a special committee is not limited to BOA members. (c) In establishing these committees, the BOA may not delegate its official powers and duties. 11. COMPENSATION: (a) Compensation for members may be provided for by the City Council. 12. VIOLATION OF DUE PROCESS: (a) A member shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter that would violate an affected persons' constitutional rights to an impartial decision-maker. Impermissible violations of due process include, but are not limited to: a member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change; undisclosed ex parte communications; a close familial, business, or other associational relationship with an affected person; or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter. (b) If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that member does not recuse himself or herself, then the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection. 13. RULES OF PROCEDURE: (a) The BOA shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs and establish its organization, committees, procedures, meeting notice, and meeting conduct. (b) The BOA's rules of procedure shall be made available for public inspection in the Planning and Development Department.  
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
2.2.5. - Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) 
The HPC is hereby established in accordance with Chapter 160A-400.8 of the North Carolina General Statutes. Table 2.2.5, Historic Preservation Commission (HPC), sets out the HPC's powers and duties, composition, and rules of procedure. 
TABLE 2.2.5: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION (HPC) 
A. POWERS AND
DUTIES 1. APPLICATION REVIEW AND DECISION - TO REVIEW AND DECIDE APPLICATIONS FOR: (a) Certificates of appropriateness. 2. RECOMMENDATION AUTHORITY - TO REVIEW AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE FOLLOWING, WHEN THEY INVOLVE LAND LOCATED WITHIN THE LOCAL HISTORIC OVERLAY (LHO) DISTRICT: (a) Conditional zonings; (c) Zoning map amendments. (b) Planned developments; and 3. OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES - THE HPC SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To recommend to the City Council regarding areas to be designated by ordinance as a local historic district, or that such designation of any local historic district or a part thereof be revoked or removed for good cause shown. (b) To adopt and update detailed historic district guidelines applicable to lands within a local historic district. (c) To recommend to the Guilford County Historic Preservation Commission regarding the designation of any building, structure, site, area, or object as a landmark, or that such designation be revoked or removed for good cause shown. (d) To review and act upon applications for COA proposals for alterations, demolitions or new construction within local historic districts, in accordance with this section and the North Carolina General Statutes, and to revoke an approved COA for good cause shown. (e) To undertake an inventory of lands of historical, pre-historical, architectural, and/or cultural significance, as authorized by the City Council. (f) To recommend, as a North Carolina Certified Local Government Commission, individual buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places. (g) To recommend appropriate changes to this Ordinance which relate to local historic districts or which relate to the preservation of historic buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects, and to prepare and recommend the adoption of a preservation element as part of the City's adopted policy guidance. (h) To conduct an educational program with respect to historic properties and districts within the city. (i) To enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, upon private lands for examination or survey thereof. However, no member, employee, or agent of the HPC may enter any private building or structure without the express consent of the owner or occupant. (j) To exercise other duties and authority provided to it by the City Council, this Ordinance, and state law. B. COMPOSITION 1. MEMBERSHIP: (a) The HPC shall consist of 9 regular members. 2. RESIDENCE LOCATION AND QUALIFICATIONS: (a) All members of the HPC shall reside within the City's planning jurisdiction. (b) Members shall have demonstrated experience or an interest in the preservation of historic structures, and should be employed in architecture, history, planning, archaeology, or a related discipline. 3. ALTERNATE MEMBERS: (a) The City Council may appoint alternate members to serve in the absence or temporary disqualification of regular members. (b) Each alternate member attending a meeting and serving in the absence of a regular member may exercise all the powers and duties of a regular member. 4. MEMBER TERMS: (a) Members may serve a 3-year term and shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed, provided that upon initial appointment their terms of office may be staggered. (b) The terms of all members shall not expire at the same time. (c) Vacancies shall be filled by a new member or an alternate member appointed to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 5. OFFICERS: (a) The HPC shall elect from its members a Chair and Vice Chair for a 1 year term of office commencing on July 1. (b) The Chair shall preside over all meetings. (c) In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall preside over meetings. (d) If both the Chair and Vice-Chair are absent, the HPC membership shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting Chair for the meeting. 6. STAFF - THE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR SHALL: (a) Provide administrative support to the HPC; (b) Record the minutes of all meetings; (c) Conduct all correspondence of the HPC; (d) Supervise all clerical work; and (e) Provide other technical support, as needed. C. RULES OF
PROCEDURE 1. SCHEDULE: (a) The HPC shall hold at least 1 regular meeting in each month unless the Chair determines that there are no agenda items for consideration. 2. PUBLICATION OF NOTICE: (a) Notice of all meetings shall be provided in accordance with state law. 3. OPEN MEETINGS: (a) All meetings and hearings shall be open to the public. 4. OFFICIAL RECORD: (a) The HPC shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every action or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact. (b) The HPC shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. (c) All records and minutes shall be public record. 5. QUORUM: (a) No official business of the HPC may be conducted without a quorum present. (b) A quorum is the majority of the HPC membership, excluding vacancies 6. VOTING: (a) An affirmative vote of the majority of HPC members present and constituting a quorum is required for all decisions. (b) The Chair shall vote as any other member. 7. CONTINUANCE: (a) The HPC may continue a public hearing or delay voting on any matter to a subsequent meeting upon a showing of good cause, in accordance with Section 2.3.13, Deferral and Continuance. 8. ABSENCE: (a) Members shall inform the Planning and Development Director of any anticipated absence immediately after receipt of the agenda. (b) A regular member who misses 3 consecutive regular meetings or 33 percent or more of the regular meetings in a calendar year loses their status as a voting member until reinstated. (c) Absences due to sickness, death in the family, or other emergencies of a similar nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall not affect the member's status on the Commission; except that in the event of a long illness or other such case resulting in a prolonged absence, the member may be replaced. 9. SPECIAL COMMITTEES: (a) The HPC may establish special committees to assist it in studying specific issues. (b) The membership of a special committee is not limited to HPC members. (c) In establishing these committees the HPC may not delegate its official powers and duties. 10. COMPENSATION: (a) Compensation for members may be provided for by the City Council. 11. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: (a) A member shall not participate in or vote on any matter that has a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member. (b) If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that member does not recuse himself or herself, then the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection. 12. RULES OF PROCEDURE: (a) The HPC shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs and establish its organization, committees, procedures, meeting notice, and meeting conduct. (b) The HPC's rules of procedure shall be made available for public inspection in the Planning and Development Department.  
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 2, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 2.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.2.6. - Reserved 
2.2.7. - Technical Review Committee (TRC) 
The TRC is hereby established in accordance with Section 160A-361 of the North Carolina General Statutes. Table 2.2.7, Technical Review Committee (TRC), sets out the TRC's powers and duties, composition, and rules of procedure. 
TABLE 2.2.7: TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE (TRC) 
A. POWERS AND
DUTIES 1. APPLICATION REVIEW AND DECISION - TO REVIEW AND DECIDE APPLICATIONS FOR: (a) Administrative adjustments; (e) Right-of-way encroachments (below ground); (b) Easement reconveyances; (f) Site plans; and (c) Group developments; (g) Watershed variances (minor). (d) Preliminary plats; 2. RECOMMENDATION AUTHORITY - TO COMMENT OR MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE FOLLOWING APPLICATIONS: (a) City construction and infrastructure projects and construction that may impact city infrastructure; (d) Street abandonments; (b) Planned development; (e) Voluntary annexations; and (c) Right-of-way encroachment (above ground); (f) Watershed variances (major). 3. OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES - THE TRC SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To provide its expertise and technical assistance to the Planning and Development Director in compiling and maintaining a Development Guide and in establishing application content requirements and a submission schedule for review of applications and appeals. (b) To review and recommend the acquisition, sale, and disposal of all city real property (not equipment). (c) To perform any other related duties that the City Manager may direct. (d) To review and comment on an item submitted by a department director. (e) To exercise other powers and authority provided to it by the City Council, this Ordinance, or state law. B. COMPOSITION 1. MEMBERSHIP - THE TRC SHALL BE COMPRISED OF DEPARTMENT HEADS (OR THEIR DESIGNEES) FROM THE FOLLOWING CITY DEPARTMENTS: (a) Planning and Development; (c) Public Services; and (b) Transportation; (d) Engineering Services. (e) Representatives from other departments, such as Police, Fire, Electric Utilities, and Parks and Recreation; private utility companies; and public or private school systems may also provide comments on applications. 2. OFFICERS: (a) The Planning and Development Director shall serve as Chair of the TRC, and shall schedule committee meetings, coordinate the committee's activities, preside over committee meetings, prepare committee reports, and serve as liaison to the departments and agencies involved for clarification of issues and resolution of conflicts. C. RULES OF
PROCEDURE 1. MEETINGS: (a) The TRC shall establish a regular meeting schedule which is set out in the Development Guide. (b) Applicants are encouraged to attend TRC meetings.  
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 3.E, 12-3-2018) 
2.2.8. - Urban Forestry Committee (UFC) 
The Urban Forestry Committee (UFC) is established to oversee the implementation of the City's urban forestry program, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and Section 160A-361 of the North Carolina General Statutes. Table 2.2.8, Urban Forestry Committee (UFC), sets out the Urban Forestry Committee's powers and duties, composition, and rules of procedure. 
TABLE 2.2.8: URBAN FORESTRY COMMITTEE (UFC) 
A. POWERS AND
DUTIES 1. APPLICATION REVIEW AND DECISION - TO REVIEW AND DECIDE APPLICATIONS FOR: (a) Public tree certificates. 2. RECOMMENDATION AUTHORITY - TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE FOLLOWING: (a) Appeals. 3. OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES - THE UFC SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To develop a comprehensive strategy for the protection, maintenance, planning, planting and removal of trees on City-owned or controlled land. (b) To facilitate the planting, growth, and protection of trees within the community. (c) To develop and implement programs that educate the community about proper tree planting and maintenance practices, encourage volunteer tree planting efforts, and increase public awareness and support of the City's urban forest. (d) To identify and recommend the removal of dead, dying, diseased, or insect-infested trees affecting City-owned or City-controlled land. (e) To coordinate and sponsor the City's annual observance of Arbor Day. (f) To develop, adopt, and maintain standards and practices for the conservation and maintenance of trees on City-owned or City-controlled land. (g) To develop, adopt and maintain guidelines for the planting of trees in the community, including standards and specifications for plantings on street rights-of-way and adjacent to overhead and underground utilities, preferred trees for planting along street rights-of-way, and recommended tree species that are best suited for the community's climate and conditions. (h) To review the City's ordinances, codes, and policies to promote the proper utilization of trees and recommend appropriate changes as necessary. (i) To develop and maintain an inventory of trees on City-owned or City-controlled land. (j) To identify and solicit grants, loans, or contributions from governmental agencies, corporations, organizations, and individuals that benefit the City's urban forestry program. (k) To prepare an annual work program and budget for the City's urban forestry program and an annual report on the City's activities and expenditures. (l) To perform any other related duties that the City Manager may direct. (m) To exercise other powers and authority provided to them by the City Council, this Ordinance, or State law. B. COMPOSITION 1. MEMBERSHIP: THE UFC SHALL BE COMPRISED OF DEPARTMENT HEADS (OR THEIR DESIGNEES) FROM THE FOLLOWING CITY DEPARTMENTS: (a) Planning and Development; (c) Electric Utilities; and (b) Public Services; (d) Parks and Recreation. 2. OFFICERS: (a) The Planning and Development Director shall serve as Chair of the UFC, and shall schedule committee meetings, coordinate the committee's activities, preside over committee meetings, prepare committee reports, and serve as liaison to the departments and agencies involved for clarification of issues and resolution of conflicts. C. RULES OF
PROCEDURE 1. MEETINGS: (a) The UFC shall establish a regular meeting schedule which is set out in the Development Guide. (b) Applicants are encouraged to attend UFC meetings.  
2.2.9. - Reserved 
2.2.10. - Planning and Development Director 
Table 2.2.10, Planning and Development Director, sets out the Planning and Development Director's powers and duties under this Ordinance. 
TABLE 2.2.10: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR 
A. POWERS AND
DUTIES 1. APPLICATION REVIEW AND DECISION - TO REVIEW AND DECIDE APPLICATIONS FOR: (a) Administrative adjustments; (e) Exclusion maps; (b) Building permits; (f) Final plats; (c) Certificates of occupancy; (g) Sign permits; and (d) Determinations; (h) Zoning compliance permits. 2. RECOMMENDATION AUTHORITY - TO COMMENT OR MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE FOLLOWING APPLICATIONS: (a) Appeals; (i) Special uses; (b) Certificates of appropriateness; (j) Street abandonments; (c) Conditional zonings; (k) Street name changes; (d) Development agreements; (l) Text amendments; (e) Land use plan amendments; (m) Variances; (f) Planned developments; (n) Vested rights certificates; (g) Reasonable accommodations; (o) Voluntary annexations; and (h) Right-of-way encroachments; (p) Zoning map amendments; 3. OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES - THE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To investigate violations and enforce this Ordinance in accordance with Chapter 9: Enforcement. (b) To establish application content requirements and a submission schedule for review of applications and appeals. (c) To ensure proper public notification regarding pending development applications is provided in accordance with state law. (d) To serve as Chair of the TRC. (e) To review development applications for compliance with this Ordinance and submit staff reports to decision-making bodies. (f) To maintain the Official Zoning Map and related materials. (g) To compile and maintain a Development Guide. (h) To provide expertise and technical assistance to City staff and decision-making bodies, upon request. (i) To maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this Ordinance and make records available for public inspection. (j) To perform any other related duties that the City Manager may direct. (k) To exercise other powers and authority provided by the City Council, this Ordinance, or state law.  
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 3.A, 12-3-2018) 
2.2.11. - Engineering Services Director 
Table 2.2.11, Engineering Services Director, sets out the Engineering Service Director's powers and duties under this Ordinance. 
TABLE 2.2.11: ENGINEERING SERVICES DIRECTOR 
A. POWERS AND
DUTIES 1. APPLICATION REVIEW AND DECISION - TO REVIEW AND DECIDE APPLICATIONS FOR: (a) Floodplain development permits; and (b) Land disturbance permits. 2. RECOMMENDATION AUTHORITY - TO COMMENT OR MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE FOLLOWING APPLICATIONS: (a) Appeals; and (b) Flood damage prevention variance requests. 3. OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES - THE ENGINEERING SERVICES DIRECTOR SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To insure development applications comply with soil and erosion control standards in Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation, and flood damage prevention standards in Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention. (b) To inspect sites for compliance with the soil and erosion control standards in Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation, and flood damage prevention standards in Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention. (c) Investigate violations of soil and erosion control and flood damage prevention standards in accordance with Chapter 9: Enforcement. (d) To insure that stormwater management devices and best management practices for watershed protection are designed in accordance with Section 6.2, Watershed Protection, and the City's Stormwater Best Management Practices Design Manual. (e) To perform any other related duties that the City Manager may direct. (f) To exercise other powers and authority provided to them by the City Council, this Ordinance, or state law.  
2.2.12. - Public Services Director 
Table 2.2.12, Public Services Director, sets out the Public Service Director's powers and duties under this Ordinance. 
TABLE 2.2.12: PUBLIC SERVICES DIRECTOR 
A. POWERS AND
DUTIES 1. THE PUBLIC SERVICES DIRECTOR SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) Inspection of stormwater management devices and best management practices constructed in accordance with Section 6.2, Watershed Protection. (b) Investigate violations of stormwater management devices and best management practices in accordance with Chapter 9: Enforcement. (c) Determine the infeasibility of water and sewer connections in accordance with this Ordinance and the City Code. 2. RECOMMENDATION AUTHORITY - TO COMMENT OR MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE FOLLOWING APPLICATIONS: (a) Appeals. 3. OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES - THE PUBLIC SERVICES DIRECTOR SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To perform any other related duties that the City Manager may direct. (b) To exercise other powers and authority provided by the City Council, this Ordinance, or state law.  
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 3, 1-17-2017) 
2.2.13. - Transportation Director 
Table 2.2.13, Transportation Director, sets out the Transportation Director's powers and duties under this Ordinance. 
TABLE 2.2.13: TRANSPORTATION DIRECTOR 
A. POWERS AND
DUTIES 1. THE TRANSPORTATION DIRECTOR SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To determine the ability of a landowner to obstruct a required cross-accessway in a vehicular use area. (b) To determine if the installation of a required sidewalk conflicts with other city, state, or federal road projects, and if an in-lieu fee is an appropriate remedy. (c) To determine the allowable alternative sign background and letter colors for signs associated with a private street. 2. RECOMMENDATION AUTHORITY - TO COMMENT OR MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE FOLLOWING APPLICATIONS: (a) Appeals. 3. OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES - THE TRANSPORTATION DIRECTOR SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES: (a) To perform any other related duties that the City Manager may direct. (b) To exercise other powers and authority provided by the City Council, this Ordinance, or state law.  
2.3. - Standard Review Procedures 

2.3.1. - General 
A.  Overview This section describes the standard procedural steps and rules generally applicable to development applications reviewed under this Ordinance, unless otherwise specified in Section 2.4, Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision or Section 2.5, Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision. The flow charts of specific procedures in Section 2.4 and Section 2.5 depict the procedural steps that apply to the review of the particular type of development application. 
B.  Development Guide The City maintains a Development Guide that includes information for persons submitting applications for development review under this Ordinance. 
2.3.2. - Pre-Application Conference 
A.  Purpose The purpose of a pre-application conference is to provide an opportunity for the applicant to learn about the submittal requirements, procedures, and standards applicable to a development application. A pre-application conference is also an opportunity for city staff to become familiar with, and offer preliminary comments about, the scope, features, and impacts of the proposed development, as it relates to the standards in this Ordinance. 
B.  Applicability   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Required A pre-application conference between the applicant and City staff shall be held before submittal of the following applications: 
(a)  Conditional zonings; 
(b)  Development agreements; 
(c)  Land use plan amendments; 
(d)  Planned developments; 
(e)  Reasonable accommodations; 
(f)  Special uses; 
(g)  Street abandonments. 
(h)  Street name changes; 
(i)  Text amendments; 
(j)  Variances; 
(k)  Vested rights certificates; and 
(l)  Voluntary annexations; 
(m)  Zoning map amendments. 
2.  Pre-Application Conference Optional A pre-application conference may be requested and held at the applicant's option for any development application other than those listed in Section 2.3.2 B.1, Pre-Application Conference Required. 
C.  Scheduling Applicants shall contact the Planning and Development Department to schedule a pre-application conference. 
D.  Effect A completed pre-application conference entitles an applicant to take the next step in the application process. 
2.3.3. - Citizen Information Meeting 
A.  Purpose The purpose of the citizen information meeting is to inform landowners and occupants of nearby lands about a development application that is going to be reviewed under this Ordinance, and to provide the applicant an opportunity to hear comments and concerns about the development proposal as a means of resolving conflicts and outstanding issues, where possible. 
B.  Favored Practice   
1.  Citizen information meetings are encouraged and sometimes required as opportunities for informal communication between applicants and the landowners and occupants of nearby lands, and other residents who may be affected by development proposals. 
2.  If a citizen information meeting is conducted, it is preferable to hold it in close proximity to the proposed development. 
C.  Applicability A citizen information meeting is required for any of the following applications (unless they are initiated by City Council): 
1.  Conditional zoning; 
2.  Planned developments; 
3.  Special uses; and 
4.  Zoning map amendments that propose to establish a more intense zoning district. 
D.  Procedure If a citizen information meeting is required, it shall comply with the following procedures: 
1.  Timing The applicant shall hold the citizen information meeting at least 23 days prior to consideration of the application by the P&Z. 
2.  Form The citizen information meeting can take the form of a meeting, gathering, or a telephone communication between the applicant or the applicant's representative and landowners or other interested parties. Nothing shall prohibit multiple meetings or telephone communications from taking place. 
3.  Notification   
(a)  Prior to the citizen information meeting, the applicant shall provide notice of the meeting to all landowners of land located within 300 feet of the land subject to the application, as shown on the county tax listing. 
(b)  Failure of a party to receive notice of the meeting shall not invalidate the application. 
4.  Information Provided The applicant shall provide the following information to those attending a meeting or participating in a telephone call: 
(a)  A description of the proposed development; 
(b)  Information provided by the Planning and Development Department that describes: 
(1)  The purpose of the citizen information meeting; 
(2)  The development review procedure(s) the application will follow; 
(3)  The potential for changes in the applicant's development proposal as it proceeds through the review process; 
(4)  Sources of further information about the development review process; and 
(5)  Any additional information that would promote understanding of the development proposal. 
5.  Conduct of Meeting At the meeting, the applicant shall explain the development proposal and application, inform attendees about the application review process and the potential for change to the proposal as it proceeds through the process, respond to questions and concerns neighbors raise about the application, and propose ways to resolve conflicts and concerns. 
6.  Written Summary At least 22 days before the initial consideration of the application by the P&Z, the applicant shall submit a written summary of the citizen information meeting or telephone call to the Planning and Development Department that includes: 
(a)  The date, time, and location of the meeting; 
(b)  The method and date of notification about the meeting; 
(c)  A list of landowners notified about the meeting; 
(d)  A list of meeting attendees; 
(e)  If the meeting was conducted as a series of telephone calls; 
(f)  The description of the development proposal presented to the attendees; and 
(g)  A summary of attendee comments, ideas, and suggestions from citizens to be incorporated into the development proposal. 
The written summary shall be included with the application materials and be made available to the public for inspection. 
7.  No Meeting Conducted   
(a)  Applicants subject to the requirement to conduct a citizen information meeting but who choose not to do so shall include, in writing, the reasons for not conducting a meeting or the activities undertaken in-lieu of conducting a meeting. 
(b)  The City Council shall consider an application regardless of whether a required citizen information meeting is conducted. 
2.3.4. - Application Submittal and Acceptance 
A.  Authority to File Applications Unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance, development applications reviewed under this Ordinance shall be submitted by the landowner, contract purchaser, or other person having a recognized property interest in the land on which development is proposed. 
B.  Application Content   
1.  The Planning and Development Director is authorized to establish the application content and forms, which shall be placed in the Development Guide. 
2.  The Planning and Development Director may change requirements for submission of certain required information when, in the Director's opinion, such information is otherwise available or is not necessary to review the application. 
C.  Application Fees   
1.  The City Council shall establish application fees, and may amend and update those fees as necessary. 
2.  No action shall be taken on an application and no application approval shall be issued until all required application fees are paid in full. 
D.  Submittal and Review Schedule The Planning and Development Director is authorized to and shall establish specific rules for submittal and review schedules (including time frames for review) for the various types of development applications, which shall be included in the Development Guide. 
E.  Application Submittal   
1.  Applications shall be submitted to the Planning and Development Director in the form established by the Planning and Development Director, along with the appropriate application fee. 
2.  Except for applications initiated by the City Council, no development application requiring approval by the City Council may be filed that includes land subject to a pending appeal being considered by the BOA or the courts. 
3.  An application shall not be considered submitted until it has been determined to be complete in accordance with subsection F below. 
F.  Determination of Application Completeness   
1.  Completeness Review On receiving a development application, the Planning and Development Director shall determine whether the application is complete or incomplete based on the application completeness requirements in the Development Guide. 
2.  Application Incomplete If the application is incomplete, the Planning and Development Director shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies in accordance with the Development Guide. 
3.  Application Complete On determining that the application is complete, it shall be considered as submitted, and the Planning and Development Director shall commence review in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Ordinance. 
2.3.5. - Staff Review and Action 
A.  Staff Review   
1.  Applications shall be reviewed during the review cycle in place when the application is determined to be complete. 
2.  When an application is determined complete, it shall be distributed by the Planning and Development Director to all appropriate staff and review agencies for review and comment, and the preparation of a staff report, if appropriate. 
3.  In considering the application, the Planning and Development Director, the TRC, or other city staff (as appropriate), shall review the application, relevant support material, and any comments or recommendations from other staff and review agencies to which the application was referred. 
4.  If deficiencies in complying with applicable standards of this Ordinance are identified, the Planning and Development Director shall notify the applicant of such deficiencies and provide the applicant a reasonable opportunity to discuss them and revise the application accordingly. 
B.  Staff Report and Recommendation   
1.  The Planning and Development Director shall prepare a written staff report on any application listed under Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table. The staff report shall conclude whether the application complies with all applicable review standards of this Ordinance, and recommend one of the decisions authorized for the particular type of application, based on the review standards applicable to the application type, in accordance with Section 2.4, Review Procedures. The staff report may identify and recommend conditions of approval addressing how compliance deficiencies might be corrected and how adverse effects of the development application might be mitigated. 
2.  A staff report is not required for an application listed under Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table, even though one may be prepared. 
C.  Distribution and Availability of Application and Staff Report In cases where a development application is listed under Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table, the Planning and Development Director shall take the following actions within a reasonable time period before the application is scheduled for review: 
1.  Schedule and ensure any required notice of the application (if appropriate) is prepared in accordance with Section 2.3.6, Public Notification; 
2.  Transmit the application, related materials, and staff report to the appropriate review authority; 
3.  Transmit a copy of the staff report to the applicant; and 
4.  Make the application, related materials, and staff report available for examination by the public in the Planning and Development Department during normal business hours. 
D.  Applications Subject to Decision by Staff   
1.  Decision In cases where a development application is listed under Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table, the appropriate City staff member shall approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the application, based on the review standards set forth in Section 2.5, Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision, for the particular type of application. 
2.  Conditions of Approval Conditions of approval shall be limited to those deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of this Ordinance. They shall be related in both type and amount to the anticipated impacts of the proposed development on the public and surrounding development. All conditions of approval shall be expressly set forth in the development permit or approval. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
2.3.6. - Public Notification 
A.  Public Hearing Scheduling When a development application is subject to a public hearing, the Planning and Development Director shall ensure that the public hearing is scheduled for a regular meeting or a meeting specially called for that purpose by the review authority. 
B.  Public Notification All development applications subject to public notification shall comply with the North Carolina General Statutes, the provisions listed in Table 2.3.6, Public Notification Timing Requirements, the provisions of this section, and other provisions in this Ordinance related to public notice. 
1.  Notification Requirements The Planning and Development Director shall ensure public notification is provided in accordance with the timing requirements in Table 2.3.6, Public Notification Timing Requirements, for the type of application and the type of notice. In computing the required time periods, the day the notice is published, mailed, or posted shall not be included, but the day of the hearing shall be included. 
TABLE 2.3.6: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION TIMING REQUIREMENTS 
APPLICATION TYPE DECISION-MAKING 
BODY REVIEW 
TYPES OF REQUIRED PUBLIC NOTICE 
PUBLISHED 
NOTICE MAILED 
NOTICE POSTED 
NOTICE Alternate Design BOA X [1] X [2] X [3] Appeal BOA X [1] X [2] X [3] Certificate of Appropriateness HPC X [1] X [2] X [3] Conditional Zoning P&Z X X [5] X [3] City Council X [6] X [5] X [3] Development Agreement P&Z X X [5] X [3] City Council X [6] X [5] X [3] Land Use Plan Amendment P&Z X · · City Council X [6] · · Planned Development P&Z X X [5] X [3] City Council X [6] X [5] X [3] Reasonable Accommodation BOA X [1] X [2] X [3] Special Use City Council X [6] X [5] X [3] Street Abandonment P&Z X X X [8] City Council X [9] X [7] X [8] Street Name Change P&Z X X [10] · Text Amendment P&Z X · · City Council X [6] · · Variance BOA X [1] X [2] X [3] Vested Rights Certificate City Council X [6] X [5] X [3] Voluntary Annexation City Council X [1] · · Zoning Map Amendment P&Z X X [5] X [3] City Council X [6] X [5] X [3] [1] Published notice provided once, at least 10 days before the hearing. [2] Mailed notice provided to affected owners and landowners within 100 feet of the subject lot or site between 10 and 25 days before the hearing. [3] Posted notice provided between 10 and 25 days before the hearing. [4] Mailed notice provided to all landowners in the subject LHO district between 10 and 25 days before the hearing. [5] Mailed notice provided to affected owners and landowners within 300 feet of the subject lot or site between 10 and 25 days before the hearing. [6] Published notice provided once a week for 2 successive calendar weeks, with first notice between 10 and 25 days before the hearing. [7] Certified mailed notice provided to all landowners abutting the street, plus NCDOT if street is under NCDOT control, between 10 and 25 days before the hearing. [8] Posted notice required in at least 2 locations along the street at least 10 days before the hearing. [9] Published notice provided once a week for 4 weeks before the hearing. [10] Mailed notice provided to all landowners abutting the street between 10 and 25 days before the hearing.  
2.  Published Notice Requirements When the provisions of this Ordinance require that public notice be published, the Planning and Development Director shall publish a notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the City. 
3.  Mailed Notice Requirements   
(a)  Mailed notice specified in Table 2.3.6, Public Notification Timing Requirements, shall be mailed to: 
(1)  All landowners subject to the application; 
(2)  The applicant, if different from the landowner; and 
(3)  All landowners entitled to receive notice (including landowners located outside the city) whose address is known by reference to the latest county tax listing. 
(b)  Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States mail, first class or certified (as appropriate), properly addressed, postage paid. The content and form of the notice shall comply with Section 2.3.6 B.5, Notice Content, and the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(c)  The Planning and Development Director shall prepare an affidavit affirming that notice meeting these standards was mailed. The affidavit shall be conclusive that notice has been given in compliance with the terms of this subsection. The affidavit shall be included in the support materials of the application. 
(d)  A copy of the mailed notice shall be maintained in the Planning and Development Department for public inspection during normal business hours. 
4.  Posted Notice Requirements Posted notice shall be made by the Planning and Development Director, and shall comply with the following: 
(a)  A sign shall be placed on subject property in a conspicuous location so as to be clearly visible to the traveled portion of the respective street. Where the land subject to the notice does not have frontage on a public street, the sign shall be erected on the nearest street right-of-way with an attached notation generally indicating the direction and distance to the land subject to the application. 
(b)  The content and form of the notice shall comply with Section 2.3.6 B.5, Notice Content, and the North Carolina General Statutes. 
5.  Notice Content Unless expressly noted otherwise, all notices, whether done by mail, publication, or posting shall: 
(a)  Identify the date, time, and place of the public hearing; 
(b)  Describe the land involved by street address or by its relationship to a fronting street and the nearest cross street (if applicable), and its size (except posted notice); 
(c)  Describe the nature and scope of the proposed development or action; 
(d)  Indicate that more restrictive changes in the proposal may be made following the public hearing (this requirement shall not be applied to posted notice); and 
(e)  Identify the means to contact a City official for further information. 
6.  Notice Involving Street Abandonment   
(a)  In the case of street abandonment, the City shall publish the required City Council resolution of intent once a week for 4 successive weeks. 
(b)  The resolution shall indicate the time, date, and location of a public hearing to consider the street abandonment. 
(c)  In addition to published notice, all the landowners, as listed on the county tax listing, fronting or abutting the street or segment affected by the abandonment, shall be given certified mailed notice of the proposed abandonment. 
(d)  Notice shall also be mailed to the North Carolina Department of Transportation, if the street is under the control and authority of the department. 
(e)  In addition, the notification of the public hearing purpose, date, time, and location shall be posted in at least 2 locations along the street. 
7.  Notice Involving Street Name Change Requests   
(a)  In the case of a street name change request, all the landowners, as listed on the county tax listing, fronting, or abutting the street or segment affected by the request, shall be given first class mailed notice of the request. 
(b)  The City shall also make a good faith effort to notify renters of property affected. 
(c)  If the street name change is approved, the landowners of properties affected shall be sent address change notices containing the effective date of the change. 
8.  Constructive Notice   
(a)  Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings if a bona fide attempt is made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Errors in a legal description; 
(2)  Errors or omissions in the county tax listing; or 
(3)  Typographical or grammatical errors that do not impede communication of the notice to affected parties. 
(b)  Failure of a party to receive written notice shall not invalidate subsequent action. In all cases, however, the requirements for the timing of the notice and for specifying the time, date, and place of a public hearing and the location of the subject property(ies) shall be strictly adhered to. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 2, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 1.B, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 1.B, 2.D, 4, 12-3-2018) 
2.3.7. - Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures 
If the development application is subject to a quasi-judicial public hearing by a decision-making body, the decision-making body shall hold a quasi-judicial public hearing in accordance with the following procedures. 
A.  Opportunity to Present Testimony and Evidence Any affected party shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to present testimony and evidence in support of or in opposition to the application, and to ask questions of the applicant, the applicant's representatives, City staff, and the City staff's representatives. At the discretion of the person chairing the body conducting the quasi-judicial public hearing, an affected party may be granted an opportunity to ask questions of any other member of the public who has testified at the hearing. 
B.  Not Bound by Rules of Evidence Except as otherwise provided in the North Carolina General Statutes, the body conducting a quasi-judicial public hearing is not bound by the rules of evidence, or limited to consideration of evidence that is admissible in a court of law. The body may consider all testimony and evidence it deems competent and material to the application under consideration. 
C.  Cross Examination Any inquiry under cross-examination shall be limited to matters raised in the direct examination of the person testifying. No re-direct or re-cross shall be allowed unless requested by the applicant, an affected party, or the City-who shall state the desired area of inquiry. The request shall be approved by the person chairing the body conducting the quasi-judicial public hearing. If re-direct or re-cross is allowed, it shall be limited to questions of the witness on issues raised in the cross-examination or re-direct examination. 
D.  Ex Parte Communication Ex parte communications between an applicant or an affected party and a member of the decision-making body is prohibited. If it occurs, it shall be disclosed during the quasi-judicial public hearing. 
2.3.8. - Review by P&Z or HPC 
If an application is subject to a recommendation by the P&Z or HPC, the P&Z or HPC shall review and act on the application in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  General The P&Z or HPC, as appropriate, shall consider the application, relevant support materials, staff report, and any public comments. One of the decisions authorized for the particular type of application shall be recommended, based on the review standards applicable to the application type, as set forth in Section 2.4, Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision. 
B.  General Conduct Members conducting a review and providing a recommendation should act in accordance with the following guidelines: 
1.  No Prejudice Consider the application without prejudice. 
2.  No Commitment Prior to Review Make no commitment or agreement or take a public position on an application or on any proposed condition until the application is reviewed during the meeting. 
3.  Acknowledgement Acknowledge any information obtained outside the public meeting that they believe has influenced their evaluation of the application. 
4.  Deliberation Refrain from deliberation or formulation of a judgment or decision prior to the meeting at which the application is considered. 
C.  Clearly State Factors for Recommendation The recommendation shall clearly state the factors considered in making the recommendation and the basis or rationale for the recommendation. 
D.  Vote   
1.  A decision to recommend approval shall be decided by a simple majority of a quorum present. 
2.  A tie vote by members of the P&Z shall be forwarded to the City Council without a recommendation. 
3.  Zoning map amendment, conditional zoning, planned development and text amendment applications receiving a recommendation for denial by the P&Z shall require a ? favorable vote of the City Council members present and voting to be approved. (SL 1989-918) 
E.  Timing Unless an application is deferred or continued in accordance with Section 2.3.13, Deferral and Continuance, a vote or recommendation on an application shall be made within 60 days from the date of the initial meeting where it is considered. 
F.  Failure to Recommend If the P&Z or HPC fails to make a recommendation in the time allotted for an application to be reviewed and decided by the City Council, the application shall be forwarded to the City Council without a recommendation from the P&Z or HPC. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 2.E, 12-3-2018) 
2.3.9. - Action by Decision-Making Body 
If an application is subject to a decision by the City Council, P&Z, BOA, or HPC, the decision-making body shall review and decide the application in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  General The decision-making body shall conduct any required public hearing(s) and consider the application, relevant support materials, staff report, any advisory body recommendations, and public comments. After the conclusion of the public hearing, it shall make one of the decisions authorized for the particular type of application based on the review standards applicable to the application type, as set forth in Section 2.4, Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision. 
B.  General Conduct Members making a decision should act in accordance with the following guidelines: 
1.  No Prejudice Consider the application without prejudice. 
2.  No Commitment Prior to Review Make no commitment or agreement or take a public position on an application or on any proposed condition until the application is reviewed during the hearing. 
3.  Acknowledgement Acknowledge any information obtained outside the public hearing that they believe has influenced their evaluation of the application. 
4.  Deliberation Refrain from deliberation or formulation of a judgment or decision prior to the meeting to consider the application. 
C.  Quasi-Judicial Procedures Required quasi-judicial public hearings (see Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table) shall be conducted in accordance with Section 2.3.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures. 
D.  Remand The decision-making body may remand the application to City staff or the appropriate advisory body for further consideration of new information or specified issues or concerns, if appropriate. 
E.  Clearly State Factors for Decision Unless stated otherwise in this Ordinance, the decision shall clearly state the factors considered in making the decision and the basis or rationale for the decision. 
F.  Application Revision The decision-making body may revise an application to apply more restrictive requirements, or to ensure the application better serves the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. In cases where an application is revised by a decision-making body in this manner, additional public notification or public hearings are not required. 
G.  Vote   
1.  A zoning map amendment, conditional zoning, planned development or text amendment application receiving a recommendation for denial from the P&Z shall only be approved by the City Council with a ? majority vote of the City Council members present and voting. (SL 1989-918) 
2.  A board member shall recuse themselves from voting on an application where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, or readily identifiable financial impact on the member. 
3.  Vacant seats shall not be considered members for the calculation of the requisite supermajority. 
4.  Upon failure of the City Council to act on a request following a public hearing and any properly followed continuance procedures, the application shall be deemed denied. 
H.  Timing The decision-making body shall take action on the application as promptly as reasonably possible in consideration of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 2.F, 12-3-2018) 
2.3.10. - Conditions of Approval 
A.  Unless expressly stated otherwise in the specific procedures in Section 2.4, Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision, or Section 2.5, Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision, conditions of approval shall be limited to those deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the review standards for the particular type of application, or to prevent or minimize adverse effects from a proposed development on surrounding lands. Conditions of approval shall be related in both type and amount to the anticipated impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed development on the public and surrounding development. All conditions of approval shall be expressly set forth in the notice of decision or development permit approval. 
B.  Conditions of approval may be in the form of text or plans or maps, or a combination thereof. 
C.  No condition of approval shall be less restrictive than the applicable standards and requirements of this Ordinance. 
D.  No condition shall be made part of an approval that: 
1.  Specifies the ownership status, race, religion, or other characteristics of the occupants of housing units; 
2.  Establishes a minimum size of a dwelling unit; 
3.  Establishes a minimum value of buildings or improvements; 
4.  Excludes residents based upon race, religion or income; or 
5.  Obligates the City to perform in any manner relative to an approval action regarding a development application. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 5.A, 12-3-2018) 
2.3.11. - Notification of Decision or Action 
A.  Timing Except where otherwise stated in this Ordinance, the Planning and Development Director shall provide the applicant written notification of a decision or action within 10 business days after a final decision on a development application. 
B.  Copy of Decision In addition, the Planning and Development Director shall make a copy of the decision available to the public in the offices of the Planning and Development Department, during normal business hours. 
2.3.12. - Effect of Development Approval 
A.  Approval Limited Approval of a development application in accordance with this Ordinance authorizes only the particular use, plan for development, or other specific activity approved. 
B.  Permit Prerequisite In the event a permit or development approval is prerequisite to another permit or development approval (e.g., administrative adjustment or variance approval prior to a site plan approval), development may not take place until all prerequisite approvals are obtained. Approval of one development application does not guarantee approval of any subsequent development application. 
C.  Sequence of Permit Issuance   
1.  A land disturbance permit can be issued after a site plan is approved; however, the Planning and Development Director may allow its issuance if a watershed development plan, floodplain development permit, or landscape plan (as applicable), has been approved. 
2.  If required, a well or septic tank permit, driveway approval, water and sewer construction plan, site plan, watershed development plan, group development plan, or final plat shall be approved prior to issuance of a building permit. 
3.  The Planning and Development Director may issue permits for temporary construction-related uses prior to approval of a site plan, group development plan, or preliminary plat. 
2.3.13. - Deferral and Continuance 
A.  Planning and Development Director Deferral   
1.  Application to be Heard by the P&Z A development application reviewed or decided by the P&Z may be granted a 1-month deferral by the Planning and Development Director, provided the request to defer is submitted in writing by the applicant at least 22 days prior to the initial consideration of a development application. The Planning and Development Director is authorized to grant only one deferral. The application must then either be forwarded to the P&Z for consideration or be withdrawn. 
2.  Application to be Heard by the BOA or HPC A development application reviewed or decided by the BOA or the HPC may be granted a 1-month deferral by the Planning and Development Director, provided the request to defer is submitted in writing by the applicant at least 15 days prior to the initial consideration of a development application. The Planning and Development Director is authorized to grant only one deferral. The application must then either be forwarded to the BOA or HPC, as appropriate, for consideration, or be withdrawn. 
B.  Decision-Making Body Continuance   
1.  When a development application is before the City Council, P&Z, BOA, or HPC for a decision, the decision-making body may continue consideration of the application for up to 60 days, provided the reason for the continuance is stated in the motion to continue. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a continuance from being granted for a greater period of time, provided it is mutually agreed upon by the decision-making body and the applicant. 
2.  In cases where a development application has been forwarded to the City Council following P&Z review and recommendation, the applicant cannot request a continuance until the City Council public hearing. 
2.3.14. - Withdrawal 
A.  Application to be Heard by the P&Z An applicant may request, and the Planning and Development Director may grant an applicant's request to withdraw an application if it is done at least 22 days prior to initial consideration by the P&Z. A request to withdraw an application after that date shall only be considered by the P&Z at the public hearing. 
B.  Application to be Heard by the BOA or the HPC An applicant may request, and the Planning and Development Director may grant an applicant's request to withdraw an application if it is done at least 15 days prior to initial consideration of the application by the BOA or the HPC. A request to withdraw an application after that date shall only be considered by the BOA or HPC, as appropriate, at the public hearing. 
C.  Successive Requests If an applicant withdraws an application for the same land after public notification 2 times within a single calendar year, the same application may not be resubmitted for a period of 1 year from the date of the second withdrawal. 
2.3.15. - Expiration of Permit or Development Approval 
A.  General   
1.  Development approvals granted in accordance with this Ordinance shall expire as provided in Section 2.4, Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision, or Section 2.5, Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision, for the particular type of development permit or approval. 
2.  If no expiration period is provided in Section 2.4, Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision, or Section 2.5, Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision, then the development approval does not expire. 
3.  A change in ownership of the land shall not affect the established expiration time period. The filing of an appeal shall delay the established expiration period until final resolution of the appeal. 
B.  Extension of Expiration Time Period   
1.  Except as otherwise provided in Section 2.4, Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision, or Section 2.5, Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision, for the particular type of development permit or approval, the Planning and Development Director may, on receipt a written request for extension before the expiration date and on a showing of good cause, grant one or more extensions of the expiration time period for up to a cumulative total of 1 year. 
2.  Any further extensions shall be subject to approval by the decision-making body that granted the development permit or approval, on submittal of a request for extension to the Planning and Development Director before the expiration date and a showing of good cause. 
2.4. - Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision 

2.4.1. - Overview 
A.  General This section sets out supplemental procedures, standards, and related information for each of the specific review procedures subject to decision-making body review and decision, as identified in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table. They apply in addition to, or instead of, the standard procedures set forth in Section 2.3, Standard Review Procedures. 
B.  Structure of Procedures   
1.  For each type of development application reviewed under this Ordinance, the following sections state the purpose of the development permit or approval, the steps in the review process, the review standards for the application, and provisions addressing expiration and amendment, if applicable. 
2.  Development application provisions in this section are organized in alphabetical order in accordance with the sequence of procedures in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table. 
C.  Procedural Flowchart Legend Each development application review procedure in this section includes a procedural flowchart that depicts the steps in the review process. White boxes indicate actions of the applicant. Light blue boxes indicate actions of City staff. Black boxes show quasi-judicial public hearings, and grey boxes show public hearings or public meetings (as appropriate). Boxes with dashed lines show optional steps. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
2.4.2. - Alternate Design 
A.  Applicability This section provides a procedure to consider an alternative to the façade articulation and façade transparency standards where unique or impractical situations result from the application of the standards to a specific building. This procedure only applies to the façade articulation and façade transparency standards contained in the building standards section of the CB, EC, MS and MX districts and in Corner Retail and Large Retail developments of Section 5.14, Development Types. 
B.  Alternate Design Procedure   
1.  Pre-application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review   

(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.2 C, Alternate Design Review Standards. 
4.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
5.  BOA Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and Section 2.3.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures). 
(b)  The BOA, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall decide the application for an alternate design. 
(c)  The decision shall be based on competent, material, and subsequent evidence in the record, as supplemented by the arguments presented at the quasi-judicial hearing, and the standards in Section 2.4.2 C, Alternate Design Review Standards. 
(d)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
1.  Approval of the alternate design as proposed; 
2.  Approval of the alternate design with revisions; or 
3.  Denial of the alternate design. 
(e)  Each decision shall be made in writing and reflect the BOA's determination of contested facts and their application to the standards of this Ordinance. 
(f)  The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the BOA. 
(g)  The decision of the BOA shall be effective upon the filing of the written decision. 
6.  Notification of Decision The decision of the BOA shall be delivered by personal service, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, the landowner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person providing notification of decision shall certify that proper notification has been made. 
C.  Alternate Design Review Standards An alternate design application shall be approved on evidence presented that demonstrates the following requirements are met and the required findings are made: 
1.  General Requirements   
(a)  An alternate design cannot be granted if the need is based on a specific use of the building. 
(b)  A greater distance in façade articulation, or a reduction or change in the articulation features provided may be granted; however, articulation cannot be eliminated for a building facade. 
(c)  Façade transparency standards may be reduced but cannot be eliminated for a building facade. 
(d)  If a facade transparency standard is altered, then the use of enclosed window wells supplemented with awnings, false storefront windows, or similar building wall fenestration techniques should be used to promote a pedestrian oriented design. Figure 2.4.2.C, Facade Transparency Alternatives, shows some alternative designs that comply with the purpose and intent of this standard. 
FIGURE 2.4.2.C FACADE TRANSPARENCY ALTERNATIVES

2.  Required Findings   
(a)  The alternate design is needed: 
(1)  Due to the unique function of the building or portion thereof, or 
(2)  Because an unreasonable or impractical situation results from the application of the building design standard, or 
(3)  Because it is determined that the building is of a unique or iconic design that warrants special consideration. 
(b)  The alternate design granted is the minimum required to meet the determined need; and 
(c)  The alternate design is compensated by exterior design features that exceed the minimum standard when the building is considered in its entirety and the building results in a pedestrian oriented design that enhances street level activity. 
D.  Conditions of Approval In granting an alternate design the BOA may prescribe conditions of approval, in accordance with Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval, to ensure compliance with the standards of this section, and to assure that the use of the land to which the alternate design applies will be compatible with surrounding lands and will not alter the essential character of the area in which the alternate design is proposed. 
1.  An alternate design granted subject to a condition of approval shall be permitted as long as there is compliance with the condition. 
2.  Violation of a condition of approval shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. 
3.  If a violation or invalidation of a condition of approval occurs, the Planning and Development Director may revoke the certificate of occupancy for the development subject to the alternate design. 
E.  Effect Approval of an alternate design authorizes only the specific building design change approved by the BOA. It does not exempt the applicant from the responsibility to obtain all other permits or development approvals required by this Ordinance or any other applicable laws, and does not indicate that the development for which the alternate design is granted should receive other permits or development approvals under this Ordinance unless the relevant and applicable portions of this Ordinance are met. 
F.  Amendment Amendment of an alternate design may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
G.  Expiration If the BOA does not include a time period by which development subject to an alternate design expires, development shall commence within 12 months of the date of issuance of the alternate design or the alternate design approval shall expire and become null and void. 
H.  Appeal Any decision by the BOA shall be subject to Superior Court review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, added new provisions as § 2.4.2 and further amended the Code by renumbering existing §§ 2.4.2-2.4.19 accordingly. 
2.4.3. - Appeal 
A.  Applicability   
1.  This section sets out the procedure and standards for an aggrieved party, officer, department, or board of the City affected by any decision or determination by a City official to determine if the decision or interpretation complies with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
2.  In the event an applicant wishes to appeal a standard outside this Ordinance, or a decision by a staff member not addressed by this Ordinance, the appeal is made to the City Manager in accordance with City policy, not this appeal procedure. 
B.  Initiation An appeal shall be initiated by filing a written notice of appeal with the Planning and Development Director within: 
1.  30 days of the date the written determination or decision being appealed is received by the applicant (except where otherwise specified in this Ordinance); or 
2.  In the event that a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is denied in accordance with Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation, the applicant may appeal the denial directly to the North Carolina Sedimentation Control Commission. 
C.  Appeal Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   

(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  The written notice of appeal shall include a statement of the error or improper decision or determination, the date of the decision or determination, the grounds for the appeal, and all related support materials. 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  On accepting a notice of appeal, the Planning and Development Director shall transmit to the BOA the appeal and the record of material considered by the decision-maker in making the decision or determination (including but not limited to, for example, the application and support materials, staff report, other plans, documents, reports, and studies considered in making the decision, and any minutes, transcripts, or record of the meetings held to consider and make the decision). 
(c)  The Planning and Development Director, Engineering Services Director, Public Services Director, or Transportation Director, as appropriate, shall review and comment on appeals related to the aspects of this Ordinance for which they are responsible for administering. 
4.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
5.  BOA Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and 2.3.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures). 
(b)  The BOA, at the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall decide the application for the appeal. 
(c)  The decision shall be based on the competent, material, and subsequent evidence in the record of the appeal, as supplemented by arguments presented at the quasi-judicial hearing, and the standards in Section 2.4.3 D, Appeal Review Standards. 
(d)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Affirmation of the decision or determination (in whole or in part); 
(2)  Modification of the decision or determination (in whole or in part); or 
(3)  Reversal of the decision or determination (in whole or in part). 
(e)  A vote to reverse or modify a decision or determination shall require approval of a majority of a quorum present at the hearing. 
(f)  Each decision shall be made in writing and reflect the BOA's determination of contested facts and their application to the standards in this Ordinance. 
(g)  The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the BOA. 
(h)  The decision of the BOA shall be effective upon the filing of the written decision. 
6.  Notification of Decision The decision of the BOA shall be delivered by personal service, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, the landowner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person providing notification of decision shall certify that proper notification has been made. 
D.  Appeal Review Standards   
1.  The BOA is limited to the following determinations in considering the appeal, which shall be based on clear and substantial evidence in the record: 
(a)  The decision-maker did not make an error or correctly applied the standards of this Ordinance in making the decision or interpretation; 
(b)  The decision-maker made an error in determining whether a standard was met. The record must indicate that an error in judgment occurred or facts, plans, or regulations were misread in determining whether the particular standard was or was not met; 
(c)  The decision-maker made an error because the decision was based on a standard not contained in this Ordinance or other appropriate City ordinances, regulations, or state law, or that a standard more strict or broad than the standard established in this Ordinance was applied; or 
(d)  The decision-maker made an error in applying a standard or measuring a standard. 
2.  Where conflicting evidence exists, the appeal is limited to determining what evidence or testimony bears the greatest credibility in terms of documentation and qualifications of those making the determination. 
3.  The BOA shall not hear any evidence or make any decision based on hardships or special conditions. (Such matters may only be considered in the context of an application for a variance.) 
E.  Effect   
1.  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the City official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the BOA, after notice of appeal has been filed, that because of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the city official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property or because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of this Ordinance. 
2.  If certification by a City official is filed, administrative proceedings shall not be stayed except through issuance of a restraining order by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
3.  If the appeal is not stayed, the appellant may file for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the BOA shall meet to consider the appeal with 15 days of the date the request is filed. 
4.  The filing of an appeal prevents the filing of an application for a zoning map amendment or special use for the same land subject to an appeal application, as well as the filing of a text amendment application by the same party filing the appeal until the appeal application is decided or appealed to the courts. 
F.  Appeal Any decision by the BOA shall be subject to Superior Court review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.4. - Beneficial Use Determination 
A.  Applicability If, after a decision on an application for development approval, a landowner is of the opinion that application of this Ordinance during the application review process has denied an economically beneficial use of the land, the procedures of this section shall be used by an applicant before seeking relief from the courts in order that any denial of economically beneficial use of land may be remedied through a non-judicial forum. 
B.  Beneficial Use Determination Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  An application for beneficial use determination may be submitted by a landowner at any time to the Planning and Development Director. 
(c)  The application shall include the following: 
(1)  The landowner's name and address; 
(2)  A legal description and the street address (when a street address is available) of the land; 
(3)  Documentation of the date of purchase and the purchase price of the land, and any offers to purchase the land made by any person, corporation, or association, within the last 3 years; 

(4)  A description of the physical features present on the land, its total acreage, the present use, the use of the land on the effective date of this Ordinance, and the current use of the land; 
(5)  Evidence of any investments made by the landowner to improve the land, the date the improvements were made, and the costs of the improvements; 
(6)  A description of what uses of land were available when the land was purchased by the landowner; 
(7)  A description of the regulations and uses permitted which are alleged to result in an elimination of economically beneficial use of the land; 
(8)  All appraisals, studies, and any other supporting evidence, and any actions taken by the City related to the land; and 
(9)  A description of the use which the landowner believes represents the minimum legally required economically beneficial use of the land and all documentation, studies, and other supporting evidence thereof. 
3.  Hearing Officer Review and Recommendation   
(a)  City Council Appointment of Hearing Officer Within a reasonable time after the date the application is determined complete the City Council shall appoint a Hearing Officer to schedule and conduct a hearing on the application in accordance with this section. The Hearing Officer shall be a licensed attorney with expertise in land use and takings claims. 
(b)  Hearing by Hearing Officer At the hearing conducted by the Hearing Officer, the applicant or the applicant's representative shall present the applicant's case and the City Attorney shall represent the City. All evidence presented shall be under oath, and the parties involved shall be permitted to cross-examine witnesses. The sworn testimony and evidence shall pertain to the standards set forth in Section 2.4.4 B.5, Beneficial Use Determination Review Standards, as to whether the applicant is deprived of an economically beneficial use of the land and the standards in Section 2.4.4 B.6, Relief, pertaining to the degree of relief needed to provide the landowner with an economically beneficial use of the land. 
(c)  Findings of the Hearing Officer Within a reasonable period of time following the close of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall prepare recommended findings of fact and a proposed order for consideration by the City Council. The recommended findings and recommendations of the Hearing Officer as to whether the land is provided economically beneficial use shall be based on the evidence submitted and the standards in Section 2.4.4 B.5, Beneficial Use Determination Review Standards. If the Hearing Officer finds that the applicant has been denied economically beneficial use of the subject land, then the Hearing Officer shall recommend a use that permits an economically beneficial use and results in a minimum change of this Ordinance as it applies to the subject land, in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 2.4.4 B.5, Beneficial Use Determination Review Standards, or other relief as is determined appropriate. The Hearing Officer's recommended findings of fact and proposed order shall be in writing and shall detail the basis of the conclusions from the record of the hearing. 
4.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  After receipt of the recommended findings and proposed order from the Hearing Officer, the City Council shall approve the findings of fact and proposed order of the Hearing Officer, or may attach conditions, modify, or reverse the findings of fact or proposed order of the Hearing Officer, based on the standards of Section 2.4.4 B.5, Beneficial Use Determination Review Standards. If the City Council attaches conditions, modifies or reverses the findings of fact or proposed order, it shall do so only where the record of the hearing indicates that the Hearing Officer is unsupported by the record, or that the proposed order is not in conformance with the standards of Section 2.4.4 B.5, Beneficial Use Determination Review Standards. 
5.  Beneficial Use Determination Review Standards   
(a)  General In determining if a landowner has been deprived of an economically beneficial use of land, the Hearing Officer and the City Council shall take into account the following factors: 
(1)  Economically Viable Use In making the determination of whether the land is provided an economically viable use, the Hearing Officer and the City Council shall first evaluate the uses of the land as provided by this Ordinance, and the uses of land in relation to the uses provided similarly situated lands. For the purposes of this section, "economically viable use" means the opportunity to make a return equivalent to that which would have been received from a conservative financial investment. Transitory economic issues shall not be relevant to this determination. 
(2)  Diminution in Value The market value of the land, as established by the comparable sales approach, prior to adoption of this Ordinance, or a relevant amendment thereto, which caused the landowner to apply for relief shall be compared to the market value of the land, as established by the comparable sales approach, with the regulations as applied. Market value of the land prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, or a relevant amendment, shall constitute its highest and best use on December 31, 2016 of the relevant amendment thereto or the date of purchase of the land, whichever is later, and any other land value/appraisal information that the applicant would like to be considered. All appraisals shall be proposed by qualified licensed appraisers, and shall follow the best professional practices as established by the profession. A mere diminution in market value is not sufficient to support a determination of denial of economically beneficial use. 
(b)  Subsidy The amount or nature of any subsidy that may be required by the City, neighbors, purchasers, tenants, or the public if the uses allowed under this Ordinance are modified. 
(c)  Other Adverse Effects Any other adverse effects on the City and its residents. 
(d)  Current State of the Law The state of the law established by the United States Supreme Court, the federal Circuit Courts of Appeals, and the North Carolina Supreme Court, relevant to these standards. 
6.  Relief If the finding is that a landowner has been deprived economically beneficial use of land, or is otherwise entitled to relief in accordance with the standards of this section, relief shall be granted. 
(a)  General In granting relief, the Hearing Officer may recommend and the City Council may adopt any legally available incentive or measure reasonably necessary to offset any substantial economic hardship, and may condition such incentives upon approval of specific development plans. If there is a finding that the denial of the application would create a substantial economic hardship, the Hearing Officer may recommend and the City Council may consider additional relief to provide an appropriate increase in market value or other benefit or return to the applicant sufficient to offset the substantial economic hardship. The types of incentives that the Hearing Officer may recommend and the City Council may consider include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A zoning map amendment of the land to a more appropriate classification, issuance of a variance, approval of a site plan, or other appropriate land use regulatory action that will enable the applicant to realize a reasonable return on the land; 
(2)  An opportunity to transfer density or cluster development on other land; 
(3)  A modification of permit fees; 
(4)  Development finance assistance; 
(5)  Approval of development on some portion of the land; or 
(6)  Acquisition of all or a portion of the property at market value. 
(b)  Minimum Increase In granting relief, the landowner shall be given the minimum increase in use or density/intensity or other possible concessions from this Ordinance and Section 2.4.4 B.6, Relief, above, in order to permit an economically viable use of the land or a use that is determined to be required by law. The highest use, or even an average or generally reasonable expectation, is not required or intended as the appropriate remedy. The following guidelines shall be used for determining the minimum economically viable use of land and, therefore, the amount of relief to be granted a landowner in order to reach that minimum. 
(1)  A minimum economically viable use of the land should be one that does not have any governmental subsidy attached to the long-term safe occupation of the land. If such a subsidy is needed, then that should be reflected by lowering the use intensity that is considered a minimum economically viable use on a market valuation basis. 
(2)  A use common to the city, although it may not involve further development of the land, is considered an economically viable use. Attention shall also be given to land uses that are considered to be the lowest intensity in the city but which still provide for occupation and living within the city. These land uses, as well, shall be considered economically viable uses. 
(3)  The actual condition of the land shall be considered. The reality of limited development potential, given the natural condition of the land, shall not be attributed to the regulations applied to the land. If the land is such that it cannot safely accommodate development with normal grading and clearing practices, this fact shall lower the intensity of use that is considered a minimum economically viable use. 
(4)  The potential for damages to either residents or land shall be assessed in determining economically viable use. The need for a governmental subsidy to future landowners shall be considered, and the cost of such subsidies shall be deducted from the otherwise established minimum economically viable use. 
(5)  Expectations shall, in general, not be considered. Only reasonable expectations backed by investments as required by the current state of the law shall be considered. 
(6)  The current state of law established by the United States Supreme Court, the federal Circuit Court of Appeals, and the North Carolina Supreme Court, relevant to the granting of relief. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.5. - Certificate of Appropriateness 
A.  Applicability A certificate of appropriateness (COA) or Minor Work COA is required within an LHO whether or not a building permit is required. If a building permit is required, the COA must be obtained prior to its issuance. Unless exempted in accordance with Section 2.4.5 B, Exemptions, a COA shall be required within an LHO for the following: 
1.  Making an architectural or environmental change to the exterior features of a property. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "architectural or environmental change" means the erection, construction, alteration, reconstruction, restoration, moving, removal, or demolition of all or part of a building or other structure, or an appurtenant fixture. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "exterior features" means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the kind and texture and color of building materials, the size and scale of a building or structure, and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, steps, pavement, masonry walls, fences, decks, signs, and other appurtenant features. It is also deemed to include major replacement or redesign of landscaping, and the removal of mature trees. 
2.  Any changes in the character of street paving, street width, utility installations or removals, street lighting, street trees, walls, fences, sidewalks, or to the exterior of buildings or structures on property or streets in which the City and all public utilities have a fee or other interest. 
B.  Exemptions The requirements of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  The ordinary maintenance, repair, or replacement of streets, sidewalks, pavement markings, utility service lines, street signs, traffic signs, and street light fixtures, provided such activities comply with the purpose and intent of this section and any guidelines adopted by the HPC. 
2.  The immediate restoration of utility service in the event of an emergency. 
C.  Certificate of Appropriateness Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  An application shall include sketches, drawings, photographs, specifications, descriptions, and other information which clearly show the proposed development. 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in Section 2.4.5 C.3(c), Minor Work, the Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.5 D, Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards. 

(c)  Minor Work 
(1)  If the development proposed is identified by the Design Review Guidelines-Historic Districts High Point, North Carolina as a minor work, the Planning and Development Director may review and make a decision on the application in accordance with the standards in Section 2.4.5 D, Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards. 
(2)  If the Planning and Development Director proposes to disapprove the minor work, the application shall be forwarded to the HPC for a final decision in accordance with Section 2.4.5 C.5, HPC Review and Decision. 
4.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
5.  HPC Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (See Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and Section 2.3.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures). 
(b)  The HPC, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall decide the application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)  The decision shall be based on the competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record, as supplemented by the arguments presented at the quasi-judicial hearing, and the standards in Section 2.4.5 D, Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards. 
(d)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Approval of the certificate of appropriateness in part, or as submitted; 
(2)  Approval of the certificate of appropriateness subject to conditions or revisions; or 
(3)  Denial of the certificate of appropriateness in part, or as submitted. The HPC shall not deny an application except for the purpose of preventing the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or moving of buildings, appurtenant features, or signs that are incompatible with the High Point Design Guidelines. 
(e)  Each decision shall be made in writing and reflect the HPC's determination of contested facts and their application to the standards in this Ordinance. 
(f)  The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the HPC. 
(g)  The decision of the HPC shall be effective upon the filing of the written decision. 
6.  Notification of Decision The decision of the HPC shall be delivered by personal service, electronic mail, or by first class mail to the applicant, the landowner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person providing notification of decision shall certify that proper notification has been made. 
D.  Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards   
1.  A certificate of appropriateness shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates the proposed development complies with the guidelines set forth in the Design Review Guidelines-Historic Districts High Point, North Carolina , and is otherwise congruous with the special character of the LHO district. 
2.  In making its decision on the application the HPC shall not consider the interior arrangement of a building or structure. 
E.  Condition of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
F.  Delay in Relocation, Demolition, or Destruction   
1.  The effective date of a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the relocation, demolition, or destruction of a designated building, structure, or site within the LHO district may be delayed for a period of up to 365 days from the date of approval, except the maximum period of delay authorized by this section shall be reduced by the HPC where the landowner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use of or return from the property by virtue of the delay. 
2.  During this period the HPC shall negotiate with the landowner and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building or site. 
3.  If the HPC finds a building or site within a LHO district has no special significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, it shall waive all or part of the period and authorize demolition or removal before expiration of the time period. 
4.  If the HPC has voted to recommend designation as a LHO district, and final designation has not been made by the City Council, the relocation, demolition, or destruction of any building, site or structure located in the proposed district may be delayed by the HPC for a period of up to 180 days or until the City Council takes final action on the designation, whichever occurs first. 
5.  The City Council may enact an ordinance to prevent the demolition by neglect of any designated building or structure within an LHO district. The ordinance shall provide appropriate safeguards to protect landowners from undue economic hardship. 
6.  An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition or destruction of a building, site, or structure determined by the State Historic Preservation Officer as having statewide significance as defined in the criteria of the National Register of Historic Places may be denied, except where the HPC finds the landowner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return by virtue of the denial. 
G.  Amendment Amendment of a certificate of appropriateness may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
H.  Expiration   
1.  Unless otherwise stated in the approval of a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of appropriateness shall expire and be null and void if a building permit is not issued or construction or installation commenced for development approved by the certificate within 18 months of the date of certificate issuance. 
2.  If work on development approved under a certificate of appropriateness is started then discontinued for a period exceeding 12 months, the certificate of appropriateness shall expire and become null and void. 
I.  Appeals Appeal of a decision on a COA shall be reviewed and decided by the BOA in accordance with Section 2.4.3, Appeal. 
(Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 1.C, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.6. - Conditional Zoning 
A.  Applicability In cases where the standards of a zoning district are inadequate to ensure that development allowed by a zoning district will conform to the City's adopted policy guidance or to appropriately address the impacts expected to be generated by development, a landowner may apply for a conditional zoning in accordance with this section. Approval of a conditional zoning application establishes a parallel conditional zoning district that is equivalent to a corresponding zoning district, but is subject to additional conditions or restrictions that the applicant and City mutually agree are necessary to ensure conformance with adopted policy guidance and adequately address expected development impacts. 
B.  Conditional Zoning Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Citizen Information Meeting Applicable (see Section 2.3.3, Citizen Information Meeting). 
3.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  Conditional zoning applications may only be initiated by the landowner(s) of the land subject to the application. 

(c)  All conditions of approval proposed by the applicant must be included with the conditional zoning application. 
(d)  An application for a conditional zoning may include a conditional zoning plan that illustrates the proposed development in order to demonstrate proposed conditions where text does not provide an adequate description. 
(e)  When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for review with the submittal of an application for a conditional zoning. The procedure for preparation of a traffic impact analysis is described in the Development Guide. 
4.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.6.C, Conditional Zoning Review Standards. 
5.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
6.  P&Z or HPC Review and Recommendation   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.7, Review by P&Z or HPC). 
(b)  If the application is proposed for land located within a LHO district, the HPC, following a meeting, shall provide a recommendation on the application to the P&Z. The P&Z shall not make a recommendation on an application until they receive a recommendation from the HPC. 
(c)  The P&Z, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation on the application in accordance with Section 2.4.6 C, Conditional Zoning Review Standards. 
(d)  During its review of the application, the P&Z may suggest revisions to the proposed conditions (including the conditional zoning plan), consistent with the provisions of Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval. Only those revisions agreed to in writing by the applicant shall be incorporated into the application. 
(e)  Upon completion of the public hearing, the P&Z shall comment on the application's consistency with the City's adopted policy guidance. 
7.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  The City Council, after the conclusion of a public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.6 C, Conditional Zoning Review Standards. 
(c)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Adoption of the conditional zoning as proposed; 
(2)  Adoption of a revised conditional zoning; 
(3)  Denial of the conditional zoning; or 
(4)  Remand of the conditional zoning application to the P&Z for further consideration. 
(d)  As part of the decision, the City Council shall adopt a written statement of consistency and reasonableness that: 
(1)  Describes whether the decision is consistent with all applicable City- adopted policy guidance; and 
(2)  Explains why the decision is reasonable and in the public interest. 
8.  Changes to Application An applicant may change the conditions associated with a conditional zoning application until 22 days prior to the initial review by the P&Z. After that time, the applicant may only propose changes in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Changes shall be made in writing to the Planning and Development Director during or after the hearing conducted by the P&Z but no closer two business days prior to final action by the City Council on the conditional zoning application; 
(b)  Changes shall be signed by all landowners or those authorized to submit the application; and 
(c)  Changes shall be approved by P&Z, or the City Council, depending upon the time the changes were submitted by the applicant. 
9.  Designation on Official Zoning Map The Planning and Development Director shall make changes to the Official Zoning Map promptly after approval of a conditional zoning district application by the City Council. 
C.  Conditional Zoning Review Standards The advisability of a conditional zoning is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to approve or deny a conditional zoning, the City Council may consider the following standards: 
1.  Consistency with Adopted Policy Guidance Whether and the extent to which the proposed conditional zoning district is appropriate for its proposed location, and is consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance. 
2.  Reasonableness/Public Interest Whether an approval of the conditional zoning is reasonable and in the public interest. 
3.  Review Factors Whether the applicant's proposed conditional zoning district, including the proposed use(s), written conditions, and conditional zoning plan (if applicable), will satisfactorily: 
(a)  Result in a development that is compatible with surrounding development character and land uses; 
(b)  Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse impact on adjacent and nearby land, such as that caused by traffic, parking, noise, lighting, trash, loading areas, etc.; 
(c)  Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse environmental impact on water and air resources, minimize land disturbance, preserve trees, and protect habitat; 
(d)  Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse impact on municipal facilities and services, such as streets, potable water and wastewater facilities, parks, police, and fire; and 
(e)  Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse effect on the use, enjoyment, or value of adjacent lands. 
4.  Changes in the Area There have been changes in the type or nature of development in the area of the proposed conditional zoning district that support the application. 
5.  Development Patterns The proposed conditional zoning district results in development that promotes a logical, preferred, and orderly development pattern. 
D.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
1.  Only conditions mutually agreed to by the landowner(s) of the land to be conditionally zoned and the City Council may be approved as part of a conditional zoning district. 
2.  No condition shall be less restrictive than the standards of the parallel general zoning district, any applicable overlay zoning district standard, or other applicable requirements in this Ordinance. 
E.  Effect   
1.  Lands rezoned to a conditional zoning district shall be subject to the standards applicable to the parallel zoning district (including the range of allowable land uses), as modified by the more restrictive conditions proposed by the applicant and approved by the City Council for the conditional zoning district. These standards and approved conditions are perpetually binding on the land as an amendment to this Ordinance and the Official Zoning Map, and may only be changed in accordance with the procedure for zoning map amendment, conditional zoning, or planned development. 
2.  No condition shall have the effect of removing or amending any requirement of this Ordinance. 
3.  No permit or development approval shall be issued for development subject to a conditional zoning district except in accordance with the approved conditions and an accompanying conditional zoning plan (if submitted). 
F.  Amendment   
1.  Minor Changes Unless expressly prohibited by City Council in approval of a conditional zoning district, subsequent plans and permits for development within a conditional zoning district may include minor changes from the approved conditions, provided the development continues to meet the minimum requirements of this Ordinance. Minor changes are limited to changes that will result in equal or better compliance with the conditions of approval or that address technical considerations that could not reasonably be anticipated at the time of the conditional zoning approval. The following minor changes may be approved by the Planning and Development Director: 
(a)  Changes to the location of entrances or driveways, the rearrangement of internal streets, turn lanes, drives, or access restrictions; 
(b)  Changes to the configuration of parking areas; 
(c)  Changes to the configuration or location of open space or placement of required amenities; 
(d)  Changes to the arrangement or location of buildings, provided there is no increase in number; 
(e)  Changes to the proposed building elevation or facade, including materials, provided that the change retains the same general architectural character; 
(f)  Changes to the configuration of landscape yards, including types of materials; 
(g)  Increases in nonresidential gross floor area of up to 10 percent, or 50,000 square feet, whichever is less; and 
(h)  Changes to features on a conditional zoning plan that are not specifically conditioned. 
2.  Material Changes are Amendments Changes that materially affect the basic configuration of the development or are beyond the scope of a minor change are not considered minor changes, and shall be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for the original approval of a conditional zoning application. 
G.  Expiration If no application for approval of a preliminary plat, site plan, or group development for any part of the rezoned land is submitted within 3 years after approval of the conditional zoning, the P&Z may forward a recommendation to the City Council to initiate an application to rezone the land to a zoning district determined to be appropriate. Prior to making such a recommendation, the P&Z shall determine that the landowner(s) has been notified and given a reasonable opportunity to comment. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 4, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 1.C, 5.B, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.7. - Development Agreement 

A.  Applicability In order to provide more regulatory certainty, establish a schedule for development, coordinate the provision of public facilities, and improve management of environmentally sensitive lands, the City Council may enter into a development agreement with a developer, subject to Section 160A-400 of the North Carolina General Statutes, and the provisions of this section. In entering into a development agreement the City may not exercise any authority or make any commitment that is unauthorized by general or local act, and may not impose any unauthorized tax or fee. 
B.  Development Agreement Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.7.C, Development Agreement Review Standards. 
4.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
5.  P&Z Review and Recommendation   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.7, Review by P&Z or HPC). 
(b)  The P&Z, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation on the application in accordance with Section 2.4.7 C, Development Agreement Review Standards. 
6.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  The City Council, after the conclusion of a public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.7 C, Development Agreement Review Standards. 
(c)  The action taken shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Enter into the development agreement, as submitted; 
(2)  Enter into the development agreement, subject to changes agreed to in writing by the developer; or 
(3)  Not enter into the development agreement. 
7.  Recordation Within 14 days after entering into a development agreement, the applicant shall record the agreement in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county where the subject land is located. 
C.  Development Agreement Review Standards For consideration of the City to participate in a development agreement, a development subject to the agreement must meet the following: 
1.  The land subject to the development agreement shall contain 25 acres or more of developable land (exclusive of wetlands, mandatory buffers, unbuildable slopes, and other portions of the land that may be precluded from the property at the time of application). 
2.  The development shall demonstrate phasing, and participation in the proposed agreement shall not exceed 20 years. 
3.  The development shall demonstrate the impact on existing and future provisions of capital improvements by the City, including at least one of the following: transportation, potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, stormwater management, educational, parks and recreation, and health systems and facilities. 
D.  Effect   
1.  Burdens and Benefits The burdens of the development agreement are binding upon, and the benefits of the agreement shall inure to, all successors in interest to the parties to the agreement. 
2.  Rights and Obligations Rights and obligations established by a development agreement shall not preclude or supersede rights and obligations established pursuant to other law regarding building permits, site specific development plans, phased development plans, group developments, or other provisions of law. 
3.  Building and Housing Code A development agreement shall not exempt the property landowner or developer from compliance with the State Building Code or the City's Minimum Housing Code. 
4.  Identify Subsequently Enacted Laws Unless the development agreement specifically provides for the application of subsequently enacted laws, the laws applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement are those in force at the time of execution of the agreement. 
5.  Application of Subsequently Adopted Laws Except for grounds specified in Section 160A-385.1(e) of the North Carolina General Statutes, the City may not apply subsequently adopted ordinances or development policies to a development that is subject to a development agreement. 
6.  Change in State or Federal Law If state or federal law is changed after a development agreement has been entered into and the change prevents or precludes compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement, the City, by ordinance after notice and a hearing, may modify the affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or federal law has a fundamental effect on the development agreement. 
7.  Vested Rights This Ordinance does not abrogate any rights preserved by Sections 160A-385 or 160A-385.1 of the North Carolina General Statutes, or that may vest pursuant to common law or otherwise in the absence of a development agreement. 
E.  Approval of Debt If any of the obligations of the City in the development agreement constitute debt, the City shall comply, at the time of the obligation to incur the debt and before the debt becomes enforceable against the City, with any applicable constitutional and statutory procedures for the approval of the debt. The agreement shall be signed by the City Attorney, Finance Director, and the City Clerk. 
F.  Periodic Review and Breach of Agreement   
1.  Annual Review During any period of time in which a permit or development approval subject to a development agreement is active, the Planning and Development Director shall review the development at least once every year for compliance with the agreement and file a report with the City Council. The developer must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. Failure to meet a commencement or completion date specified in the development agreement shall not, in and of itself, constitute a material breach of the agreement, but must be judged based upon the totality of the circumstances. 
2.  Material Breach If the City Council finds and determines that the developer has committed a material breach of the terms or conditions of the development agreement, the City Attorney shall serve written notice of the breach upon the developer within a reasonable time after the periodic review. Such notice shall set forth with reasonable particularity the nature of the breach and the evidence supporting the finding and determination, and shall provide the developer a reasonable time in which to cure the material breach. 
3.  Failure to Cure Material Breach If the developer fails to cure the material breach within the time given, then the City Council may unilaterally terminate or modify the development agreement. 
G.  Amendment   
1.  Mutual Consent A development agreement may be amended or canceled by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or by their successors in interest. 
2.  Minor Change The Planning and Development Director may approve minor changes of the development agreement with the mutual consent of the other parties to the agreement, without following the same procedures as required for initial approval of the agreement, upon making written findings that the proposed minor changes would not significantly change the use, intensity, or design of the development, would be consistent with the purposes and goals of the agreement, would comply with this Ordinance, and would not adversely affect the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
3.  Material Changes are Amendments Consideration of a proposed material change of a development agreement beyond the scope of a minor change shall be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for the original approval of a development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.8. - Land Use Plan Amendment 
A.  Purpose The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform means for amending the High Point Land Use Plan whenever the public necessity, changed conditions, convenience, general welfare, or appropriate land use practices justify or require doing so. 
B.  Land Use Plan Amendment Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Citizen Information Meeting Optional (see Section 2.3.3, Citizen Information Meeting). 
3.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  Applications may be initiated by the City Council, the P&Z, the Planning and Development Director, any person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 2.3.4 A, Authority to File Applications, or any other interested party. 
4.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.8 C, Land Use Plan Amendment Review Standards. 

5.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
6.  P&Z Review and Recommendation   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.8, Review by P&Z or HPC). 
(b)  The P&Z, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation on an application in accordance with Section 2.4.8 C, Land Use Plan Amendment Review Standards. 
7.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  The City Council, after the conclusion of a public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.8 C, Land Use Plan Amendment Review Standards. 
(c)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Adoption of the Land Use Plan amendment as proposed; 
(2)  Adoption of a revised Land Use Plan amendment; 
(3)  Denial of the Land Use Plan amendment; or 
(4)  Remand of the Land Use Plan amendment application to the P&Z for further consideration. 
C.  Land Use Plan Amendment Review Standards Amending the High Point Land Use Plan is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny a proposed land use plan amendment, the City Council may consider whether and the extent to which the proposed land use plan amendment is appropriate and is consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance. 
D.  Amendment Amendment of a land use plan amendment may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.9. - Planned Development 

A.  Applicability This section provides a uniform means for amending the Official Zoning Map to establish a Planned Development (PD) zoning district. This Ordinance establishes two forms of planned development, one intended for lands within the Core City area (PD-CC), and one for peripheral lands located outside the Core City area (PD-P). 
B.  Planned Development Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Citizen Information Meeting Applicable (see Section 2.3.3, Citizen Information Meeting). 
3.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  Planned development applications may only be initiated by the landowner(s) of the land subject to the application. 
(c)  The application shall include a master plan map and a statement of intent and development standards completed in accordance with Section 3.7.3, Standards Applied to All Planned Development Districts. 
(d)  To ensure unified control, the application shall also include a copy of the title to all land that is part of the proposed PD zoning district classification. 
(e)  When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for review with the submittal of an application for a planned development. The procedure for preparation of a traffic impact analysis is described in the Development Guide. 
4.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The TRC shall review the application and comment on the availability of municipal services to the development. 
(c)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.9 C, Planned Development Review Standards 
5.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
6.  P&Z or HPC Review and Recommendation   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.7, Review by P&Z or HPC). 
(b)  If the application is for land located within a LHO district, the HPC, following a meeting, shall provide a recommendation on the application to the P&Z. The P&Z shall not make a recommendation on an application until they receive a recommendation from the HPC. 
(c)  The P&Z, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation on the application in accordance with Section 2.4.9 C, Planned Development Review Standards. 
(d)  Upon completion of the public hearing, the P&Z shall comment on the application's consistency with the City's adopted policy guidance. 
7.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  The City Council, after the conclusion of a public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.9 C, Planned Development Review Standards. The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Adoption of the planned development as proposed; 
(2)  Adoption of a revised planned development; 
(3)  Denial of the planned development; or 
(4)  Remand of the planned development application to the P&Z for further consideration. 
(c)  As part of the decision, the City Council shall adopt a written statement of consistency and reasonableness that: 
(1)  Describes whether the decision is consistent with all applicable City- adopted policy guidance; and 
(2)  Explains why the decision is reasonable and in the public interest. 
8.  Changes to Application An applicant may change the standards associated with a planned development zoning application until 22 days prior to the initial review by the P&Z. After that time, the applicant may only propose changes in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Changes shall be made in writing to the Planning and Development Director during or after the hearing conducted by the P&Z but no closer than 48 hours prior to final action by the City Council on the planned development application; 
(b)  Changes shall be signed by all landowners or those authorized to submit the application; and 
(c)  Changes shall be approved by P&Z, or the City Council, depending upon the time the changes were submitted by the applicant. 
9.  Designation on the Official Zoning Map The Planning and Development Director shall place the planned development district classification on the Official Zoning Map promptly after approval of a planned development district classification by the City Council. 
C.  Planned Development Review Standards The advisability of establishing a planned development district classification is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny a planned development, the City Council shall consider the following: 
1.  Consistency with Adopted Policy Guidance Whether a decision to approve, or to deny, the proposed PD zoning district is consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance. 
2.  Consistency with PD District Standards   
(a)  Whether the proposed PD district meets the standards of Section 3.7.3., Standards Applied to All Planned Development Districts. 
(b)  Whether the proposed PD district meets the standards of Section 3.7.5., PD-CC District if in the Core City Area, or the standards of Section 3.7.6, PD-P District if outside the Core City Area. 
3.  Compatibility with Surrounding Areas   
(a)  Whether development along the perimeter of the proposed PD district is compatible with adjacent existing or proposed development. 
(b)  Where there are issues of compatibility, the master plan map, statement of intent and the standards document shall establish transition areas along the perimeter of the PD district that provide for appropriate buffering and ensure a complimentary character of development. 
(c)  Determination of complimentary character shall be based on densities/intensities, use types, lot sizes and dimensions, building height, mass and scale, exterior lighting, siting of service areas, or other aspects identified by the City Council. 
4.  Promotes a Preferred Development Pattern   
(a)  Whether and the extent to which there have been changes in the type or nature of development in the area of the proposed PD zoning district that support the application. 
(b)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed PD zoning district will result in development that promotes a logical, preferred, and orderly development pattern. 
5.  Mitigation of Impacts How the proposed PD District, including the proposed use(s), standards, and PD Master Plan, will satisfactorily: 
(a)  Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse impact on adjacent and nearby land, such as that caused by traffic, parking, noise, lighting, trash, loading areas, etc.; 
(b)  Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse environmental impact on water and air resources, minimize land disturbance, preserve trees, and protect habitat; 
(c)  Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse impact on municipal facilities and services, such as streets, potable water and wastewater facilities, parks, police, and fire; and 
(d)  Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse effect on the use, enjoyment, or value of adjacent lands. 
6.  Reasonableness/Public Interest Why a decision to approve, or to deny, the proposed PD District would be reasonable and in the public interest. 
D.  Effect   
1.  Lands rezoned to a planned development district shall be subject to the approved master plan map and the statement of intent and development standards document. The master plan map and the statement of intent and development standards document are binding on the land as an amendment to the Official Zoning Map. The applicant may apply for and obtain subsequent development permits and approvals necessary to implement the planned development master plan map and the statement of intent and development standards document in accordance with the appropriate procedures and standards in this Ordinance. Any permits or development approvals shall comply with the planned development master plan map and the statement of intent and development standards document. 
2.  The PD master plan map, statement of intent and development standards document shall not include any standards which: 
(a)  Specifies the ownership status, race, religion, or other characteristics of the occupants of housing units; 
(b)  Establishes a minimum size of a dwelling unit; 
(c)  Establishes a minimum value of buildings or improvements; 
(d)  Excludes residents based upon race, religion, or income; or 
(e)  Obligates the City to perform in any manner relative to the approval of the PD District or development of the land. 
E.  Amendment   
1.  Minor Changes Subsequent plans and permits for development within a planned development district may include minor changes to the approved master plan map or statement of intent and development standards, provided the development continues to meet the minimum requirements of this Ordinance. Minor changes are limited to changes that have no material effect on the character of the planned development or any of its terms or conditions or changes that address technical consideration that could not reasonably be anticipated at the time of the planned development approval. The following minor changes may be approved by the Planning and Development Director: 
(a)  Changes to the location of entrances or driveways, the rearrangement of internal streets, turn lanes, drives, or access restrictions; 
(b)  Changes to the configuration of parking areas; 
(c)  Changes to the configuration or location of open space or placement of required amenities; 
(d)  Changes to the configuration of landscape yards, including types of materials; 
(e)  Changes to the proposed building elevation or facade, including materials, provided that the change retains the same general architectural character; and 
(f)  Changes to the arrangement or location of buildings provided there is no increase in the number of buildings or size. 
2.  Material Changes are Amendments   
(a)  Changes that materially affect the basic concept of the planned development master plan or basic parameters establishing the terms and conditions or that exceed the scope of a minor change are not considered minor changes. They shall be considered amendments. Amendments include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Changes in use designations; 
(2)  Density/intensity increases; 
(3)  Decreases in open space; 
(4)  Substantial changes in the location of streets (particularly if streets are to be deleted or access points to the development moved so traffic flows both inside and outside the development are affected); 
(5)  Change in the location of any public easement; or 
(6)  Change in the proportion of housing types by more than 15 percent. 
(b)  Amendments shall be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for the original approval of a planned development application. 
F.  Expiration If no application for approval of a preliminary plat, site plan, or group development for any part of the planned development is submitted within 3 years after approval of the planned development, the P&Z may forward a recommendation to the City Council to initiate an application to rezone the land to a zoning district determined to be appropriate. Prior to making such a recommendation, the P&Z shall determine that the landowner(s) has been notified and given a reasonable opportunity to comment. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 3.A, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.10. - Reasonable Accommodation 
A.  Applicability This section provides a procedure for reasonable accommodation of eligible persons in cases where the strict application of the standards of this Ordinance would deprive them of their right to equal opportunity to use a dwelling under the Federal Fair Housing Act. 
B.  Eligible Persons   
1.  An eligible person is a person who meets the definition of a disabled or handicapped person under federal law. 
2.  A person recovering from substance abuse is considered a person with a disability or handicap provided they are not currently engaging in the illegal use of controlled substances. 

C.  Reasonable Accommodation Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Required (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  An application for reasonable accommodation may be made by any of the following: 
(1)  A person with a disability or handicap, or their legal representative; or 
(2)  A provider of housing for persons with disabilities or handicaps. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance, an application for reasonable accommodation shall also include the following: 
(1)  The basis for the claim that the applicant or persons receiving services from the applicant is considered disabled or handicapped under federal law; 
(2)  The Ordinance provision from which the reasonable accommodation is being requested; and 
(3)  An explanation of why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific land or development available for the applicant. 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, and after consultation with the City Attorney, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.10 D, Reasonable Accommodation Review Standards. 
4.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
5.  BOA Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and Section 2.3.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures). 
(b)  The BOA, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall decide the application. 
(c)  The decision shall be based on the competent, material, and subsequent evidence in the record, as supplemented by the arguments presented at the quasi-judicial hearing, and the standards in Section 2.4.10 D, Reasonable Accommodation Review Standards. 
(d)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Approval of the reasonable accommodation application as proposed; 
(2)  Approval of the reasonable accommodation application with revisions; or 
(3)  Denial of the application. 
(e)  Each decision shall be made in writing and reflect the BOA's determination of contested facts and their application to the standards in this Ordinance. 
(f)  The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the BOA. 
(g)  The decision of the BOA shall be effective upon the filing of the written decision. 
6.  Notification of Decision The decision of the BOA may shall be delivered by personal service, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, the landowner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person providing notification of decision shall certify that proper notification has been made. 
D.  Reasonable Accommodation Review Standards   
1.  A reasonable accommodation application shall be approved on a finding the proposed accommodation: 
(a)  Will be used by an individual or individuals with a disability or handicap protected under federal law; 
(b)  Is the minimum needed to provide accommodation; and 
(c)  Is reasonable and necessary. 
2.  For the purposes of this section, an accommodation is reasonable if it would not undermine the legitimate purposes of this Ordinance, it does not constitute a substantial alteration of this Ordinance or other City standard, and it will not impose significant financial and administrative burden upon the City. 
3.  For the purposes of this section, an accommodation is necessary if it would provide direct or meaningful therapeutic amelioration of the effects of the particular disability or handicap, and would afford handicapped or disabled persons equal opportunity to use housing in the City. 
E.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
F.  Effect   
1.  Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
2.  A reasonable accommodation shall not affect an applicant's obligation to comply with other applicable standards in this Ordinance that are not the subject of the reasonable accommodation application. 
G.  Amendment Amendment of an application for reasonable accommodation may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
H.  Expiration Approval of a reasonable accommodation shall describe the conditions or events that would terminate the reasonable accommodation or cause it to expire. 
I.  Appeal Any decision by the BOA shall be subject to Superior Court review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.11. - Right-of-Way Encroachment 

A.  Applicability Development proposing to encroach, either above or below ground, into a City-maintained right-of-way shall gain approval of a right-of-way encroachment in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section, prior to encroachment. Installation of a driveway does not constitute a right-of-way encroachment. 
B.  Above-Ground Encroachment Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  The person seeking approval to encroach may file an application for a right-of-way encroachment. 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The TRC shall review and comment on infrastructure-related issues associated with the application. 
(c)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.11 D, Right-of-Way Encroachment Review Standards. 
4.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  The City Council, after conclusion of a public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.11 D, Right-of-Way Encroachment Review Standards. 
(c)  The action taken shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Approval of the encroachment as proposed; 
(2)  Approval of a revised encroachment; 
(3)  Denial of the encroachment; or 
(4)  Remand of the encroachment application to City staff for further review. 
C.  Below-Ground Encroachment Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The TRC shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.11 D, Right-of-Way Encroachment Review Standards. 

D.  Right-of-Way Encroachment Review Standards A right-of-way encroachment shall be approved on a decision that the applicant demonstrates: 
1.  The right-of-way encroachment is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance; 
2.  The City is properly indemnified by the applicant against liability arising from the placement of structures within the right-of-way; 
3.  Evidence is furnished of insurance covering liability arising from the proposed encroachment, if any; and 
4.  Any above-ground encroachment is outside areas needed for pedestrian or vehicular safety, or the visual obstruction has been properly mitigated. 
E.  Effect Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
F.  Amendment Amendment of a right-of-way encroachment may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.12. - Special Use 
A.  Applicability Uses identified as requiring a special use in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, shall be approved as a special use in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section, prior to development. A special use is a use that may be appropriate in a zoning district, but because of its nature, extent, and external effects, requires special consideration of its location, design, and methods of operation before it can be deemed appropriate in the district and compatible with its surroundings. 
B.  Special Use Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Citizen Information Meeting Applicable (see Section 2.3.3, Citizen Information Meeting). 
3.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  An application shall be submitted only by the landowner(s), and shall include a site plan. 
(c)  When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for review with the submittal of an application for a special use. The procedure for review of a traffic impact analysis is described in the Development Guide. 
4.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.12 C, Special Use Review Standards. 
5.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
6.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and 2.3.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures). 

(b)  The City Council, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.12 C, Special Use Review Standards. The decision shall be the one of the following: 
(1)  Approval of the special use as proposed; 
(2)  Approval of a revised special use; 
(3)  Denial of the special use; or 
(4)  Remand of the special use application to the P&Z for further consideration. 
(c)  Any conditions of approval shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements of this Ordinance. 
C.  Special Use Review Standards A special use shall be approved upon a finding that the applicant demonstrates the proposed special use: 
1.  Will not materially endanger the public health or safety if located where proposed; 
2.  Complies with all required standards, conditions, and specifications of this Ordinance, including Chapter 4: Uses; 
3.  Will not substantially injure the value of the abutting land, or the special use is a public necessity; 
4.  Will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located; and 
5.  Is in general conformity with the City's adopted policy guidance. 
D.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
E.  Effect   
1.  Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
2.  A special use and the associated site plan approval are perpetually binding and run with the land, unless amended. 
3.  An action invalidating a special use condition of approval for any reason shall render the special use null and void. 
F.  Amendment   
1.  Minor Changes   
(a)  The City Council may approve a minor change to a special use requested by the applicant without a public hearing, upon receipt of a report from the Planning and Development Director on the proposed minor change. 
(b)  A minor change includes changes to conditions of a special use or associated site plan which will result in equal or better performance of the conditions and that do not alter the objectives and purposes of the special use. 
(c)  In granting a minor change, the City Council may require such conditions as will address the objectives of the requirements or conditions changed. 
2.  Material Changes are Amendments   
(a)  A material change to a special use or to an associated site plan that alters the objectives and purposes of the requirements or conditions of the special use constitute an amendment to the special use. 
(b)  An amendment includes but is not limited to: 
(1)  Boundary changes; 
(2)  Use changes; and 
(3)  Increases in density or intensity of development. 
(c)  Amendments of a special use may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
G.  State and Federal Requirements Special uses shall meet all applicable federal and state requirements for location and operation. Failure to maintain compliance with those requirements may result in the revocation of the special use. 
H.  Expiration   
1.  General   
(a)  Unless otherwise stated in the special use approval, a special use shall expire and become null and void 18 months after the date of issuance if a footing inspection for the development approved has not been passed or an applicant has not requested an extension in accordance with Section 2.4.12 H.2 below. 
(b)  If development approved as a special use is discontinued for a period exceeding 18 months, or if a special use is replaced by a use otherwise permitted by right in the zoning district, the special use approval is deemed abandoned and the special use approval is null and void. 
2.  Extension   
(a)  An applicant may request an extension of a special use approval in writing to the Planning and Development Director at least 30 days prior to expiration. 
(b)  Extension requests are considered as minor changes and shall be reviewed and approved by City Council in accordance with Section 2.4.12 F.1 above. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 1.C, 2.G, 2.H, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.13. - Street Abandonment 
A.  Applicability This section provides a procedure for requests to abandon any platted or dedicated street or alley rights-of-way determined to be unnecessary for the movement of vehicles in the City, in accordance with Section 160A-299 of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
B.  Street Abandonment Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference   
(a)  Applicable (See Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
(b)  The TRC shall review the application and comment on municipal service and infrastructure issues associated with the abandonment. 

2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  Applications may be initiated by the City or landowners abutting a street. 
(c)  If the City Council wishes to abandon a public street or alley it shall adopt a resolution of intent to close the street or alley. 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.13 C, Street Abandonment Review Standards. 
4.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
5.  P&Z Review and Recommendation   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.8, Review by P&Z or HPC). 
(b)  The P&Z, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation on the application in accordance with Section 2.4.13 C, Street Abandonment Review Standards. 
6.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  The City Council, after the conclusion of a public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.13 C, Street Abandonment Review Standards. 
(c)  The action taken shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Approve abandonment of all or a portion of the street or alley right-of-way; 
(2)  Approve abandonment of all or a portion of the street or alley right-of-way with retention of all or a portion of the utility or other easement; 
(3)  Denial of the street abandonment; or 
(4)  Remand of the street abandonment application to the P&Z for further consideration. 
C.  Street Abandonment Review Standards A street abandonment application shall be approved on a decision that the applicant demonstrates: 
1.  Closing of the street or alley is in the best interest of the public; and 
2.  A landowner in the vicinity of the street or alley would not be deprived of reasonable ingress or egress to their land. 
D.  Recordation The Planning and Development Director shall file a certified copy of the street abandonment approval in the office of the Register of Deeds in the county where the subject street is located within a reasonable period of time after the approval. 
E.  Effect Where a platted street or alley is abandoned in accordance with this section, the regulations applicable to a lot shall apply to the portion of the lot formerly occupied by the abandoned street or alley. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.14. - Street Name Change 
A.  Applicability This section establishes a uniform street name change procedure in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of City residents and visitors by improving emergency response times and ease of locating destinations. 
B.  Street Name Change Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  The City Council or any governmental department of the City, the P&Z, or any landowner of land along the street where a name change is proposed may initiate a request to change the name of a street. 
(c)  An application for a street name change submitted by landowners along the street shall include a petition of support for the name change signed by a minimum of 66.67 percent of the number of different landowners that are affected by the renaming. The petition shall indicate the desired new street name. No petition shall be required for City-initiated applications. 
(d)  The application shall not be accepted until the Planning and Development Director confirms the availability of the proposed new street name. 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.14 C, Street Name Change Review Standards. 

4.  Determination of Merit   
(a)  Each street name change request filed by the required deadline shall be forwarded to the P&Z and placed on the next scheduled regular meeting to determine whether the request should be granted a public hearing. If the P&Z determines that the request should be heard, it shall set the date, time and place for a public hearing. 
(b)  When a change is initiated due to public safety or emergency service delivery issues, no merit determination is needed and the request shall be placed on the next scheduled regular meeting for public hearing and decision. 
(c)  If the P&Z decides not to conduct a public hearing on the street name change request, it shall be considered a denial of the request. 
5.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification), whenever a public hearing has been scheduled for a street name change request. 
6.  P&Z Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  If a public hearing is conducted, the P&Z, at the conclusion of the public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.14 C, Street Name Change Review Standards. 
(c)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Approval of the street name change as submitted; 
(2)  Approval of the street name change, with revisions; or 
(3)  Denial of the street name change. 
(d)  The P&Z may consider and approve a name change for a portion of the request or a change of prefix or suffix without a new submittal or additional hearing. The P&Z shall not approve alterations to the primary name requested, nor approve the application of the name to a street or segment thereof not included in the original request, without re-notification and re-hearing. 
C.  Street Name Change Review Standards A street name change shall be approved on a finding that the applicant demonstrates: 
1.  The street name change is in accordance with the City's Street Name and Address Assignment Guidelines and Policies as included in the Development Guide ; 
2.  The street name change will serve the public interest by enhancing public safety or that it will do no harm; 
3.  The street name change will not adversely affect land values or cause excessive economic impact to landowners or the City; and 
4.  The street name change will result in an overall public good that generally cannot be measured in monetary terms, but is found to outweigh known or perceived economic interests and costs. 
D.  Effect   
1.  All approved street name change applications shall have an effective date at least 45 days from the date of approval, but may be further delayed for a set period of time not to exceed 1 year, to assist businesses and other affected landowners in preparing for the name change. 
2.  Street name changes initiated by City Council, P&Z, or other City department due to public safety or emergency service delivery issues may take effect immediately upon approval. 
E.  Amendment An application for a street name change with the same name for the same street or portion of the same street shall not be filed within 2 years from the date of final action on the previous request, unless the P&Z determines a substantial change has occurred in the nature of the application that merits reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.15. - Text Amendment 
A.  Applicability This section provides a uniform means for amending the text of this Ordinance whenever the public necessity, changed conditions, convenience, general welfare, or appropriate land use practices justify or require doing so. 
B.  Text Amendment Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  Applications may be initiated by the City Council; any board, commission, or department of the City; any landowner; or any resident of the city. 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.15 C, Text Amendment Review Standards. 
4.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
5.  P&Z Review and Recommendation   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.8, Review by P&Z or HPC). 
(b)  The P&Z, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation on an application in accordance with Section 2.4.15 C, Text Amendment Review Standards. 
(c)  The P&Z shall comment on whether or not the text amendment is consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance. 
6.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  The City Council, after the conclusion of a public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.15 C, Text Amendment Review Standards. 
(c)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Adoption of the text amendment as proposed; 
(2)  Adoption of a revised text amendment; 
(3)  Denial of the text amendment; or 
(4)  Remand of the text amendment application to the P&Z for further consideration. 
(d)  In making its decision, the City Council shall adopt a written statement of consistency and reasonableness that: 
(1)  Describes whether the decision is consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance; and 
(2)  Explains why the decision is reasonable and in the public interest. 
C.  Text Amendment Review Standards The advisability of amending the text of this Ordinance is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny the proposed text amendment, the City Council may weigh the relevance of and consider whether and the extent to which the proposed text amendment: 

1.  Is consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance; 
2.  Is not in conflict with any provision of this Ordinance or the City of High Point Code of Ordinances; 
3.  Is required by changed conditions; 
4.  Addresses a demonstrated community need; 
5.  Addresses an unforeseen matter not present when the Ordinance was adopted; 
6.  Is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning districts in this Ordinance, or would improve compatibility among uses and ensure efficient development within the city; 
7.  Would result in a logical and orderly development pattern; and 
8.  Would not result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment, including but not limited to water, air, noise, stormwater management, wildlife, vegetation, and the natural functioning of the environment. 
D.  Effect Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
E.  Amendment Amendment of a text amendment approval may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.16. - Variance 
A.  Applicability Development that would otherwise be subject to undue and unique hardship from the applications of the standards in this Ordinance may seek relief from the standards in accordance with this section. 
B.  Variances Distinguished This section sets out the procedure and review standards for two type of variances. 
1.  The zoning variance procedure may be used to seek hardship relief from the dimensional standards in this Ordinance. A variance shall not be requested to: 
(a)  Vary from density or intensity beyond that allowed in a base zoning district; 
(b)  Permit a use not allowed in a zoning district; 
(c)  Modify any standards in Section 5.7, Signage other than sign height or allowable sign location; or 
(d)  Allow a prohibited use. 
2.  The flood damage prevention variance may be used to request relief from the standards in Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention, for: 
(a)  The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures when the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not affect the structure's designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; 
(b)  A functionally dependent facility, provided it is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety; and 
(c)  Any other type of development, provided it meets the standards of this section for a flood damage prevention variance. 

C.  Variance Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.16 D, Variance Review Standards. 
4.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
5.  HPC Review and Recommen-
dation   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.8, Review by P&Z or HPC). 
(b)  If the application is for land located within a LHO district, the HPC, following a meeting, shall provide a recommendation on the application to the BOA. The BOA shall not make a decision on an application until they receive a recommendation from the HPC. 
6.  BOA Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and Section 2.3.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures). 
(b)  The BOA, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall decide the application for a variance. 
(c)  The decision shall be based on the competent, material, and subsequent evidence in the record, as supplemented by the arguments presented at the quasi-judicial hearing, and the standards in Section 2.4.16 D, Variance Review Standards. 
(d)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Approval of the variance as proposed; 
(2)  Approval of the variance with revisions; or 
(3)  Denial of the variance. 
(e)  Each decision shall be made in writing and reflect the BOA's determination of contested facts and their application to the standards in this Ordinance. 
(f)  The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the BOA. 
(g)  The decision of the BOA shall be effective upon the filing of the written decision. 
7.  Notification of Decision The decision of the BOA shall be delivered by personal service, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, the landowner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person providing notification of decision shall certify that proper notification has been made. 
D.  Variance Review Standards   
1.  Zoning Variance Standards A zoning variance shall be approved upon evidence presented that demonstrates the following requirements are met and the required findings are made: 
(a)  General Requirements   
(1)  A variance shall not be granted to permit a use that is expressly or determined to be prohibited in the zoning district. 
(2)  A variance shall not be granted to permit a density not allowed in the zoning district. 
(3)  A variance shall not be granted to standards that pertain to the number, size, illumination or minimum spacing of signs. 
(4)  It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property. 
(5)  The hardship must be real and substantial, and mere inconvenience or additional expense are not an adequate basis for a hardship. 
(6)  Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance. 
(7)  Neither the nonconforming use of lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district, nor the permitted use of lands, buildings, or structures in other zoning districts shall be considered as the basis for granting a variance. 
(8)  The act of purchasing property with knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of the variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship. 
(9)  The variance granted is the minimum necessary to make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
(10)  The variance granted must not create a nuisance or violate other laws. 
(b)  Required Findings   
(1)  Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the Ordinance. 
(2)  The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as location, size, or topography. 
(3)  The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the property owner. 
(4)  The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of the Ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and substantial justice is achieved. 
2.  Flood Damage Prevention Variance Standards A zoning variance shall be approved upon evidence presented that demonstrates the following requirements are met and the required findings are made: 
(a)  General Requirements   
(1)  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Approval of the variance will not render the structure in violation of applicable federal, state, or local requirements. 
(3)  Approval of the variance will not result in any increase in flood levels within any designated floodway or non-encroachment area during the base flood discharge. 
(4)  The variance is issued prior to any other prerequisite permit or development approvals. 
(5)  Consideration shall be given to all of the following factors: 
(i)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands and injure others; 
(ii)  The danger to life and land due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(iii)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual landowner; 
(iv)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(v)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as a functionally-dependent facility; 
(vi)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(vii)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(viii)  The relationship of the proposed use to the City's adopted policy guidance and the City's floodplain management program; 
(ix)  The safety of access to the use in times of flood for ordinary emergency vehicles; 
(x)  The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(xi)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(b)  Required Findings   
(1)  There is a good and sufficient cause to grant the variance. 
(2)  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship. 
(3)  Granting the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with this Ordinance. 
E.  Conditions of Approval In granting a variance the BOA may prescribe conditions of approval to ensure compliance with the standards of this section, and to assure that the use of the land to which the variance applies will be compatible with surrounding lands and will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood. 
1.  A variance granted subject to a condition of approval shall be permitted as long as there is compliance with the condition. 
2.  Violation of a condition of approval shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. 
3.  If a violation or invalidation of a condition of approval occurs, the Planning and Development Director may revoke the certificate of occupancy for the development subject to the variance. 
F.  Effect   
1.  General Approval of a zoning variance or flood damage prevention variance authorizes only the particular regulatory relief approved by the BOA. It does not exempt the applicant from the responsibility to obtain all other permits or development approvals required by this Ordinance or any other applicable laws, and does not indicate that the development for which the variance is granted should receive other permits or development approvals under this Ordinance unless the relevant and applicable portions of this Ordinance are met. 
2.  Notification Regarding Flood Insurance Costs   
(a)  An applicant for whom a flood damage prevention variance is approved shall be provided written notice by the Planning and Development Director specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is built. The notice shall inform the applicant about the risks to life and property from construction below the BFE and that issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
(b)  The notification shall be maintained by the Engineering Services Director with the record of the flood damage prevention variance action. 
3.  Records Upon request, the Engineering Services Director shall report all flood damage prevention variances approved in accordance with this section to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State of North Carolina. 
G.  Amendment Amendment of a variance may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
H.  Expiration If the BOA does not include a time period by which development subject to a zoning variance or a flood damage prevention variance expires, development shall commence within 12 months of the date of issuance of the variance or the variance shall expire and become null and void. 
I.  Appeal Any decision by the BOA shall be subject to Superior Court review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 1.D, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 1.C, 6, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.17. - Vested Rights Certificate 
A.  Applicability   
1.  A vested right may be established, in accordance with Section 160A-385.1 of the North Carolina General Statutes and this section, for the following permits and development approvals: 
(a)  Site plans; 
(b)  Group development plans; or 
(c)  Preliminary plats. 
2.  Any application for a vested rights certificate shall be processed concurrently or after the approval of a site plan, group development plan, or a preliminary plat. 
B.  Vested Rights Certificate Procedure   

1.  Pre-Application Conference Required (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  Applications may be initiated by the landowner or any person who may submit an application in accordance with Section 2.3.4 A, Authority to File Applications. 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.17 C, Vested Rights Certificate Review Standards. 
4.  Public Notification Applicable (See Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
5.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable. (See Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and 2.3.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures). 
(b)  The City Council, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.17 C, Vested Rights Certificate Review Standards. 
(c)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Approval of the vested rights certificate as proposed; 
(2)  Approval of a revised vested rights certificate; 
(3)  Denial of vested rights certificate; or 
(4)  Remand of the vested rights certificate application to the Planning and Development Director for further review. 
C.  Vested Rights Certificate Review Standards A vested rights certificate shall be approved if the applicant demonstrates: 
1.  The vested rights certificate is for an approved site plan, group development plan, or preliminary plat; 
2.  The development is valid and unexpired; and 
3.  Any required variances have been obtained. 
D.  Effect   
1.  Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
2.  A vested rights certificate shall be approved prior to issuance of a building permit. 
E.  Amendment Amendment of vested rights certificate may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
F.  Expiration   
1.  A vested right certificate shall expire and become null and void: 
(a)  If a building permit application for the development subject to the certificate is not submitted within 5 years of the approval of the vested rights certificate. 
(b)  Upon a finding by the City Council after notice and a public hearing, that: 
(1)  Natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the land, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as contemplated; or 
(2)  The landowner or landowner's representative intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which affected the approval of the site plan, group development, preliminary plat, or vested right certificate; or 
(3)  The landowner failed to comply with any condition imposed upon the establishment of the site plan, group development, preliminary plat, or vested right certificate. 
(c)  Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for all costs, expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural, planning, marketing, legal, and other consultant fees incurred after approval of the certificate by the City, together with interest at the legal rate until paid. Compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the land which is caused by such action. 
(d)  With the written consent of the affected landowner. 
2.  Upon enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site plan, group development, or preliminary plat, the City Council may modify the affected provisions of the certificate by ordinance, if after conducting a hearing, it finds the changed conditions created by the change in the state or federal law have a fundamental effect on the site plan, group development, or preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.18. - Voluntary Annexation 
A.  Applicability The City Council may consider voluntary annexation petitions, prepared in accordance with the standards in this section, from: 
1.  The landowner of land that is contiguous with the City's corporate limits; and 
2.  The landowner of land that is not contiguous to the corporate limits when the proposed voluntary annexation complies with the following standards: 
(a)  The land proposed for annexation is no more than 3 miles from the contiguous corporate limits; and 
(b)  No portion of the land proposed for annexation is closer to the contiguous corporate limits of another municipality unless the land is subject to an approved annexation agreement that includes the land within the City's planning area; and 
(c)  If the land proposed for annexation is part of a recorded subdivision, all lots in the recorded subdivision are part of the annexation petition; and 
(d)  The combined total land area associated with the annexation, when added to all other noncontiguous land areas annexed by the City does not exceed 10 percent of the land area located within the City's contiguous corporate limits. 
B.  Voluntary Annexation Review Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 

2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  The voluntary annexation petition shall be signed by all the landowners of land proposed for annexation. 
(c)  Applications shall be accompanied by an application for a zoning map amendment for the subject land in accordance with Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment, unless the land is within the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. 
(d)  The voluntary annexation petition shall include a signed statement declaring whether or not any vested right with respect to the land subject to the petition has been established under Section 160A-385.1 or 153A-344.1 of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  Following receipt of a voluntary annexation petition the City Clerk shall investigate and certify whether the petition is legally sufficient. If certified as legally sufficient, the petition shall be reviewed in accordance with this section. 
(c)  The TRC shall review the application and comment on the City's ability to provide municipal services. 
(d)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.18 C, Voluntary Annexation Review Standards. 
4.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
5.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  The City Council, after the conclusion of a public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.18 C, Voluntary Annexation Review Standards. 
(c)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Approval of the voluntary annexation petition; 
(2)  Denial of the voluntary annexation petition; or 
(3)  Remand of the voluntary annexation petition to the Planning and Development Director for further review. 
C.  Voluntary Annexation Review Standards Approval of a voluntary annexation is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council. The voluntary annexation petition may be approved upon a finding the petition complies with all the standards in Section 160A-31 or Section 160A-58 of the North Carolina General Statutes, as appropriate, and: 
1.  The voluntary annexation petition bears the signatures of all landowners within the area to be annexed; 
2.  The area to be annexed can be adequately served by the same municipal services provided within the City's primary corporate limits; 
3.  The debt obligations from serving the subject lands do not exceed the anticipated revenues to the City; and 
4.  The public health, safety, and welfare of City residents and the residents of the lands proposed for annexation will be best served by the annexation. 
D.  Recording An ordinance approving a voluntary annexation adopted by the City, together with a map of the annexed area, shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for the county where the land is located within a reasonable period of time after adoption of the annexation. 
E.  Effect   
1.  Within 60 days of voluntary annexation, the City Council shall adopt a zoning district classification for the land involved. The City Council may consider a City-initiated or landowner-initiated zoning map amendment immediately following approval of the annexation. 
2.  Upon the effective date of annexation, the land shall be subject to the debts, laws, ordinances and regulations of the City, and shall be entitled to the same privileges and benefits as other parts of the City. 
F.  Expiration Land may be de-annexed only by act of the North Carolina General Assembly. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.19. - Watershed Variance 
A.  Applicability Development that would otherwise be subject to undue and unique hardship from the applications of the State's watershed protection standards in this Ordinance may seek relief from those standards in accordance with this section. Where the watershed protection standards exceed the State's minimum watershed protection standards, then a modification to the requirements may be requested in accordance with Section 6.2.16, Watershed Modifications. 
B.  Variances Distinguished There are 2 types of watershed variance: 
1.  Major Watershed Variances A major watershed variance is a variance from the minimum State watershed protection rules that result in the relaxation of: 
(a)  Any buffer, density, or built-upon area requirement by a factor greater than 5 percent under the high density option; 
(b)  Any variation in the design, maintenance or operation requirements of a wet detention pond or other approved stormwater management system; 
(c)  Any management requirement by a factor greater than 10 percent under the low density option; or 
(d)  Any variance that pertains to activities impacting Zone 1 of a surface water buffer. 
2.  Minor Watershed Variances A minor watershed variance is a variance from the minimum State watershed protection rules that result in the relaxation of: 
(a)  Any buffer, density or built-upon area requirement by a factor of up to 5 percent under the high density option; 
(b)  Any management requirement by a factor up to 10 percent under the low density option; or 
(c)  Any variance that pertains to activities impacting Zone 2 of a surface water buffer. 
C.  Major Watershed Variance Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The TRC shall review the application and the associated watershed development plan, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.19 E, Watershed Variance Review Standards. 

(c)  In the case of water supply watersheds, the City shall notify and allow a reasonable comment period for all local governments having jurisdiction in the applicable designated watershed and any entity using the water supply for consumption where a major watershed variance is being considered. 
4.  City Council Review and Recommendation   
(a)  The City Council shall review the application and make a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.19 E, Watershed Variance Review Standards. 
(b)  In making a watershed variance recommendation, the City Council may suggest conditions to assure that the use of the land will be compatible with surrounding lands and will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood. 
(c)  If the City Council recommends approval, the application shall be forwarded to the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission (EMC) with a report containing the findings of fact for City Council's favorable recommendation, conclusions of law, a recommended decision, recommended conditions and a record of the Council's decision on the request. 
(d)  If the City Council does not recommend approval, it shall be deemed disapproved and shall not be forwarded to the EMC. 
D.  Minor Watershed Variance Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The TRC shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.19 E, Watershed Variance Review Standards. 

(c)  In approving a watershed variance, the TRC may apply conditions to assure that the use of the land will be compatible with surrounding properties and will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood. 
E.  Watershed Variance Review Standards   
1.  Required Findings A watershed variance (major or minor) shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates all of the following: 
(a)  Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property. 
(b)  The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as location, size or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance. 
(c)  The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of the variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship. 
(d)  The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and substantial justice is achieved. 
2.  Other Considerations In addition to the making the required findings in subsection (1) above, the TRC and City Council, as applicable, may also consider the following: 
(a)  The watershed variance approval is the minimum necessary to make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
(b)  None of the following may be used as the basis for approving a watershed variance: 
(1)  Neither the nonconforming use of lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district, nor the permitted use of lands, buildings, or structures in other zoning districts, nor personal circumstances; 
(2)  Hardships resulting from factors other than application of the relevant standards of this Ordinance; 
(3)  The fact that land or a structure may be utilized more profitably or be more marketable with a variance; or 
(4)  Financial hardship. 
F.  Effect   
1.  Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
2.  The Planning and Development Director shall keep a record of all watershed variances in accordance with Section 6.2.17 D, Record Keeping. 
G.  Amendment Amendment of a watershed variance may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
H.  Expiration An approved watershed variance is part of an approved plan and shall have the same duration as the original plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 5, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.4.20. - Zoning Map Amendment 
A.  Applicability This section provides a uniform means for reviewing and deciding proposed amendments to the Official Zoning Map whenever the public necessity, general welfare, the City's adopted policy guidance, or appropriate land use practices justify or require doing so. 
B.  Zoning Map Amendment Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Applicable (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Citizen Information Meeting Applicable when a more intense zoning district classification is being requested (see Section 2.3.3, Citizen Information Meeting). 
3.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  Applications may be initiated by the City Council or all landowner(s) of the land in the proposed Zoning Map Amendment application. (SL 1989-88) 
(c)  When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for review with the submittal of an application for a zoning map amendment. The procedure for preparation of a traffic impact analysis is described in the Development Guide. 
4.  Staff Review   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application, prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.4.20 C, Zoning Map Amendment Review Standards. 
5.  Public Notification Applicable (see Section 2.3.6, Public Notification). 
6.  P&Z or HPC Review and Recommendation   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.8, Review by P&Z or HPC). 
(b)  If the application is for land located within a LHO district, the HPC, following a meeting, shall provide a recommendation on the application to the P&Z. The P&Z shall not make a recommendation until they receive a recommendation from the HPC. 
(c)  The P&Z, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation on the application in accordance with Section 2.4.20 C, Zoning Map Amendment Review Standards, and shall comment on the application's consistency with applicable City adopted policy guidance. 

7.  City Council Review and Decision   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.9, Action by Decision-Making Body). 
(b)  The City Council, at the conclusion of a public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.4.20 C, Zoning Map Amendment Review Standards. 
(c)  The decision shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Adoption of the zoning map amendment as proposed; 
(2)  Adoption of a revised zoning amendment; 
(3)  Denial of the zoning map amendment; or 
(4)  Remand of the zoning map amendment application to the P&Z for further consideration. 
(d)  In making its decision, the City Council shall adopt a written statement of consistency and reasonableness that: 
(1)  Describes whether the decision is consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance; and 
(2)  Explains why the decision is reasonable and in the public interest. 
8.  Designation on Official Zoning Map The Planning and Development Director shall make changes to the Official Zoning Map promptly after approval of a map amendment application by the City Council. 
C.  Zoning Map Amendment Review Standards The advisability of an amendment to the Official Zoning Map is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny a proposed zoning map amendment, the City Council may weigh the relevance of and consider the following: 
1.  Consistency with Adopted Plans Whether and the extent to which the proposed zoning map amendment is appropriate for its proposed location, and is consistent with the purposes, goals, objectives, and policies of the City's adopted policy guidance. 
2.  Reasonableness/Public Interest Whether an approval of the zoning map amendment is reasonable and in the public interest. 
D.  Effect Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
E.  Amendment Amendment of an approved zoning map amendment may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 1.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.5. - Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision 

2.5.1. - Overview 
A.  General This section sets forth supplemental procedures, standards, and related information for each of the specific review procedures subject to staff review and decision, as identified in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table. They apply in addition to, or instead of, the standard procedures set forth in Section 2.3, Standard Review Procedures. 
B.  Structure of Procedures   
1.  For each type of development application reviewed under this Ordinance, the following sections state the applicability of a procedure, the steps in the procedure, the review standards for the application, and provisions addressing expiration and amendment, if applicable. 
2.  Development application provisions in this section are organized in alphabetical order in accordance with the sequence of procedures in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table. 
C.  Procedural Flowchart Legend Each development application review procedure in this section includes a procedural flowchart that depicts the steps in the review process. White boxes indicate actions of the applicant. Light blue boxes indicate actions of City staff. Grey boxes indicate the decision-making step. Boxes with dashed lines show optional steps. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
2.5.2. - Administrative Adjustment 
A.  Applicability This section provides an administrative mechanism for allowing minor adjustments to certain standards (e.g., setbacks) in this Ordinance, based on specific review criteria, with the intent of providing relief where application of a standard creates practical difficulties in allowing development that otherwise advances the purposes served by this Ordinance where the adjustment is compatible with the surrounding development. 
B.  Administrative Adjustment An administrative adjustment is reviewed and decided by the Planning and Development Director and allows an adjustment of the standards in accordance with Section 2.5.2 C, Administrative Adjustment Amount. 
C.  Administrative Adjustment Amount Table 2.5.2.C, Administrative Adjustment Amount, sets out the standards that may be adjusted through the administrative adjustment procedure and the maximum percentage of allowable adjustment. 
TABLE 2.5.2.C: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT AMOUNT 
STANDARD 
MAXIMUM 
ADMINISTRATIVE 
ADJUSTMENT IN 
CORE CITY AREA MAXIMUM 
ADMINISTRATIVE 
ADJUSTMENT 
OUTSIDE CORE 
CITY AREA Maximum building height (except where increases in maximum height are prohibited in this Ordinance) 20% 10% Minimum building setbacks 20% 10% Maximum residential density 20% 10% Minimum required lot width 20% 10% Minimum lot area 20% 10% Minimum required parking spaces 20% [1] 10% [2] Average landscape yard width 20% 10% Minimum open space amount 20% 10% Minimum active recreational area open space 20% 10% Remove or cover an existing window 2 [3] n/a NOTES [1] Allowed when other parking alternatives cannot be utilized. New construction and building addition space are not eligible for reduced parking. [2] Allowed for existing development to retrofit parking to conform to the landscaping regulations or to allow an existing or new development to preserve trees within or adjacent to a vehicular use area. [3] Allowed for up to 2 windows for non-occupiable space in an existing building in the CB, MS or MX districts.  
D.  Administrative Adjustment Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review and decide applications for an administrative adjustment in accordance with Section 2.5.2 E, Administrative Adjustment Review Standards. 

E.  Administrative Adjustment Review Standards An administrative adjustment shall be approved on a decision the applicant demonstrates all of the following: 
1.  The administrative adjustment is consistent with the thresholds for an administrative adjustment established in this section; 
2.  The administrative adjustment is consistent with the character of development on surrounding land, and is compatible with surrounding land uses; 
3.  The administrative adjustment is either: 
(a)  Required to compensate for some unusual aspect of the site or the proposed development that is not shared by landowners in general; 
(b)  Supports an objective or goal from the purpose and intent statements of the zoning district where it is located; or 
(c)  Saves healthy existing trees; 
4.  The administrative adjustment will not pose a danger to the public health or safety; 
5.  Adverse impacts resulting from the administrative adjustment will be fully mitigated; and 
6.  The development standard being adjusted is not the subject of a previously approved administrative adjustment on the same site. 
7.  The development standard being adjusted is not expressly prohibited by a condition of approval. 
F.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
G.  Effect An administrative adjustment shall be reviewed and decided prior to the other applications with which it is submitted. (For example, if an administrative adjustment application is submitted in conjunction with a site plan application because the administrative adjustment is needed to achieve the plan for development in the site plan, the administrative adjustment application shall be reviewed and decided prior to the approval of the site plan application.) 
H.  Amendment Amendment of an administrative adjustment may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
I.  Expiration If an administrative adjustment is associated with another permit or development approval, the expiration of the administrative adjustment shall be the same as the permit or development approval with which it is associated. 
J.  Appeal Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , §§ 4, 6, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 1, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 7.A, 12-3-2018) 
2.5.3. - Building Permit 
A.  Applicability Unless exempted in accordance with the State Building Code, no construction, addition, alteration, repair, movement to another site, removal, or demolition of any building or structure may occur until a building permit is approved in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 

B.  Building Permit Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review and decide the application for a building permit in accordance with Section 2.5.3 C, Building Permit Review Standards. 
(c)  All applications for a building permit shall also be granted a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of compliance upon satisfactory completion of all required building and site inspections in accordance with Section 2.5.3 C, Building Permit Review Standards. 
(d)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Planning and Development Director prior to the completion of all construction or changes if occupancy will not violate any health or safety considerations of any applicable codes. 
(1)  The Planning and Development Director shall specify the duration of the temporary certificate of occupancy, which shall not exceed 90 days. 
(2)  If all remaining work is not completed within the specified timeframe of the temporary certificate of occupancy, the Planning and Development Director shall order the applicant to cease occupancy immediately. Occupancy shall not recommence until a certificate of occupancy is obtained in accordance with this section. 
(e)  The Planning and Development Director may require the applicant to submit a financial guarantee (see Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees) in an amount necessary to ensure that any work not completed as specified in the development permit or approval will be completed within the specified timeframe for a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
C.  Building Permit Review Standards A building permit shall be issued and a certificate of occupancy granted on a decision that the application complies with: 
1.  The State Building Code; 
2.  The applicable requirements of the county Health Department; 
3.  All standards or conditions of any prior, applicable permits and development approvals; and 
4.  All other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the City Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Effect Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
E.  Amendment Amendment of a building permit may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
F.  Expiration   
1.  A building permit shall expire and become null and void if the development it authorizes is not commenced within 6 months of the permit issuance. 
2.  If development authorized by a building permit commences but is discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months, the permit shall expire and become null and void. 
G.  Appeal An appeal of a decision on a building permit may be filed with the North Carolina Commissioner of Insurance, in accordance with Section 160A-434 of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
2.5.4. - Determination 
A.  Applicability The Planning and Development Director is responsible for written determinations of all provisions of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Determinations of the meaning of the text; 
2.  Determinations of the zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map; 
3.  Determinations of whether an unlisted use in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, is comparable to a listed use or not, and should be allowed in a zoning district or prohibited in that district; and 
4.  Determinations of compliance with a condition of approval. 

B.  Determination Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  An application for a formal written determination may be initiated by any person having an interest in the matter in question. 
3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the request and make determinations in accordance with Section 2.5.4 C, Determination Review Standards. 
(c)  The Planning and Development Director may request additional information as necessary to make a determination. 
(d)  Prior to rendering a determination the Planning and Development Director may consult with the City Attorney and other affected City officials. 
C.  Determination Review Standards   
1.  Zoning District Map Boundaries Determination of zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map shall be in accordance with the standards in Section 3.1.5 C, Interpretation of Official Map Boundaries, and consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance. 
2.  Unlisted Uses Determination of whether an unlisted use is similar to a use identified in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, shall be based on consistency with the City's adopted policy guidance and the following standards: 
(a)  The function, product, or physical characteristics of the use; 
(b)  The impact on adjacent lands created by the use; 
(c)  The type, size, and nature of buildings and structures associated with the use; 
(d)  The type of sales (retail, wholesale), and the size and type of items sold and displayed on the premises; 
(e)  The types of items stored (such as vehicles, inventory, merchandise, chemicals, construction materials, scrap and junk, and raw materials including liquids and powders); 
(f)  The volume and type of vehicle traffic generated by the use, and the parking demands of the use; 
(g)  Any processing associated with the use, including assembly, manufacturing, warehousing, shipping, distribution, and whether it occurs inside or outside a building; 
(h)  Any dangerous, hazardous, toxic, or explosive materials associated with the use; 
(i)  The amount and nature of any nuisances generated on the premises, including but not limited to noise, smoke, odor, glare, vibration, radiation, and fumes; and 
(j)  Any prior determinations made by the Planning and Development Director or decisions made by the BOA. 
3.  Text Provisions Determination of the text and its application shall be based on the standards in Section 10.1, General Rules for Interpretation, and the following considerations: 
(a)  The clear and plain meaning of the provision's wording, as defined by the meaning and significance given specific terms used in the provision-as established in Section 10.4, Definitions, and by the common and accepted usage of the term; 
(b)  The intended purpose of the provision, as indicated by purpose statements, its context and consistency with surrounding and related provisions, and any legislative history related to its adoption; 
(c)  The general purposes served by this Ordinance, as set forth in Section 1.3, General Purpose and Intent; and 
(d)  Consistency with the City's adopted policy guidance. 
D.  Effect   
1.  General   
(a)  A written determination shall be binding on subsequent decisions by the Planning and Development Director or other administrative officials in applying the same provision of this Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map in the same circumstance, unless the determination is modified in accordance with this section, or the text of this Ordinance is amended. 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall maintain a record of written determinations in the Development Guide that shall be available in the Planning and Development Department for public inspection, on reasonable request, during normal business hours. 
2.  Approval of Unlisted Use   
(a)  After the Planning and Development Director determines the use category or use type in which the unlisted use is best classified as well as the land use intensity score, then the unlisted use shall be subject to all applicable requirements of that use category or use type. 
(b)  After making a determination of an unlisted use, the Planning and Development Director shall determine whether the unlisted use is likely to be common or recur frequently, and whether its omission is likely to lead to uncertainty and confusion. On determining that the unlisted use is likely to be common and would lead to confusion if unlisted, the Planning and Development Director shall initiate an application for a text amendment. Until final action is taken on the text amendment, the Planning and Development Director's decision shall be binding. 
(c)  If after making a determination of an unlisted use, the Planning and Development Director determines that the unlisted use is of an unusual or transitory nature, and unlikely to recur frequently, the determination shall be binding without further action or amendment of this Ordinance. 
E.  Appeal Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
2.5.5. - Easement Reconveyance 
A.  Applicability This section provides a procedure for the City to transfer a recorded, but unnecessary access, utility, drainage, conservation, or other easement back to one or more landowners. 
B.  Easement Reconveyance Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The TRC shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.5 C, Easement Reconveyance Review Standards. 
(c)  Following a decision on the reconveyance application by the TRC, the City Attorney shall prepare a quitclaim deed that is signed by the Mayor. 

C.  Easement Reconveyance Review Standards An easement reconveyance shall be approved on a decision that the application complies with: 
1.  The easement being reconveyed is no longer required and is not likely to be needed in the future; 
2.  Reconveyance of all or a portion of an easement will not impair the City's ability to provide necessary municipal services; 
3.  Reconveyance will not convey a right or obligation to one landowner over another similarly situated landowner; and 
4.  The proposed reconveyance would be in the best interest of the public. 
D.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
E.  Appeal Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
2.5.6. - Exclusion Map 
A.  Applicability This section provides a procedure, in accordance with Section 160A-376 of the North Carolina General Statutes, for exclusion of the following divisions of land from the subdivision requirements of this Ordinance: 
1.  A combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots that does not increase the total number of lots, and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this Ordinance; 
2.  The division of land into parcels greater than 10 acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved; 
3.  Public acquisition involving the purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets; or 
4.  Division of a tract of land in single ownership, where the total area is no greater than 2 acres, the division creates no more than 3 lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved, and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this Ordinance. 
5.  The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms of a probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under Chapter 29 of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
B.  Exclusion Map Review Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review the application in accordance with Section 2.5.6 C, Exclusion Map Review Standards, and certify that the land division qualifies as an exclusion map. If certified, the land division shall be certified exempt from the standards and procedures in Section 2.5.11, Preliminary Plat. 
4.  Recordation If an exclusion map is prepared, and certified by the Planning and Development Director, it may be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for the county where the land is located. 

C.  Exclusion Map Review Standards A division of land shall be certified as an exclusion map if it: 
1.  Is excluded from the definition of a subdivision in accordance with Section 160A-376 of the North Carolina General Statutes; and 
2.  Complies with all applicable standards in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts; and 
3.  Complies with all standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and development approvals; and 
4.  Complies with all other prior applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the City Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Effect Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
E.  Amendment Amendment of an exclusion map may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
F.  Appeal Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 8, 12-3-2018) 
2.5.7. - Final Plat 
A.  Applicability   
1.  A final plat, reviewed and approved in accordance with this section, shall be required for all land subdivisions as defined by this Ordinance. 
2.  Except for a minor subdivision, a landowner shall not submit an application for final plat review until a preliminary plat is approved. 
3.  Before approval of a final plat, all required improvements serving the subdivision shall be installed and inspected by the City, or the developer shall provide a financial guarantee in accordance with Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees. 
B.  Final Plat Review Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 

3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.7 C, Final Plat Review Standards. 
4.  Recordation Once a final plat is approved, a signed statement by the Planning and Development Director shall be entered on the face of the plat. The final plat may not be recorded without this certification. Failure to record the final plat in accordance with Section 2.5.7 F, Expiration, shall render the plat null and void. 
C.  Final Plat Review Standards A final plat shall be approved on a decision that the application complies with the following: 
1.  The final plat is prepared and sealed by a licensed professional land surveyor or professional engineer. 
2.  The final plat is in substantial conformance with the preliminary plat and all applicable requirements in Chapter 7: Subdivision Standards; 
3.  All required improvements depicted on the preliminary plat and final plat are installed and inspected by the City, or are subject to a financial guarantee (see Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees); 
4.  The final plat complies with all standards and conditions of any applicable permits and development approvals; and 
5.  The final plat complies with all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the City Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Effect   
1.  General Approval of a final plat allows the sale or conveyance of lots within the subdivision. Building permits may be issued following recordation of the final plat. 
2.  Acceptance of Public Infrastructure   
(a)  Approval and recordation of a final plat constitutes dedication by the owner and acceptance by the City and the public of the right-of-way of each public street, alley or utility easement shown on the plat. 
(b)  Approval of the final plat does not constitute acceptance for maintenance responsibility of any improvements within such right-of-way or easement and the City assumes no responsibility to open, operate, repair, or maintain any improvements until it is in the public interest to do so. Improvements within such rights-of-way or easements, such as utilities, streets, drainage facilities or sidewalks may be accepted for maintenance by the City Council or the Engineering Services Director, when appropriate. 
(c)  The subdivider shall retain responsibility for public improvements until maintenance responsibility is accepted by the City, NCDOT, or a public utility provider, as appropriate. 
E.  Amendment Amendment of a final plat approval may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
F.  Expiration   
1.  A final plat shall be null and void unless it is recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for the county where the development is located within 60 days of approval. 
2.  If a final plat is not recorded within 2 years of the associated preliminary plat approval, or if there is a lapse of more than 2 years between the recording of different sections or phases, then the preliminary plat shall expire. 
3.  An expired preliminary plat may be resubmitted in accordance with Section 2.5.11, Preliminary Plat, and shall be reviewed in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
G.  Appeal Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 9.A, 12-3-2018) 
2.5.8. - Floodplain Development Permit 
A.  Applicability To reduce the potential for damage to land and life from flooding or floodwaters, development proposed on land in a special flood hazard area within the City's zoning jurisdiction shall obtain a floodplain development permit in accordance with this section prior to or concurrent with an application for a site plan, group development, building permit, or zoning compliance permit, as appropriate. 
B.  Floodplain Development Permit Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 

3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Engineering Services Director shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.8 C, Floodplain Development Permit Review Standards. 
C.  Floodplain Development Permit Review Standards A floodplain development permit shall be approved on a decision that the application complies with the following: 
1.  The permit is issued prior to the commencement of development; and 
2.  The development complies with all applicable standards in Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention. 
D.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
E.  Effect Approval of a floodplain development permit authorizes an applicant to obtain all required elevation certificates or other required certificates and proceed with development following issuance of a building permit. 
F.  Amendment Amendment of a floodplain development permit approval may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
G.  Expiration A floodplain development permit shall expire and become null and void if the development it authorizes is not commenced within 6 months of permit issuance. 
H.  Appeal Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
2.5.9. - Group Development 
A.  Applicability Group development review is applicable to any land development subject to a site plan that includes 2 or more principal buildings (without a subdivision of land) for the purpose of development (whether immediate or in the future) to be occupied by separate families, firms, businesses, or other enterprises. 
B.  Group Development Review Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 

2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for review with the application for a group development. The procedure for preparation of a traffic impact analysis is described in the Development Guide. 
(c)  If a watershed development plan, landscape plan, or land disturbance plan approval are required, they shall be obtained concurrently with the group development approval. 
3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The TRC shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.9 C, Group Development Review Standards. 
(c)  The TRC may grant conditional approval of a group development pending additional revision by the applicant. In the case of a conditional approval, the applicant shall revise the group development to address all TRC comments and re-submit the revised plan to the Planning and Development Director, who shall convert the conditional group development approval to an approved group development, upon finding the revised group development complies with all TRC comments. Failure to submit a revised group development shall render the conditional approval null and void. 
C.  Group Development Review Standards A group development shall be approved on a decision that the application complies with the following: 
1.  All standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and development approvals; and 
2.  All applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the City Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
E.  Effect   
1.  General Approval of a group development plan authorizes the submittal of street and utility plans, if applicable, and the submittal of an application for a building permit in accordance with Section 2.5.3, Building Permit. 
2.  Street and Utility Construction Plans   
(a)  Street and utility construction plans for all public improvements associated with the group development shall be approved prior to street and utility construction in accordance with Section 7.1.3, Street and Utility Construction. 
(b)  In the case of a multi-phase group development, street and utility construction plans shall include all improvements within a phase and all public improvements outside the phase but necessary to serve development within that phase. 
3.  Land Disturbance Permit Upon issuance of a land disturbance permit in accordance with Section 2.5.10, Land Disturbance Permit, any approved soil erosion and sedimentation control devices, and approved permanent runoff control structures may be installed prior to the approval of street and utility construction plans in accordance with Section 7.1.5, Permanent Runoff Control Structures/Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Devices. 
4.  Financial Guarantees All public improvements that have not been installed by the developer and inspected and accepted by the City shall comply with the requirements in Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
5.  As-Built Plan As-built plans for all public improvements shall be submitted in accordance with Section 7.2.4, As-Built Plans Required. 
F.  Amendment Amendment of a group development approval may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
G.  Expiration Group development approval shall expire and become null and void if the development approved in the plan does not begin within 18 months of issuance of the group development approval. 
H.  Appeal Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
2.5.10. - Land Disturbance Permit 
A.  Applicability In order to avoid groundwater contamination, sediment accumulation in drainage conveyances and surface waters, and unnecessary loss of erodible soils, land-disturbing activities specified in Section 6.3.1, Applicability require approval of a land-disturbance permit in accordance with this section, prior to commencement. 
B.  Land Disturbance Permit Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 

3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Engineering Services Director shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.10 C, Land Disturbance Permit Review Standards. 
(c)  A pre-construction conference shall be conducted on-site with the applicant. 
(d)  Following the pre-construction conference, the Engineering Services Director shall issue the land disturbance permit. 
C.  Land Disturbance Permit Review Standards A land disturbance permit shall be approved in accordance with a soil erosion and control plan developed in accordance with Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation. 
D.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
E.  Effect   
1.  Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
2.  The applicant shall post the approved land disturbance permit in a prominent location on the site where the land disturbance is occurring at all times while it is in effect. 
F.  Amendment Amendment of a land disturbance permit may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
G.  Expiration   
1.  The land disturbance permit shall be null and void if work authorized is not completed within 1 year from the issuance of the permit. 
2.  The Engineering Services Director may, on receipt of a written request for an extension filed at least 30 days prior to the expiration date, renew a land disturbance permit for an additional 180 days, for good cause. 
H.  Appeal Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
2.5.11. - Preliminary Plat 
A.  Applicability Unless a division of land is a minor subdivision as defined by this Ordinance, or is exempted in accordance with Section 2.5.6. Exclusion Map, it shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Preliminary Plat Review Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Sketch Plan Review   
(a)  A sketch plan for land subject to a preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the TRC prior to submittal of an application for a preliminary plat in the following instances: 
(1)  The applicant for a preliminary plat owns land adjacent to the preliminary plat, but the land under common ownership is not included in the preliminary plat application; or 
(2)  The preliminary plat includes more than 50 lots. 
(b)  A sketch plan shall be prepared in accordance with the Development Guide. 
(c)  Following the review of a sketch plan, an applicant may file an application for a preliminary plat. 
(d)  Applicants are encouraged to file sketch plans, even when not required. 
3.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  A preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed professional surveyor, registered professional landscape architect, or licensed professional engineer, and shall be prepared in accordance with the Development Guide. 
(c)  When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for review with the submittal of a preliminary plat application. The procedure for preparation of a traffic impact analysis is described in the Development Guide. 
(d)  If a watershed development plan approval is required, it shall be obtained concurrent with preliminary plat approval. 

4.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The TRC shall decide an application for a preliminary plat in accordance with Section 2.5.11 C, Preliminary Plat Review Standards. 
(c)  The TRC may grant conditional approval of a preliminary plat. In the case of a conditional approval, the applicant shall revise the preliminary plat to address the conditions of approval and re-submit the revised plat to the Planning and Development Director, who shall convert the conditional approval to an approval upon finding the revised preliminary plat complies with all conditions of approval. If the plat is not revised within 60 days of a conditional approval, then it shall be deemed denied. 
(d)  If the preliminary plat is denied, then the reasons shall be stated in writing. The applicant may revise and resubmit a preliminary plat that has been denied. 
C.  Preliminary Plat Review Standards An application for a preliminary plat shall be approved on a decision that the application complies with: 
1.  All applicable standards in Chapter 7: Subdivision Standards; 
2.  All standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and development approvals; and 
3.  All other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and in the City Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Effect   
1.  General Approval of a preliminary plat authorizes the submittal of street and utility construction plans, and soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
2.  Street and Utility Construction Plans   
(a)  Street and utility construction plans for all public improvements associated with the preliminary plat shall be approved prior to street and utility construction and prior to the approval of a final plat in accordance with Section 7.1.3, Street and Utility Construction. 
(b)  In the case of a multi-phase subdivision, street and utility construction plans shall include all improvements within a phase and all public improvements outside the phase but necessary to serve development within that phase. 
3.  Land Disturbance Permit An approved preliminary plat authorizes the submittal of soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and the issuance of a land disturbance permit in accordance with Section 2.5.10, Land Disturbance Permit. Any approved soil erosion and sedimentation control devices, and approved permanent runoff control structures may be installed prior to the approval of street and utility construction plans in accordance with Section 7.1.5, Permanent Runoff Control Structures/Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Devices. 
4.  Final Plat An approved preliminary plat, along with approved street and utility construction plans, allows the applicant to submit for final plat approval in accordance with Section 2.5.7, Final Plat. 
5.  Financial Guarantees All public improvements that have not been installed by the developer, and inspected and accepted by the City shall comply with the requirements in Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees, prior to the recordation of a final plat. 
6.  As-Built Plans As-built plans for all public improvements shall be submitted in accordance with Section 7.2.4, As-Built Plans Required. 
E.  Amendment Amendment of a preliminary plat approval may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
F.  Expiration An approved preliminary plat shall be valid for two years from the date of approval and may be extended in accordance with Section 2.5.7, Final Plat. 
G.  Appeal Applicable (See Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 9.C, 12-3-2018) 
2.5.12. - Public Tree Certificate 
A.  Applicability Unless exempted in accordance with Section 6.1.3 B, Exemptions, activity that involves the planting, removal, trimming, or below grade excavation within the critical root zone of trees within a street right-of-way, park, City facility, or other areas owned or controlled by the City shall require approval of a public tree certificate in accordance with the standards of this section. 
B.  Public Tree Certificate Review Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  An application may be initiated by the City or any person. 
3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Urban Forestry Committee shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.12 C, Public Tree Certificate Review Standards. 

C.  Public Tree Certificate Review Standards A public tree certificate shall be approved on a decision the application complies with: 
1.  The standards in Section 6.1, Public Tree Protection; 
2.  The guidelines in The City of High Point Guidelines and Standard Practices for Trees ; 
3.  All standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and development approvals; and 
4.  All other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and in the City Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
E.  Effect Approval of a public tree certificate entitles removal, pruning, or planting of trees within a street right-of-way, park, City facility, or other areas owned or controlled by the City. 
F.  Amendment Amendment of a public tree certificate may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
G.  Expiration A public tree certificate shall expire and become null and void if the activity it authorized is not commenced within 12 months of certificate issuance, or a different time period as approved by the UFC. 
H.  Appeal Applicable (See Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
2.5.13. - Sign Permit 
A.  Applicability All signs, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.7, Signage, shall obtain a sign permit in accordance with this section before being erected, replaced, relocated, or altered. 
B.  Sign Permit Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.13 C, Sign Permit Review Standards. 

C.  Sign Permit Review Standards A sign permit shall be approved on a decision the application complies with: 
1.  The standards in Section 5.7, Signage; 
2.  The State Building Code; 
3.  All standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and developments approvals; and 
4.  All other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and in the City Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
E.  Effect Applicable (see Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval). 
F.  Amendment Amendment of a sign permit may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
G.  Expiration If the work authorized by a sign permit is not commenced within 6 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
H.  Appeal Applicable (See Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
2.5.14. - Site Plan 
A.  Applicability Site plan review is applicable to any development activity that includes constructing a building or increasing the amount of impervious surface other than a group development, single-family detached dwelling, duplex, including their accessory buildings. 
B.  Site Plan Review Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
(b)  When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for review with a site plan application. The procedure for preparation of a traffic impact analysis is described in the Development Guide. 
(c)  If a watershed development plan, landscape plan, or land disturbance plan is required, they shall be obtained concurrently with the site plan approval. 
3.  Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The TRC shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.14 C, Site Plan Review Standards. 
(c)  The TRC may grant conditional approval of a site plan pending additional revision by the applicant. In the case of a conditional approval, the applicant shall revise the site plan to address all TRC comments and re-submit the revised plan to the Planning and Development Director, who shall convert the conditional site plan approval to an approval, upon finding the revised site plan complies with all TRC comments. Failure to submit a revised site plan shall render the conditional approval null and void. 

C.  Site Plan Review Standards A site plan shall be approved on a decision the application complies with: 
1.  All standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and development approvals; and 
2.  All applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the City Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
E.  Effect   
1.  General Approval of a site plan authorizes the submittal of street and utility construction plans, if applicable, and the submittal of an application for a building permit in accordance with Section 2.5.3, Building Permit, or for a zoning compliance permit in accordance with Section 2.5.15, Zoning Compliance Permit. 
2.  Street and Utility Construction Plans   
(a)  Street and utility construction plans for all public improvements associated with the site plan shall be approved prior to street and utility construction and prior to the approval of a final plat in accordance with Section 7.1.3, Street and Utility Construction. 
(b)  In the case of a multi-phase site plan, street and utility construction plans shall include all improvements within a phase and all public improvements outside the phase but necessary to serve development within that phase. 
3.  Land Disturbance Permit Upon issuance of a land disturbance permit in accordance with Section 2.5.10, Land Disturbance Permit, any approved soil erosion and sedimentation control devices, and approved permanent runoff control structures may be installed prior to the approval of street and utility construction plans in accordance with Section 7.1.5, Permanent Runoff Control Structures/Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Devices. 
4.  Financial Guarantees All public improvements that have not been installed by the developer, and inspected and accepted by the City shall comply with the requirements in Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
5.  As-Built Plans As-built plans for all public improvements shall be submitted in accordance with Section 7.2.4, As-Built Plans Required. 
F.  Amendment Amendment of a site plan approval may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval 
G.  Expiration Site plan approval shall expire and become null and void if the development approved in the site plan does not begin within 18 months of issuance of the site plan approval. 
H.  Appeal Applicable (See Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
2.5.15. - Zoning Compliance Permit 
A.  Applicability Approval of a zoning compliance permit is required for development that does not require a building permit (such as accessory buildings with no horizontal dimension greater than 12 feet, outdoor storage activities, fences, and temporary uses). 
B.  Zoning Compliance Permit Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Conference Optional (see Section 2.3.2, Pre-Application Conference). 
2.  Application Submittal and Acceptance Applicable (see Section 2.3.4, Application Submittal and Acceptance). 
3.  Staff Review and Action   
(a)  Applicable (see Section 2.3.5, Staff Review and Action). 
(b)  The Planning and Development Director shall review and decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.15 C, Zoning Compliance Permit Review Standards. 
C.  Zoning Compliance Permit Review Standards   
1.  Temporary Uses Temporary uses shall comply with the standards in Section 4.5, Temporary Uses. 
2.  All Other Uses A zoning compliance permit shall be approved on a decision the application complies with: 
(a)  All standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and developments approvals; and 
(b)  All applicable requirements of this Ordinance and in the City Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Conditions of Approval Applicable (see Section 2.3.10, Conditions of Approval). 
E.  Effect Approval of a zoning compliance permit authorizes an applicant to commence construction or move forward with the approved development. 
F.  Amendment Amendment of a zoning compliance permit may only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 

G.  Expiration   
1.  Temporary Uses A zoning compliance permit for a temporary use is effective on the date of approval and shall remain effective for the time period indicated in the permit. 
2.  All Other Development A zoning compliance permit shall expire and become null and void if development it authorizes is not commenced within 180 days of permit issuance. 
H.  Appeal Applicable (See Section 2.4.3, Appeal). 
CHAPTER 3: - ZONING DISTRICTS 
3.1. - General Provisions 

3.1.1. - Types of Zoning Districts 
Land within the City is generally classified by this Ordinance to be in one of a number of general zoning districts. Land may be reclassified to one of a number of comparable conditional zoning districts in accordance with Section 2.4.6, Conditional Zoning. Land in any general or conditional district may also be classified into one or more overlay zoning districts, in which case regulations governing development in the overlay district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing development in the underlying general zoning district or conditional zoning district. 
3.1.2. - Compliance with District Standards 
Land in the City shall not be developed except in accordance with the zoning district regulations of this chapter and all other regulations of this Ordinance, including but not limited to: Chapter 4: Uses, Chapter 5: Development Standards, Chapter 6: Environmental Standards, and Chapter 7: Subdivision Standards. 
3.1.3. - Conflict 
In the event of a conflict between the standards in Chapter 5: Development Standards, and the district standards in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts, the standards in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts, shall control. 
3.1.4. - Maximum Density May be Increased 
Unless otherwise indicated in this Ordinance, the maximum density for a zoning district may be increased beyond the amount listed in Section 3.3, Residential Zoning Districts, Section 3.4, Business Zoning Districts, and Section 3.5, Special Zoning Districts, in accordance with the standards and procedure in Section 2.5.2, Administrative Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 2, 4-3-2017) 
3.1.5. - Official Zoning Map 
A.  General   
1.  The Official Zoning Map designates the location and boundaries of the various zoning districts established in this Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the Planning and Development Department and is available for public inspection during normal business hours. It is maintained solely in digital form. It shall be the final authority as to the status of the current zoning district classification of land in the City's planning jurisdiction, and shall only be amended in accordance with Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment. 
2.  The Planning and Development Director shall maintain digital or printed copies of superseded versions of the Official Zoning Map for historical reference. 
B.  Incorporated by Reference   
1.  The Official Zoning Map is incorporated herein by reference and made part of this Ordinance. 
2.  The City of High Point Water Supply Watershed Map is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this Ordinance. 
3.  The Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) prepared by the State and the associated Flood Insurance Study (FIS) are incorporated herein by reference and made part of this Ordinance. 
4.  The Core City boundary delineated in the Core City Plan adopted February 8, 2007 is incorporated herein by reference and made part of this Ordinance. 
C.  Interpretation of Official Map Boundaries The Planning and Development Director shall be responsible for determination of boundaries on the Official Zoning Map in accordance with the standards in Section 2.5.4, Determination, and the following standards: 
1.  Boundaries shown as approximately following a utility line or a street, alley, railroad, or other public access way shall be interpreted as following the centerline of the right-of-way or easement for the utility line or access way. 
2.  If a street, alley, railroad, or utility easement forming the boundary between 2 separate zoning districts is abandoned or removed from dedication, the district boundaries shall be construed as following the centerline of the abandoned or vacated roadbed or utility easement. 
3.  Boundaries shown as approximately following a lot line shall be interpreted as following the lot line as it existed when the boundary was established. If a subsequent minor adjustment (such as from settlement of a boundary dispute or overlap) results in the lot line moving 10 feet or less, the zoning boundary shall be interpreted as moving with the lot line. 
4.  Boundaries shown as approximately following a river, stream, canal, lake, or other watercourse shall be interpreted as following the centerline of the watercourse as it actually exists, and as moving with that centerline to the extent the watercourse moves as a result of natural processes (flooding, erosion, sedimentation, etc.). 
5.  Boundaries shown as approximately following shorelines of a river, stream, or lake shall be interpreted to follow the shoreline, even in the event of change. 
6.  Boundaries shown parallel to or as extensions of features indicated in this subsection shall be interpreted as such. 
7.  If the specific location of a depicted boundary cannot be determined from application of the above standards, it shall be determined by using the Official Zoning Map's scale to determine the boundary's distance from other features shown on the map. In the case of flood hazard boundaries, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers work maps, if available, shall be used for scaling. 
8.  Where the actual location of existing physical or natural features vary from that shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances are not covered by this subsection, the Planning and Development Director shall have the authority to determine the district boundaries (see Section 2.5.4, Determination). 
9.  Interpretations of the floodplain boundary shall be made by the Engineering Services Director, in accordance with the standards in Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention. 
10.  Outer boundaries of a Watershed Overlay District shall be construed to follow actual drainage basin boundaries. In cases of conflicts between the boundaries as they appear on the Watershed Map and detailed engineering studies, the TRC may rely on the more detailed study in approving watershed development plans. 
11.  Locations of perennial and intermittent streams within General Watershed Area and Watershed Critical Area shall be construed to be as depicted on the Watershed Map. In case of conflicts between the locations as they appear on the Watershed Map and detailed engineering studies, the TRC may rely on the more detailed study in approving watershed development plans. 
12.  Wherever a single lot is located within 2 or more different zoning districts, each portion of the lot shall be subject to all the regulations applicable to the zoning district where it is located. 
D.  Changes to Official Zoning Map Changes made in zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map shall be considered an amendment to this Ordinance and are made in accordance with Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment. Changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map by the Planning and Development Director promptly after the amendment is approved by the City Council. Where the ordinance enacting a zoning district boundary change contains wording explaining or clarifying the location of the new boundary, the Planning and Development Director shall enter the boundary on the Official Zoning Map in accordance with the ordinance wording. 
3.2. - General Zoning Districts Established 
Table 3.2, General Zoning Districts Established, sets out the general zoning districts established by this Ordinance. General zoning districts are grouped into Residential, Business, Special, and Planned Development districts. 
TABLE 3.2: GENERAL ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 
DISTRICT NAME ABBREVIATION 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS Residential Single Family - 3 R-3 Residential Single Family - 5 R-5 Residential Single Family - 7 R-7 Residential Multi-Family - 5 RM-5 Residential Multi-Family - 16 RM-16 Residential Multi-Family - 26 RM-26 BUSINESS DISTRICTS Transitional Office TO Office Institutional OI Limited Business LB General Business GB Retail Center RC Central Business CB Employment Center EC Light Industrial LI Heavy Industrial HI SPECIAL DISTRICTS Agricultural/Rural AGR Institutional I Main Street MS Mixed-Use MX Parks and Natural Resources PNR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS Planned Development-Core City PD-CC Planned Development-Periphery PD-P  
A.  Classification of General Zoning Districts Land shall be classified or reclassified into a zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment, Section 2.4.6, Conditional Zoning, or Section 2.4.9, Planned Development, as appropriate. 
B.  Relationship to Overlay Zoning Districts Regulations governing development in an overlay zoning district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing development in the underlying general or conditional zoning district classification. If the standards governing a general zoning district expressly conflict with those governing an overlay zoning district, the standards governing the overlay zoning district shall control. 
C.  Organization of General Zoning District Regulations   
1.  Sections 3.3 through 3.5 set out the general purposes of each group of zoning districts and contain subsections that set out the specific purpose, density, bulk, and dimensional standards for each individual zoning district. 
2.  Each district includes a summary table of dimensional standards that include numbers in black circles. The black circles in the dimensional standards table correspond to the black circles depicted in the district graphics. 
3.  The building form photographs and lot pattern diagrams are for illustrative purposes only. The text of this Ordinance shall control. 
4.  The range of allowable uses for each general zoning district are identified in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. 
3.3. - Residential Zoning Districts 

3.3.1. - General Purpose and Intent 
The residential zoning districts established in this section are intended to provide a, healthy and safe environment in which to live and recreate. More specifically, they are intended to: 
A.  Provide appropriately located lands for residential development that are consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance; 
B.  Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and recreation and open space areas for each dwelling; 
C.  Provide for residential housing choice, affordability, and diversity with varying housing densities, types, and designs, including accessory dwelling units where appropriate; 
D.  Provide for safe and efficient vehicular access and circulation and pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods in the Core City area; 
E.  Provide for public services and facilities needed to serve residential areas while protecting residential areas from incompatible nonresidential development; 
F.  Create neighborhoods and preserve existing community character while accommodating new development and redevelopment consistent with the City's goals and objectives. 
G.  Preserve the unique character and historic resources of the city's traditional neighborhoods and the community. 
3.3.2. - Residential Single Family - 3 (R-3) 
R-3
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The R-3 district is established to accommodate principally single-family detached dwellings developed at a density of 3 units an acre, in developments served by public water and sewer. Complimentary uses such as open space, schools, utilities, religious institutions, and recreational facilities are also allowed. District regulations discourage any use that interferes with the development of single-family detached dwellings or that is detrimental to the residential nature of the district. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 12,000 [1] n/a 20,000 12,000 [2] n/a 20,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) [3] Interior lot 75 n/a 75 75 [2] n/a 75 Corner lot 85 85 85 [2] 85 Minimum Street Setback (feet) Front 30 n/a 30 30 [2] n/a 30 [2] Side 15 15 [2] Minimum Side Setback (feet) 10 n/a n/a 5 [2] n/a n/a Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 25 n/a n/a 15 [2] n/a n/a Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) n/a n/a 25 n/a n/a 25 Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 n/a 50 50 n/a 50 [1] Lots in projects 2 acres or greater in area may be between 75% and 125% of the district minimum lot area, provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum (See Section 10.2.3 C.2 Lot Area Averaging). [2] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average for lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [3] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 32, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 3.B, 5-21-2018) 
3.3.3. - Residential Single Family - 5 (R-5) 
R-5
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The R-5 district is established to accommodate principally single-family detached dwellings developed at a density of 5 units an acre that is served by public water and sewer. Complimentary uses such as open space, schools, utilities, religious institutions, and recreational facilities are also allowed. District regulations discourage uses that interfere with the development of residential development or that is detrimental to the residential nature of the district. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 7,000 [1] n/a 15,000 7,000 [2] 10,000 [2] 15,000 [3] 15,000 Minimum Development Size (acres) n/a 5 n/a n/a Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a 5 [4] n/a n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [5] Interior lot 50 n/a 75 + [6] 50 50 [2] 80 50 Corner lot 60 70 60 [2] 70 Minimum Street Setback (feet) Front 25 n/a 20 25 25 [2] 25 [2] Side 15 15 [2] Minimum Side Setback (feet) 5 n/a n/a 5 [2] n/a Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 20 n/a 10 [2] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) n/a n/a 20 n/a 15 20 Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 n/a 50 50 [1] May be between 75% and 125% of the district minimum lot area, provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum (See Section 10.2.3 C.2 Lot Area Averaging). [2] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average for lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [3] Minimum development size. [4] The maximum number of attached dwelling units per structure is 2. [5] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [6] For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum width of 120 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 32, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 3.C, 5-21-2018) 
3.3.4. - Residential Single Family - 7 (R-7) 
R-7
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The R-7 district is established to accommodate principally single-family detached dwellings developed at a density of 7 units an acre, that are served by public water and sewer. Complimentary uses such as open space, schools, utilities, religious institutions, and recreational facilities are also allowed. District regulations discourage any use that interferes with the development of residential development or that is detrimental to the residential nature of the district. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 5,000 [1] 7,000 n/a 12,000 5,000 [2] 7,000 [2] 12,000 [3] 12,000 Minimum Development Size (acres) n/a 5 n/a n/a Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a 7 [4] n/a n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [5] Interior lot 40 75+ [6] 50 40 [2] 80 50 Corner lot 50 65 50 [2] 65 Minimum Street Setback (feet) Front 20 20 20 20 [2] 20 [2] Side 15 15 [2] Minimum Side Setback (feet) 5 n/a 5 [2] n/a Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 15 10 [2] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) n/a 20 n/a 10 20 Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 50 50 [1] May be between 75% and 125% of the district minimum lot area, provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum (See Section 10.2.3 C.2 Lot Area Averaging). [2] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average for lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [3] Minimum development size. [4] The maximum number of attached dwelling units per structure is 2. [5] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [6] For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum width of 120 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 32, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 3.D, 5-21-2018) 
3.3.5. - Reserved 
  
3.3.6. - Residential Multifamily - 5 (RM-5) 
RM-5
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The RM-5 district is established to accommodate a mix of residential development at densities of 5 units an acre, that are served by public water and sewer. Complimentary uses such as open space, schools, utilities, religious institutions and recreational facilities are also allowed. District regulations discourage any use that interferes with the development of residential development or that is detrimental to the residential nature of the district. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a 5 5 [1] n/a 5 5 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 7,000 [2] 12,000 26,000 [3] 15,000 7,000 [4] 10,000 [4] 26,000 [3] 15,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) [5] Interior lot 50 75 + [6] 50 50 [4] 75 + [6] 50 Corner lot 60 70 60 [4] 70 Minimum Street Setback (feet) Front 25 25 25 [4] 25 [4] Side 15 15 [4] Minimum Side Setback (feet) 5 n/a 5 [4] n/a Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 20 10 [4] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to 
Residential District n/a 20 n/a 20 [4] 20 Adjacent to 
Non-residential 
District Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 50 [1] Mixed-used development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] May be between 75% and 125% of the district minimum lot area, provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum (See Section 10.2.3 C.2 Lot Area Averaging). [3] Minimum development size. [4] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average for lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [5] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [6] For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum width of 120 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 32, 1-17-2017) 
3.3.7. - Residential Multifamily - 16 (RM-16) 
RM-16
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The RM-16 district is established to accommodate a mix of residential development at around 16 units an acre, that is served by public water and sewer. District regulations encourage the development of functioning neighborhoods that include a mix of housing types and a variety of institutional uses. Complimentary uses such as open space, schools, utilities, religious institutions, and recreational facilities are also allowed. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a 16 16 [1] n/a 16 16 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 5,000 [2] 7,000 10,000 [3] 12,000 5,000 [4] 7,000 [4] 10,000 [3] 12,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) [5] Interior lot 40 75 + [6] 50 40 [4] 75 + [6] 50 Corner lot 50 65 50 [4] 65 Minimum Street Setback (feet) Front 20 20 20 [4] 20 [4] Side 15 15 [4] Minimum Side Setback (feet) 5 n/a 5 [4] n/a Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 15 10 [4] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to 
Residential District n/a 15 n/a 15 [4] 15 Adjacent to 
Non-residential 
District Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 50/80 [7] 50 80 [8] [1] Mixed-use development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] May be between 75% and 125% of the district minimum lot area, provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum (See Section 10.2.3 C.2 Lot Area Averaging). [3] Minimum development size. [4] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average for lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [5] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [6] For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum width of 120 feet. [7] For each additional foot of height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot. [8] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential zoning district, the effected setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 32, 1-17-2017) 
3.3.8. - Residential Multifamily - 26 (RM-26) 
RM-26
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The RM-26 district is established to accommodate a mix of residential and institutional uses intended to help establish functioning neighborhoods. The district accommodates residential uses at densities of up to 26 units an acre. Complimentary uses such as open space, schools, utilities, and recreation facilities are also allowed. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a 26 26 [1] n/a 26 26 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 4,000 [2] 7,000 8,000 [3] 10,000 4,000 [4] 7,000 [4] 8,000 [3] 10,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) [5] Interior lot 30 60 + [6] 50 30 [4] 60 + [6] 50 Corner lot 40 65 40 [4] 65 Minimum Street Setback (feet) Front 20 20 20 [4] 20 [4] Side 15 15 [4] Minimum Side Setback (feet) 5 n/a 5 [4] n/a Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 15 10 [4] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to 
Residential District n/a 10 n/a 10 [4] 10 Adjacent to 
Non-residential 
District Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 n/a [7] 50 n/a [8] [1] Mixed-use development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] May be between 75% and 125% of the district minimum lot area, provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum (See Section 10.2.3 C.2 Lot Area Averaging). [3] Minimum development size. [4] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or an amount between 75% and 125% of the average for lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [5] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [6] For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum width of 120 feet. [7] For each additional foot of height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot [8] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential zoning district, the effected setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 32, 1-17-2017) 
3.4. - Business Zoning Districts 

3.4.1. - General Purpose and Intent 
The business zoning districts are established for the general purpose of ensuring there are lands in the City that provide a wide range of office, retail, service, industrial, and related uses to meet household and business needs. More specifically they are intended to: 
A.  Provide appropriately located lands for the full range of business uses needed by the City's residents, businesses, and workers, consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance; 
B.  Strengthen the city's economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the city and surrounding communities; 
C.  Create suitable environments for various types of business uses, and protect them from the adverse effects of incompatible uses; 
D.  Create suitable environments for various types of mixed-use development, where business, office, retail, and residential uses are designed and integrated in compatible ways; 
E.  Preserve the unique character and historic resources of the Core City area; and 
F.  Minimize the impact of business development on residential districts and uses, Piedmont Triad International Airport operations, and sensitive natural environments. 
3.4.2. - Transitional Office (TO) 
TO
TRANSITIONAL
OFFICE DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The TO district is intended to provide a transition between residential neighborhoods and higher intensity office and commercial development. The TO district accommodates nonresidential uses in small buildings that are generally similar to the character of residential development. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a 5 5 [1] n/a 5.5 5.5 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 7,000 [2] 12,000 26,000 [3] n/a 7,000 [4] 10,000 [4] 26,000 [3] n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [5] Interior lot 50 75 + [6] 50 50 [4] 75 + [6] 50 Corner lot 60 70 60 [4] 70 Minimum Street Setback (feet) Front 25 25 25 [4] 15 [4] Side 15 15 [4] Minimum Side Setback (feet) 5 n/a 5 [4] n/a Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 20 10 [4] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to 
Residential District n/a 20 n/a 15 Adjacent to 
Non-residential 
District 0/5 [7] 0/5 [7] Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 50 50 [1] Mixed-use development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] May be between 75% and 125% of the district minimum lot area, provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum (See Section 10.2.3 C.2 Lot Area Averaging). [3] Minimum development size. [4] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average for lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [5] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [6] For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum width of 120 feet. [7] No setback is required, but if provided, it shall be at least 5 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
G.  District Standards   
1.  Drive-Throughs Drive-through lanes and windows are prohibited. 
2.  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage of materials, supplies, products, or equipment is prohibited for all nonresidential uses. Nothing shall prohibit the outdoor display of merchandise for sale in accordance with Section 4.4.5 K, Outdoor Display. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 32, 1-17-2017) 
3.4.3. - Office Institutional (OI) 
OI
OFFICE
INSTITUTIONAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The OI district is established to primarily accommodate a wide variety of moderate and high intensity office, institutional, and residential uses. In addition, the district accommodates health care, personal services, and retail uses. Supporting services are permitted provided they are located in multi-tenant buildings and limited in floor area. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a 16 16 [1] n/a 17.6 17.6 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 5,000 [2] 7,000 10,000 [3] n/a 5,000 [4] 7,000 [4] 10,000 [3] n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [5] Interior lot 40 75 + [6] 60 40 [4] 75 + [6] 60 Corner lot 50 50 [4] Minimum Street Setback (feet) Front 20 20 20 [4] 15 [4] Side 15 15 [4] Minimum Side Setback (feet) 5 n/a 5 [4] n/a Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 15 10 [4] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to 
Residential District n/a 20 n/a 15 Adjacent to 
Non-residential 
District 10 5 Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 50/80 [7] 50 80 [8] [1] Mixed-use development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] May be between 75% and 125% of the district minimum lot area, provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum (See Section 10.2.3 C.2 Lot Area Averaging). [3] Minimum development size. [4] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average for lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [5] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [6] For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum width of 120 feet. [7] For each additional foot of height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot. [8] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential district, the setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
G.  District Standards   
1.  Drive-Throughs Drive-through lanes and windows are prohibited. 
2.  Maximum Use Size Eating establishments, retail sales, and personal service uses established as a principal use shall be located within a multi-tenant building and shall not exceed more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area per use and collectively shall not exceed 40 percent of the gross floor area of the multi-tenant building. 
3.  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage of materials, supplies, products, or equipment is prohibited for all nonresidential uses. Nothing shall prohibit the outdoor display of merchandise for sale in accordance with Section 4.4.5 K, Outdoor Display. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 32, 1-17-2017) 
3.4.4. - Reserved 
3.4.5. - Limited Business (LB) 
  
LB
LIMITED
BUSINESS
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The LB district is established to primarily accommodate low to moderate intensity office, retail, and personal service uses adjacent to and within residential neighborhoods. In addition to commercial uses, the district also allows a variety of residential and institutional uses in stand-alone structures as well as in mixed-use developments. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Detached Duplex SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a 16 16 [1] n/a 17.6 17.6 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 5,000 [2] 7,000 10,000 [3] n/a 5,000 [4] 7,000 [4] 10,000 [3] n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [5] Interior lot 40 75 +[6] 60 40 [4] 75 + [6] 60 Corner lot 50 50 [4] Minimum Street Setback (feet) Front 20 20 15 [4] Side 15 Minimum Side Setback (feet) 5 n/a 5 [4] n/a Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 15 10 [4] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to 
Residential District n/a 20 n/a 15 Adjacent to 
Non-residential 
District 10 5 Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 50/80 [7] 50 80 [8] [1] Mixed-use development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] May be between 75% and 125% of the district minimum lot area, provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum (See Section 10.2.3 C.2 Lot Area Averaging). [3] Minimum development size. [4] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average of the lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [5] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [6] For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum width of 120 feet. [7] For each additional foot of height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot. [8] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential district, the setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
G.  District Standards   
1.  Drive-Throughs   
(a)  Outdoor speakers associated with a drive-through shall be located at least 50 feet from a residential district. 
(b)  Drive-through windows, menu boards, drive aisles, and speakers shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way. For corner lots, the drive aisles shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way, to the maximum extent practicable. 
2.  Nonresidential Development Nonresidential development shall not exceed 50,000 square feet of gross floor area of buildings in the aggregate. 
3.  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage of materials, supplies, products, or equipment is prohibited for all nonresidential uses. Nothing shall prohibit the outdoor display of merchandise for sale in accordance with Section 4.4.5 K, Outdoor Display. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , §§ 9, 32, 1-17-2017) 
3.4.6. - General Business (GB) 
GB
GENERAL
BUSINESS
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The GB district is established to accommodate a wide range of general retail, business, and service uses that serve groups of neighborhoods. GB districts are generally located at major street intersections and along major thoroughfares. Residential uses are encouraged as stand-alone uses and on the upper floors of retail and office buildings as a part of mixed-use development. Uses in the district are subject to standards intended to ensure development is compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods, particularly within the Core City area. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Maximum Density (units/acre) 26 26 [1] 28.6 28.6 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 8,000 [2] n/a 8,000 [2] n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [3] Interior lot 60 + [4] 75 60 + [4] 75 Corner lot Minimum Street Setback (feet) 25 15 [5] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to 
Residential District 25 10 Adjacent to 
Nonresidential 
District 10 0/5 [6] Maximum Building Height (feet) n/a [7] n/a [8] [1] Mixed-use development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] Minimum development size. [3] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [4] For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum width of 120 feet. [5] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average of the lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [6] No setback is required, but if provided, it shall be at least 5 feet. [7] For each additional foot of height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot. [8] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential district, the setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
G.  District Standards   
1.  Drive-Throughs   
(a)  Outdoor speakers associated with the drive-through shall be at least 50 feet from a residential district. 
(b)  Drive-through windows, menu boards, drive aisles, and speakers shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way. For corner lots, the drive aisles shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way, to the maximum extent practicable. 
2.  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage shall: 
(a)  Not cover an area greater than 50 percent of the gross ground floor area of the principal building; 
(b)  Not be located between a principal building line and a front or side street right-of-way; 
(c)  Not be located in any required landscape yard; and 
(d)  Be screened from view from adjacent lots and public streets with an opaque fence, wall, or by any other allowed method in Section 5.6.6, Screening Methods, to a height 6 feet above grade level, provided the screen shall not be allowed in any required landscape yard. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 9, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 4.A, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 10.A, 12-3-2018) 
3.4.7. - Retail Center (RC) 
RC
RETAIL
CENTER
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The RC district is established to accommodate a diverse range of high-intensity retail, service, and office uses that provide goods and services serving the residents and businesses of the region. The district is typically located at major intersections where visibility and good access are important. Development in the RC district is often configured as large-scale development with multiple uses, shared parking, coordinated signage and landscaping, and deep front setbacks. Higher-density residential uses are encouraged on the upper floors of nonresidential establishments, and may exist as stand-alone buildings as part of a large horizontal mixed-use development. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Attached 
& Multi-family All Other Uses SF Attached 
& Multi-family All Other Uses Minimum District Size (acres) 5 3 Maximum Density (units/acre) 26 26 [1] 28.6 28.6 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 8,000 [2] n/a 8,000 [2] n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [3] Interior lot 60 + [4] 100 60 + [4] 100 Corner lot Minimum Street Setback (feet) 30 30 [5] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) 30 15 Maximum Building Height (feet) n/a [6] n/a [7] [1] Mixed-use development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] Minimum development size. [3] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [4] For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum width of 120 feet. [5] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average of the lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [6] For each additional foot of height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot. [7] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential district, the setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
G.  District Standards   
1.  Drive-Throughs   
(a)  Outdoor speakers associated with the drive-through shall be at least 50 feet from a residential district. 
(b)  Drive-through windows, menu boards, drive aisles, and speakers shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way. For corner lots, the drive aisles shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way, to the maximum extent practicable. 
2.  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage shall: 
(a)  Not cover an area greater than 50 percent of the gross ground floor area of the principal building; 
(b)  Not be located between a principal building line and a front or side street right-of-way; 
(c)  Not be located in any required landscape yard; and 
(d)  Be screened from view from adjacent lots and public streets with an opaque fence, wall, or by any other allowed method in Section 5.6.6, Screening Methods, to a height 6 feet above grade level, provided the screen shall not be allowed in any required landscape yard. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 9, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 4.B, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 10.B, 12-3-2018) 
3.4.8. - Central Business (CB) 
CB
CENTRAL
BUSINESS
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The CB district is established and intended to encourage the urban form and architectural character found in the traditional downtown area as well as promote redevelopment that will make the downtown area, a more diverse and vibrant mixed-use urban center. The CB district is intended to accommodate a well-balanced mix of uses (e.g., office, retail, service, high-density residential, and market showroom development), promote a strong pedestrian-oriented environment (with a reduced need for parking), and preserve and protect the downtown's historical and architectural scale and character. The district is subject to flexible standards intended to support a mixed use urban context. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # ALL USES Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a Minimum Lot Area (square feet) n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) Interior lot n/a Corner lot n/a Minimum Street Setback (feet) 0, 10 from back of curb [1] Maximum Street Setback 
(Main Street Only) [2] [3] 20 Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) 0/5 [4] Maximum Building Height (feet) n/a [1] All buildings shall be at least 10 feet from the back of the curb. [2] For all new buildings subject to a maximum street setback, at least 60% of the front building facade shall be located parallel to and within the required setbacks. [3] Buildings are exempt from the maximum street setback, if they provide a civic space (see Section 3.4.8 G.2(b) Exemption from Maximum Setback). [4] No setback is required, but if provided, it shall be at least 5 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
G.  District Standards   
1.  Building Compliance due to Expansion or Exterior Alteration   
(a)  In cases where an existing building is expanded or enlarged by 25 percent or less of its gross floor area as it existed on June 5, 2017, or the effective date of the district upon the land, whichever is later, the expansion of the building shall either maintain the current appearance of the existing building or comply with the standards in Section 3.4.8 G.1, Building Standards. 
(b)  In cases where an existing building is expanded or enlarged by more than 25 percent of its gross floor area as it existed on June 5, 2017, or the effective date of the district upon the land, whichever is later, the portion of the front and side building facades associated with the expansion or enlargement shall comply with the standards in Section 3.4.8 G.1, Building Standards. 
(c)  In cases where the exterior of an existing building is altered, the alterations shall conform to the standards of this section, to the maximum extent practicable. Alterations shall not include the removing, filling-in, or placing a false facade over an existing window, or any other physical changes to obstruct the window. The Planning and Development Director is authorized to grant an administrative adjustment to allow up to 2 windows to be removed or covered for non-occupiable space in an existing building. 
2.  Site Standards   
(a)  Building Orientation For all new buildings subject to a maximum street setback, at least 60% of the front building facade shall be located parallel to and within the required setbacks. 
(b)  Exemption from Main Street Maximum Setback Uses that provide a civic space are exempt from the maximum setback requirement, provided the civic space meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The civic space shall be between the front of the principal building and Main Street; 
(2)  The area shall not be used for parking or loading, exclusive of valet parking and passenger loading; 
(3)  The area shall have landscaping that covers a minimum of 10 percent of the area; 
(4)  It may include pedestrian amenities which include but are not limited to: seating, outdoor play areas, bicycle racks, kiosks, water features, public art, freestanding structures such as a clock tower, or similar amenities; 
(5)  A decorative fence, a hedgerow, or a combination thereof may be provided along Main Street (or other primary fronting street) to provide a boundary between the civic space and the street right-of-way. If provided, the boundary treatment shall meet the following requirements: 
(i)  Walls and fences are limited to a maximum of 4 feet in height. Decorative fences include, but are not limited to: wrought iron, architectural metal, or other transparent decorative fence. Chain-link fencing is prohibited. 
(ii)  Hedges used to establish this boundary shall be a minimum height of 18 inches at planting and shall be maintained at a height between 3 and 4 feet at maturity. 
(c)  Off-Street Parking Off-Street parking is not required, but when provided, development in the CB district shall comply with the following standards (see Figure 3.4.8.G.2, Parking Lot Location) in addition to the applicable standards in Section 5.4, Off-Street Parking and Loading: 
(1)  Off-street parking areas shall not be located between the front building line and the street it faces. 
(2)  Off-street parking areas on corner lots shall not contiguously front more than 1 street. 
FIGURE 3.4.8.G.2, PARKING LOT LOCATION

  
(d)  Drive-Throughs   
(a)  Outdoor speakers associated with the drive-through shall be at least 50 feet from a residential district. 
(b)  Drive-through windows, menu boards, drive aisles, and speakers shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way. For corner lots, the drive aisles shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage of materials, supplies, products, or equipment is prohibited for all nonresidential uses. Nothing shall prohibit the outdoor display of merchandise for sale in accordance with Section 4.4.5 K, Outdoor Display. 
(f)  Sidewalks Sidewalks shall comply with the standards in Section 5.9, Sidewalks, as well as the following: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be located on both sides of all streets except alleys. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be located at the back of the curb and shall maintain a minimum width of 10 feet or up to the existing building line when less than 10 feet. 
(3)  Sidewalks may include street tree plantings, street furnishings and sidewalk cafes in accordance with applicable City Codes. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be configured to provide a smooth transition in width between new sidewalks and connections to established sidewalks of a lesser width. 
(g)  Accessory Buildings   
(1)  Accessory buildings shall be located behind the rear building line of the principal building they serve. 
(2)  For group developments, accessory buildings can be located internally to the development. In no instance, shall an accessory building be located between a front building line that is established by a principal building and the street the principal building faces. 
(3)  Multi-family residential and nonresidential accessory building facades should use the same materials as the principal building they serve. 
3.  Building Standards The following standards are applied to all multi-family residential and nonresidential buildings; except for locally or nationally designated individual historic structures, and contributing structures within a locally or nationally designated historic district, provided such structures comply with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation or are issued a Certificate of Appropriateness, as applicable: 
(a)  Facade Articulation   
(1)  Front and side building facades shall include at least 2 or more of the following features at least every 15 feet measured horizontally and vertically per floor: 
(i)  Recessed entryways; 
(ii)  Display windows; 
(iii)  Window indentations (such as but not limited to double-hung, stationary, or casement windows) that are regularly spaced and that incorporate a differing building material, texture, color, awnings, window hoods, or canopies. This shall not include a glass curtain wall or flush mounted glass; 
(iv)  Offset surfaces, niches, insets, projections, or bas-relief with a minimum depth of 4 inches; 
(v)  Differentiated piers, columns, or pilasters; 
(vi)  Pedestrian entrances; 
(vii)  Textured materials (such as but not limited to brick or stone); 
(viii)  Roofline changes, coupled with correspondingly aligned wall offsets or facade material changes, changes in the roof planes, or changes in the height of a parapet wall; or 
(ix)  Changes in wall plane (such as projections or recesses). 
(2)  Building facades facing a street should achieve vertical orientation by using regularly spaced vertically oriented windows and doors, in conjunction with features such as: roof line/parapet variations, window hoods, material changes, columns, pilasters, posts, awnings, canopies, stoops, or facade offsets, to create vertically oriented bays, or divisions of space that are approximately 30 feet wide or less. The rhythm within a building facade should be maintained by making each vertically oriented bay the same width. 
(3)  Buildings of 2 or more stories are encouraged to have front facades that have a clear and distinct base (ground floor), middle, and top (often defined by a decorative cornice). Features such as an increased ground floor height (including a transom window), the use of a frieze, string course or storefront cornice, a bulkhead or kick plate, and differentiated building materials or coloration are similarly encouraged. 
(b)  Facade Materials   
(1)  Primary facade materials should not change at outside corners, and should continue around the corner to a logical point of conclusion such as a change in facade plane. 
(2)  Exterior building materials shall be continued to the finished grade on any elevation. 
(3)  Building facades utilizing smooth-faced concrete block, or unfinished or untreated tilt-up concrete panels, shall be limited to building facades not visible from public streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(4)  The use of vinyl siding or corrugated and other vertical metal siding as the sole or primary facade material is prohibited. 
(c)  Facade Transparency   
(1)  The front building facade facing a street shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 35 percent of the facade area between 2 and 8 feet above average grade. 
(2)  Ground level side facades facing a street shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 20 percent of the facade area between 2 and 8 feet of the floor. 
(3)  Upper stories on front and side facades facing a street shall maintain windows on at least 20 percent of the upper story facade area per floor as measured between 2 and 8 feet. The window glazing may be opaque. 
(4)  Civic, religious institution, and utilities use categories are exempt from these transparency requirements. 
(d)  Primary Entrance   
(1)  Except for corner buildings, the primary entrance of a building shall face the street from which the building derives its street address. 
(2)  Primary entrances on corner buildings may be located to face the corner. 
(3)  The primary entrance shall be distinguishable from the balance of the front facade through the use of one or more of any of the following or other similar features: 
(i)  Projecting or recessed entry; 
(ii)  Transom or sidelight windows; 
(iii)  Pediments, columns, or other vertical features; or 
(iv)  Marquees, arcades, or overhangs. 
(e)  Roof-Mounted Equipment   
(1)  Flat roofs shall incorporate parapet walls designed to screen the roof and roof-mounted equipment from view from the primary street fronting the building and any abutting side streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. The parapet wall should be finished in the same or similar material and color as the building. 
(2)  For sloped roofs, equipment and other roof penetrations should be located and screened to have a minimal visual impact as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(3)  In cases where complete screening is not practicable, all roof-mounted equipment and other roof penetrations shall be camouflaged through the use of paint or architectural techniques to minimize its appearance. 
(4)  Green roofs, which use vegetation to improve stormwater quality and reduce runoff, are exempt from the screening requirements described in this subsection. 
(f)  Service or Vehicular Bays   
(1)  Service or vehicular bay doors shall not face the primary fronting street if the door is located within 50 feet of the street right-of-way, unless the doors use similar architectural styling and color to blend in with the building they serve, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(2)  Other than the primary fronting street, all service or vehicular bay doors that face a street and are within 50 feet of the street right-of-way shall use the same or a similar color as the building so as to blend it in with the building they serve, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3)  No service or vehicular bay doors shall face Main Street. 
(Ord. No. 7302/17-44 , §§ 1, 2, 6-5-2017; Ord. No. 7363/17-106 , §§ 12-15, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7389/18-18 , § 1, 2-19-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 7.B, 12-3-2018) 
3.4.9. - Reserved 
3.4.10. - Employment Center (EC) 
EC
EMPLOYMENT
CENTER
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The EC district is established to accommodate office, warehouse, research and development, light industrial, and supporting activities in a well-planned, high quality business park setting. In addition to typical business park uses, the district also allows retail and service uses intended to serve employees working in the immediate vicinity. In addition to an expectation for high quality design, the district includes standards to help ensure compatibility between development and nearby residential uses. Region-serving commercial and intensive forms of industrial development are prohibited as well as outdoor manufacturing, processing, and storage activities. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses Minimum District Size (acres) 5 2 Maximum Density (units/acre) 16 16 [1] 17.6 17.6 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 40,000 [2] n/a 40,000 [2] n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [3] Interior lot 150 150 [4] 150 Corner lot Minimum Street Setback (feet) 15 15 [4] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to 
Residential 
District 40 25 Adjacent to 
Nonresidential 
District 20 10 Max. Building Height (feet) n/a [5] n/a [6] [1] Mixed-use development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] Minimum development size. [3] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [4] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average of the lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [5] For each additional foot of height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot. [6] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential district, the setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
G.  District Standards   
1.  Site Standards The following standards are applied to nonresidential development sites: 
(a)  Building Orientation Single-building developments shall be oriented so that the front facade faces the street from which the building derives its street address. 
(b)  Drive-Throughs Drive-through lanes and windows are prohibited. 
(c)  Fences Non-coated chain link fencing shall not be located between the primary facade of a building and the street it faces, and comply with the standards in Section 5.11, Fences. 
(d)  Ground-based Mechanical Equipment Screening Ground-based mechanical equipment shall be located to the side or rear of the building and comply with the standards in Section 5.6, Screening. 
(e)  Off-Street Loading   
(1)  Loading docks and bays shall be located towards the rear of buildings, or located internally within multi-building developments, and shall not face or be adjacent to public streets. 
(2)  If located on the side of a building it shall be screened in accordance with Section 5.6, Screening. 
(f)  Pedestrian Connections Pedestrian connections with a minimum unobstructed width of 4 feet shall be incorporated to connect a building's primary entrance with all of the following: 
(1)  Off-street parking areas of 30 or more spaces located on the same lot; 
(2)  The principal entrances of all other principal buildings in a multi-building development; 
(3)  The public sidewalk, if one abuts the development; 
(4)  On-site pedestrian amenities; 
(5)  Greenways, trails, or paths located on-site or abutting the development; and 
(6)  Existing or planned transit stops located on-site or abutting the development. 
(g)  Accessory Buildings Accessory buildings shall be located to the side or rear of the development they serve, and shall use the same materials and architectural styling as the principal building they serve. 
(h)  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage shall: 
(1)  Not cover an area greater than 50 percent of the gross ground floor area of the principal building; 
(2)  Be located between the rear building line of the principal building and the rear lot line; 
(3)  Not be located in any required landscape yard; and 
(4)  Be screened from view from adjacent lots and public streets with an opaque fence, wall, or by any other allowed method in Section 5.6.6, Screening Methods, to a height 6 feet above grade level, provided the screen shall not be allowed in any required landscape yard. 
(i)  Outdoor Manufacturing, Processing, Repair, or Assembly Outdoor manufacturing, processing, repair, or assembly is prohibited and must take place within an enclosed building. 
2.  Building Standards The following standards are applied to all multi-family residential and nonresidential buildings, except for locally or nationally designated individual historic structures and contributing structures within a locally or nationally designated historic district, provided such structures comply with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation or are issued a Certificate of Appropriateness, as applicable. 
(a)  Articulation   
(1)  Building facades facing a public street shall include at least 2 or more of the following features: 
(i)  Windows or fenestration; 
(ii)  Changes in wall plane (such as projections or recesses) with an offset or depth of at least 1 foot; 
(iii)  Roofline changes, coupled with correspondingly aligned wall offset or facade material changes, changes in the roof planes, or changes in the height of a parapet wall; 
(iv)  Use of columns, pilasters, piers, architectural boxing, or other technique to break the facade into different volumes; 
(v)  Inclusion of eaves or overhangs; or 
(vi)  Inclusion of an entryway with a roof form that differs from the rest of the facade. 
(b)  Facade Materials   
(1)  Exterior building materials should be continued to the finished grade on any elevation. 
(2)  Building facades utilizing smooth-faced concrete block, or unfinished or untreated tilt-up concrete panels, shall be limited to building facades not visible from public streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(3)  The use of vinyl siding or corrugated metal siding and other vertical metal siding is prohibited. 
(4)  The use of high intensity (bright), metallic, or fluorescent colors shall be limited to facade trim or accents and total less than 20% of the area of any building facade. 
(5)  Primary facade materials should not change at outside corners, and should continue around the corner to a logical point of conclusion such as a window or change in facade plane. 
(c)  Roof-Mounted Equipment   
(1)  Flat roofs shall incorporate parapet walls designed to screen the roof and roof-mounted equipment from view from the primary street fronting the building and any abutting side streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. The parapet wall should be finished in the same or similar material and color as the building. 
(2)  For sloped roofs, equipment and other roof penetrations should be located and screened to have a minimal visual impact as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(3)  In cases where complete screening is not practicable, all roof- mounted equipment and other roof penetrations shall be camouflaged through the use of paint or architectural techniques to minimize its appearance. 
(4)  Green roofs, which use vegetation to improve stormwater quality and reduce runoff, are exempt from the screening requirements described in this subsection. 
3.  Retail Sales and Personal Service Uses Retail Sales and Personal Service uses established as a principal use shall be located within a multi-tenant building. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 7, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 4.C, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 2.A, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 10.C, 12-3-2018) 
3.4.11. - Light Industrial (LI) 
LI
LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The LI district is established to accommodate light manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, distribution, storage, wholesales sales, research and development, and other industrial uses that are small-scale and result in minimal exterior movement of vehicles, materials, and goods, and have minimal visual impacts. The district also allows commercial activities intended to serve the primary businesses in the districts and their employees as well as multi-family, retail, and personal services establishments as adaptive re-uses of existing buildings within the Core City. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA Minimum Lot Area (square feet) n/a n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [1] Interior lot 100 100 Corner lot Minimum Street Setback (feet) 25 15 [2] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to Residential District 40 25 Adjacent to Nonresidential District 0/5 [3] 0/5 [3] Maximum Building Height (feet) n/a [4] n/a [5] [1] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [2] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average of the lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [3] No setback is required, but if provided, it shall be at least 5 feet. [4] For each additional foot of height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot. [5] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential district, the setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
G.  District Standards   
1.  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage shall be screened from view from adjacent lots and public streets with an opaque fence, wall, or by any other allowed method in Section 5.6.6, Screening Methods, to a height 6 feet above grade level. 
2.  Outdoor Manufacturing, Processing, or Assembly Outdoor manufacturing, processing, or assembly is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 4.D, 11-20-2017) 
3.4.12. - Heavy Industrial (HI) 
HI
HEAVY
INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The HI district is established to accommodate heavy manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, distribution, storage, research and development, and other industrial uses that may be large-scale or otherwise have extensive exterior movement of vehicles, materials, and goods, and greater potential for adverse environmental and visual impacts. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA Minimum Lot Area (square feet) n/a n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [1] Interior lot 100 100 Corner lot Minimum Street Setback (feet) 25 15 [2] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) [3] Adjacent to Residential District 50 35 Adjacent to Nonresidential District 0/5 [3] 0/5 [3] Maximum Building Height (feet) n/a [4] n/a [5] [1] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [2] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average of the lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [3] No setback is required, but if provided, it shall be at least 5 feet. [4] For each additional foot of height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot. [5] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential district, the setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
3.5. - Special Zoning Districts 

3.5.1. - General Purpose and Intent 
The special zoning districts established in this section are intended to achieve specific planning and design objectives in defined areas of the City and to create suitable environments for distinct uses and development outside the established residential and business districts. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 8, 1-17-2017) 
3.5.2. - Agricultural/Rural (AGR) 
AGR
AGRICULTURAL/
RURAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The AGR district is established to accommodate agricultural and agricultural-related uses as well as very low density residential development on large lots, that are not served by public water or sewer. The district is intended to preserve land for agricultural or forest uses, to provide for the orderly transition to urban use, and protect environmentally-sensitive lands. It encourages residential development that preserves farmland and other open space through flexibly-designed conservation subdivisions. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # ALL USES Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a Minimum Lot Area (acres) 5 Minimum Lot Width (feet) [1] Interior lot 150 Corner lot Minimum Street Setback (feet) Front 30 Side 15 Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) 30 Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 [2] [1] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [2] Not applied to farm-related accessory structures.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
(Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 3.A, 5-21-2018) 
3.5.3. - Reserved 
  
3.5.4. - Institutional (I) 
I
INSTITUTIONAL
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The I district is established to accommodate large-sized public, quasi-public, and institutional uses such as colleges, universities, or hospitals in a campus-like setting. Uses in the I district can have substantial land use impacts or traffic impacts on surrounding uses. This district is not intended to accommodate those smaller public and institutional uses that are typically found in residential districts. The district allows a limited range of residential and institutional development as support uses. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA All Uses All Uses Minimum District Size (acres) 20 10 Maximum Density (units/acre) 16 [1] 17.6 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) n/a n/a Minimum Lot Width (feet) [2] Interior lot 100 100 Corner lot Minimum Street Setback (feet) 30 30 [3] Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) 30 15 Maximum Building Height (feet) n/a [4] n/a [5] [1] Mixed-use development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [3] At applicant's option, may be reduced to the lesser of: zoning district minimum or between 75% and 125% of the average of the lots on the same block face (See Section 10.2.3 D, Dimensional Standards in the Core City). [4] For each additional foot of height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot. [5] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential district, the setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
3.5.5. - Reserved 
  
3.5.6. - Main Street (MS) 
MS
MAIN
STREET
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The Main Street (MS) district is established to encourage compact, walkable, pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use development and redevelopment along Main Street. It is intended to enhance the range of goods and services available to shoppers in the Core City area while also providing a wider range of urban housing options for those seeking to live near the central business district. B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD SUB-DISTRICT A SUB-DISTRICT B SUB-DISTRICT C SUB-DISTRICT D Maximum Density (units/acre) 26 [1] Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 6,000 4,000 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) [2] Interior lot 60 40 60 Corner lot Minimum Street Setback (feet) 5, 10 from back of curb [3] 0, 10 from back of curb [3] 5, 10 from back of curb [3] Maximum Street Setback (feet) 
(Main Street Only) [4] [5] 25 20 25 Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to Residential District 10 Adjacent to Nonresidential District 0/5 Maximum Building Height (feet) n/a [6] [1] Mixed-use development is subject to the maximum density standards. [2] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [3] All buildings shall be at least 10 feet from the back of the curb. [4] For all new buildings subject to a maximum street setback, at least 60% of the front building facade shall be located parallel to and within the required setbacks. [5] Buildings are exempt from the maximum street setback, if they provide a civic space (see Section 3.5.6 G.3.(b) Exemption from Maximum Setback). [6] When a perimeter setback abuts a single-family residential district, the setback shall be increased by 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 feet up to 80 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
G.  District Standards   
1.  Sub-districts Established The MS district is organized into a series of 4 sub-districts (A, B, C, and D, as depicted on the Official Zoning Map) to better recognize the differing development contexts along Main Street. Except where otherwise indicated below, the district standards in this section shall apply to development in all 4 sub-districts. 
2.  Building Compliance due to Expansion or Exterior Alteration   
(a)  In cases where an existing building is expanded or enlarged by 25 percent or less of its gross floor area as it existed on March 31, 2008, the expansion of the building shall either maintain the current appearance of the existing building or comply with the standards in Section 3.5.6 G.4, Building Standards. 
(b)  In cases where an existing building is expanded or enlarged by more than 25 percent of its gross floor area as it existed on March 31, 2008, the portion of the front and side building facades associated with the expansion or enlargement shall comply with the standards in Section 3.5.6 G.4, Building Standards. 
(c)  In cases where a building existing on March 31, 2008, does not comply with the minimum and maximum street setbacks, the building may be enlarged or expanded without complying with applicable maximum street setback requirements. 
(d)  In cases where the exterior of an existing building is altered, the alterations shall conform to the standards of this section, to the maximum extent practicable. Alterations shall not include the removing, filling-in, or placing a false facade over an existing window, or any other physical changes to obstruct the window. The Planning and Development Director is authorized to grant an administrative adjustment to allow up to 2 windows to be removed or covered for non-occupiable space in an existing building. 
3.  Site Standards   
(a)  Building Orientation   
(1)  Single-building developments shall be oriented so that the front facade faces the street from which the building derives its street address. 
(2)  For all new buildings subject to a maximum street setback, at least 60% of the front building facade shall be located parallel to and within the required setbacks. 
(3)  Group developments shall configure building walls to frame and enclose the corners of street intersections or entry points into the development, a central pedestrian access corridor within the development site, or other site amenities on at least 3 sides. 
(b)  Exemption from Maximum Setback Uses that provide a civic space are exempt from the maximum setback requirement, provided the civic space meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The civic space shall be between the front of the principal building and the street; 
(2)  The area shall not be used for parking or loading, exclusive of valet parking and passenger loading; 
(3)  The area shall have landscaping that covers a minimum of 10 percent of the area; 
(4)  It may include pedestrian amenities which include but are not limited to: seating, outdoor play areas, bicycle racks, kiosks, water features, public art, freestanding structures such as a clock tower, or similar amenities; 
(5)  A decorative fence, a hedgerow, or a combination thereof may be provided to provide a boundary between the civic space and the street right-of-way. If provided, the boundary treatment shall meet the following requirements: 
(i)  Walls and fences are limited to a maximum of 4 feet in height. Decorative fences include, but are not limited to: wrought iron, architectural metal, or other transparent decorative fence. Chain-link fencing is prohibited. 
(ii)  Hedges used to establish this boundary shall be a minimum height of 18 inches at planting and shall be maintained at a height between 3 and 4 feet at maturity. 
(c)  Drive-Throughs   
(1)  Drive-through lanes and windows are prohibited in sub-district B. 
(2)  In sub-districts A, C, and D the following standards shall apply: 
i.  Outdoor speakers associated with a drive-through shall be located at least 50 feet from a residential district. 
ii.  Drive-through windows, menu boards, drive aisles, and speakers shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way. For corner lots, drive aisles shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(d)  Fuel Pumps and Canopies Fuel pumps and canopies shall be located behind the rear building line of the principal building, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  Fences Fences shall comply with the standards in Section 5.11, Fences, as well as the following: 
(1)  Chain link, barbed wire fencing, and plain concrete block shall only be permitted behind the rear building line of the principal building and shall not be located within 40 feet of the right-of-way of a public street (excluding alleys). 
(2)  Chain link, barbed wire fencing, and plain concrete block walls shall only be permitted along the rear lot line of lots without a principal building. 
(3)  Fences located between the minimum and maximum street setback shall be limited to 4 feet in height or less and may not be fully opaque. 
(4)  Fences shall be provided along all lot lines that abut a residential zoning district and be opaque to a height 6 feet above grade level. 
(f)  Ground-based Mechanical Equipment Screening Ground-based mechanical equipment should be located to the rear of the principal building(s), and shall be screened in accordance with Section 5.6, Screening. 
(g)  Landscaping Landscaping shall comply with the standards in Section 5.5, Landscaping, as well as the following: 
(1)  Street yards are not required in sub-districts B and C. 
(2)  A Type D yard is required in sub-districts A & D for all street frontages. 
(h)  Off-Street Loading If provided, loading areas shall not be on the front facade of the principal building and shall be screened in accordance with Section 5.6, Screening. 
(i)  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage of materials, supplies, products, or equipment is prohibited. Nothing shall prohibit the outdoor display of merchandise for sale in accordance with Section 4.4.5 K, Outdoor Display. 
(j)  Off-Street Parking In addition to the applicable standards in Section 5.4, Off-Street Parking and Loading, development in the MS district shall comply with the following standards (see Figure 3.5.6.G1, Parking Lot Location): 
(1)  Off-street parking areas shall not be located between the front building line and the street it faces. 
(2)  Off-street parking areas on corner lots shall not contiguous front more than 1 street. 
(3)  Except for driveway crossings, drive aisles in sub-districts B and C shall not be located in the area between the minimum and maximum street setback. 
(4)  Residential uses located within a mixed-use building are exempted from the off-street parking requirements in Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards. 
FIGURE 3.5.6.G1, PARKING LOT LOCATION

(k)  Sidewalks Sidewalks shall be installed along the abutting public street frontage and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards in Section 5.9, Sidewalks. 
(l)  Accessory Buildings   
(1)  Accessory buildings shall be located behind the rear building line of the principal building they serve. 
(2)  For group developments, accessory buildings can be located internally to the development. In no instance, shall an accessory building be located between a front building line that is established by a principal building and the street the principal building faces. 
(3)  Multi-family residential and nonresidential accessory buildings and structures should be similar in materials and architectural style to a principal building. 
(m)  Group Developments Additional principal buildings may be built on a site beyond the maximum street setback if there is at least 1 principal building located on the site with a front facade that meets the street setback requirements and covers a minimum of 50 percent of the lot width. 
4.  Building Standards The following standards are applied to all multi-family residential and nonresidential buildings; except for locally or nationally designated individual historic structures, and contributing structures within a locally or nationally designated historic district, provided such structures comply with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation or are issued a Certificate of Appropriateness, as applicable: 
(a)  Facade Articulation   
(1)  Front and side building facades shall include at least 2 or more of the following features at least every 15 feet measured horizontally and vertically per floor: 
(i)  Recessed entryways; 
(ii)  Display windows; 
(iii)  Window indentations (such as but not limited to double-hung, stationary, or casement windows) that are regularly spaced and that incorporate a differing building material, texture, color, awnings, window hoods, or canopies. This shall not include a glass curtain wall or flush mounted glass; 
(iv)  Offset surfaces, niches, insets, projections, or bas-relief with a minimum depth of 4 inches; 
(v)  Differentiated piers, columns, or pilasters; 
(vi)  Pedestrian entrances; 
(vii)  Textured materials (such as but not limited to brick or stone); 
(viii)  Roofline changes, coupled with correspondingly aligned wall offset or facade material changes, changes in the roof planes, or changes in the height of a parapet wall; or 
(ix)  Changes in wall plane (such as projections or recesses). 
(2)  Building facades facing a street should achieve vertical orientation by using regularly spaced vertically oriented windows and doors, in conjunction with features such as: roofline/parapet variations, window hoods, material changes, columns, pilasters, posts, awnings, canopies, stoops, or facade offsets, to create vertically oriented bays, or divisions of space that are approximately 30 feet wide or less. The rhythm within a building facade should be maintained by making each vertically oriented bay the same width. 
(3)  Buildings of 2 or more stories are encouraged to have front facades that have a clear and distinct base (ground floor), middle, and top (often defined by a decorative cornice). Features such as an increased ground floor height (including a transom window), the use of a frieze, string course or storefront cornice, a bulkhead or kick plate, and differentiated building materials or coloration are similarly encouraged. 
(b)  Facade Materials   
(1)  Where 2 or more materials are proposed to be combined on a facade, the heavier and more massive elements should be located below the lighter elements (e.g., brick shall be located below stucco). Heavier materials may also be placed as a detail on the corner of a building or along cornices or windows. 
(2)  Primary facade materials should not change at outside corners, and shall continue around the corner to a logical point of conclusion such as a change in facade plane. 
(3)  Exterior building materials shall be continued to the finished grade on any elevation. 
(4)  Building facades utilizing smooth-faced concrete block, or unfinished or untreated tilt-up concrete panels, shall be limited to building facades not visible from public streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(c)  Facade Transparency   
(1)  The front building facades facing a street shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 50 percent of the facade area between 2 and 8 feet above average grade. 
(2)  Ground level side facades facing a street shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 20 percent of the facade area between 2 and 8 feet of the floor. 
(3)  Upper stories on front and side facades facing a street shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 20 percent of the upper story facade area per floor as measured between 2 and 8 feet. 
(4)  Civic, religious institution, and utilities use categories are exempt from these transparency requirements. 
(d)  Main Street Entrance   
(1)  Every building on Main Street shall have an entrance that faces the Main Street right-of-way. 
(2)  A Main Street entrance on corner buildings may be located to face the corner. 
(3)  A Main Street entrance shall be distinguishable from the balance of the front facade through the use of one or more of any of the following or other similar features: 
(i)  Projecting or recessed entry; 
(ii)  Transom or sidelight windows; 
(iii)  Pediments, columns, or other vertical features; or 
(iv)  Marquees, arcades, or overhangs. 
(4)  Buildings on lots without a frontage on Main Street shall comply with the standards of this subsection for the street they face. 
(e)  Roof-Mounted Equipment   
(1)  Flat roofs shall incorporate parapet walls designed to screen the roof and roof-mounted equipment from view from the primary street fronting the building and any abutting side streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. The parapet wall should be finished in the same or similar material and color as the building. 
(2)  For sloped roofs, equipment and other roof penetrations should be located and screened to have a minimal visual impact as seen from adjacent residential uses and the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(3)  In cases where complete screening is not practicable, all roof- mounted equipment and other roof penetrations shall be camouflaged through the use of paint or architectural techniques to minimize its appearance. 
(4)  Green roofs, which use vegetation to improve stormwater quality and reduce runoff, are exempt from the screening requirements described in this subsection. 
(f)  Service or Vehicular Bays   
(1)  Service or vehicular bays and their doors shall not be located so as to face Main Street (or the primary fronting street for properties located off of Main Street) if the door is located within 50 feet of the street right-of-way. 
(2)  Other than the primary fronting street, all service or vehicular bay doors that face a street and are within 50 feet of the street right-of-way shall use the same or a similar color as the building so as to blend it in with the building they serve, to the maximum extent practicable. 
5.  Existing Manufacturing Uses in Sub-district A The following standards shall apply to manufacturing uses in sub-district A: 
(a)  Any manufacturing use that existed on March 31, 2008 shall be considered a conforming use of land for the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Expansion of an existing manufacturing use is permitted provided all expansions are located at least 200 linear feet from the Main Street right-of-way. 
6.  Reserved   
7.  Uses Prohibited Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, sets out the use types prohibited in the MS district. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 9, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 2, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7363/17-106 , §§ 16-23, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 3.E, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 1.D, 7.C, 12-3-2018) 
3.5.7. - Mixed-Use (MX) 
MX
MIXED-USE
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The Mixed-Use (MX) district is intended to establish compact, pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use development and redevelopment at key locations in the Core City in accordance with the City's adopted policy guidance. It seeks to revitalize existing neighborhoods by enabling the development of higher intensity neighborhood centers with new housing, shopping, working, and recreational options in close proximity to one another. The proximity of these uses allows nearby residents to meet some of their daily needs without use of an automobile. The district standards address a variety of design elements including building location, off-street parking, access, land use, and visual quality.  
B.  Procedure for Establishment of Mixed-Use (MX) Districts   
1.  Mixed-Use Area Plan Prior to establishment of a MX district for a specific mixed-use area, a plan for the specific mixed-use area shall be adopted by the City Council. The mixed-use area plan should comply with the City's adopted policy guidance generally, and the specific recommendations for the mixed-use centers in the Core City Plan. The plan should, at a minimum, describe the characteristics, conditions, boundaries, and development goals of the area. 
2.  Mixed-Use Area Plan Approval After completion, the mixed-use area plan shall be forwarded to the P&Z for its review and recommendations following a public hearing. Upon completion of its review, the plan along with the recommendations of the P&Z shall be forwarded to the City Council for review and a public hearing. A mixed-use area plan shall be approved by the City Council for a specific mixed-use area before establishment of a corresponding MX district for the same area. 
3.  District Organization   
(a)  The MX district is organized into a series of different districts (e.g., Mixed-Use Washington Street (MX-W) as depicted on the Official Zoning Map) to better recognize the differing development contexts. 
(b)  The City Council may establish an MX district in accordance with this section, Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment, and Section 2.4.15, Text Amendment. 
(c)  Based on its associated mixed-use area plan, each MX district should, at a minimum, include boundaries, dimensional standards, and any other standards unique to the district. The general standards in Section 3.5.7 C, General Standards for All MX Districts shall also apply. If there is a conflict between the general standards for all MX districts and the specific standards for the individual MX districts, the specific standards for the individual MX district shall control. 
C.  General Standards for All MX Districts Except where otherwise indicated below, the standards in this section shall apply to all development in all MX districts. 
1.  Building Compliance due to an Expansion or Exterior Alteration   
(a)  In cases where an existing building is expanded or enlarged by 25 percent or less of its gross floor area as it existed on the effective date of the ordinance establishing the MX district, the expansion of the building shall either maintain the current appearance of the existing building or comply with the standards in Section 3.5.7 C.3, Building Standards. 
(b)  In cases where an existing building is expanded or enlarged by more than 25 percent of its gross floor area as it existed on the effective date of the ordinance establishing the MX district, the portion of the front and side building facades associated with the expansion or enlargement shall comply with the standards in Section 3.5.7 C.3, Building Standards. 
(c)  In cases where a building existing on the effective date of the ordinance establishing the MX district, does not comply with the minimum and maximum street setbacks, the building may be enlarged or expanded without complying with applicable maximum street setback requirements. 
(d)  In cases where the exterior of an existing building is altered, the alterations shall conform to the standards of this section, to the maximum extent practicable. Alterations shall not include the removing, filling-in, or placing a false facade over an existing window, or any other physical changes to obstruct the window. The Planning and Development Director is authorized to grant an administrative adjustment to allow up to 2 windows to be removed or covered for non-occupiable space in an existing building. 
2.  Site Standards   
(a)  Building Orientation   
(1)  Single-building developments shall be oriented so that the front facade faces the street from which the building derives its street address. 
(2)  For all new buildings subject to a maximum street setback, at least 60% of the front building facade shall be located parallel to and within the required setbacks. 
(3)  Group developments shall configure building walls to frame and enclose the corners of street intersections or entry points into the development, a central pedestrian access corridor within the development site, or other site amenities on at least 3 sides. 
(b)  Exemption from Maximum Setback Uses that provide a civic space are exempt from the maximum setback requirement, provided the civic space meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The civic space shall be between the front of the principal building and the street; 
(2)  The area shall not be used for parking or loading, exclusive of valet parking and passenger loading; 
(3)  The area shall have landscaping that covers a minimum of 10 percent of the area; 
(4)  It may include pedestrian amenities which include but are not limited to: seating, outdoor play areas, bicycle racks, kiosks, water features, public art, freestanding structures such as a clock tower, or similar amenities; 
(5)  A decorative fence, a hedgerow, or a combination thereof may be provided to provide a boundary between the civic space and the street right-of-way. If provided, the boundary treatment shall meet the following requirements: 
(i)  Walls and fences are limited to a maximum of 4 feet in height. Decorative fences include, but are not limited to: wrought iron, architectural metal, or other transparent decorative fence. Chain-link fencing is prohibited. 
(ii)  Hedges used to establish this boundary shall be a minimum height of 18 inches at planting and shall be maintained at a height between 3 and 4 feet at maturity. 
(c)  Fences Fences shall comply with the standards in Section 5.11, Fences, as well as the following: 
(1)  Chain link, barbed wire fencing, and plain concrete block shall only be permitted behind the rear building line of the principal building and shall not be located within 40 feet of the right-of-way of a public street (excluding alleys). 
(2)  Chain link, barbed wire fencing, and plain concrete block walls shall only be permitted along the rear lot line of lots without a principal building. 
(3)  Fences located between the minimum and maximum street setback shall be limited to 4 feet in height or less and may not be fully opaque. 
(4)  Fences shall be provided along all lot lines that abut a residential zoning district and shall be opaque to a height 6 feet above grade level. 
(d)  Ground-based Mechanical Equipment Screening Ground-based mechanical equipment should be located to the rear of the principal building(s), and shall be screened in accordance with Section 5.6, Screening. 
(e)  Off-Street Loading If provided, loading areas shall not be on the front facade of the principal building and shall be screened in accordance with Section 5.6, Screening. 
(f)  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage of materials, supplies, products, or equipment is prohibited. Nothing shall prohibit the outdoor display of merchandise for sale in accordance with Section 4.4.5 K, Outdoor Display. 
(g)  Off-Street Parking Off-Street parking is not required, but when provided, development in the MX district shall comply with the following standards (see Figure 3.5.7.C1, Parking Lot Configuration) in addition to the applicable standards in Section 5.4, Off-Street Parking and Loading: 
(1)  Off-street parking areas shall not be located between the front building line and the street it faces. 
(2)  Off-street parking areas on corner lots shall not contiguously front more than 1 street. 
(3)  When located along the side of a building, vehicular use areas shall not occupy more than 64 linear feet in width as measured along the lot's street frontage. 
FIGURE 3.5.7.C1, PARKING LOT CONFIGURATION

(h)  Sidewalks Sidewalks shall comply with the standards in Section 5.9, Sidewalks, as well as the following: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be located on both sides of all streets except alleys. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be located at the back of the curb and shall maintain a minimum width of at least 12 feet or up to the existing building line when less than 12 feet. 
(3)  Sidewalks may include street tree plantings, street furnishings and sidewalk cafes in accordance with applicable City Codes. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be configured to provide a smooth transition in width between new sidewalks and connections to established sidewalks of a lesser width. 
(i)  Accessory Buildings   
(1)  Accessory buildings shall be located behind the rear building line of the principal building they serve. 
(2)  For group developments, accessory buildings can be located internally to the development. In no instance, shall an accessory building be located between a front building line that is established by a principal building and the street the principal building faces. 
(3)  Multi-family residential and nonresidential accessory buildings and structures should be similar in materials and architectural style to a principal building. 
(j)  Group Developments Additional principal buildings may be built on a site beyond the maximum street setback if there is at least 1 principal building located on the site with a front facade that complies with the street setback requirements and covers a minimum of 50 percent of the lot width. 
3.  Building Standards The following standards are applied to all multi-family residential and nonresidential buildings; except for locally or nationally designated individual historic structures, and contributing structures within a locally or nationally designated historic district, provided such structures comply with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation or are issued a Certificate of Appropriateness, as applicable: 
(a)  Facade Articulation   
(1)  Front and side building facades shall include at least 2 or more of the following features at least every 15 feet measured horizontally and vertically per floor: 
(i)  Recessed entryways; 
(ii)  Display windows; 
(iii)  Window indentations (such as but not limited to double-hung, stationary, or casement windows) that are regularly spaced and that incorporate a differing building material, texture, color, awnings, window hoods, or canopies. This shall not include a glass curtain wall or flush mounted glass; 
(iv)  Offset surfaces, niches, insets, projections, or bas-relief with a minimum depth of 4 inches; 
(v)  Differentiated piers, columns, or pilasters; 
(vi)  Pedestrian entrances; 
(vii)  Textured materials (such as but not limited to brick or stone); 
(viii)  Roofline changes, coupled with correspondingly aligned wall offset or facade material changes, changes in the roof planes, or changes in the height of a parapet wall; or 
(ix)  Changes in wall plane (such as projections or recesses). 
(2)  Building facades facing a street should achieve vertical orientation by using regularly spaced vertically oriented windows and doors, in conjunction with features such as: roofline/parapet variations, window hoods, material changes, columns, pilasters, posts, awnings, canopies, stoops, or facade offsets, to create vertically oriented bays, or divisions of space that are approximately 30 feet wide or less. The rhythm within a building facade should be maintained by making each vertically oriented bay the same width. 
(3)  Buildings of 2 or more stories are encouraged to have front facades with a clear and distinct base (ground floor), middle, and top (often defined by a decorative cornice). Features such as an increased ground floor height (including a transom window), the use of a frieze, string course or storefront cornice, a bulkhead or kick plate, and differentiated building materials or coloration are similarly encouraged. 
(b)  Facade Materials   
(1)  Where 2 or more materials are proposed to be combined on a facade, the heavier and more massive elements should be located below the lighter elements (e.g., brick shall be located below stucco). Heavier materials may also be placed as a detail on the corner of a building or along cornices or windows. 
(2)  Primary facade materials should not change at outside corners, and should continue around the corner to a logical point of conclusion such as a change in facade plane. 
(3)  Exterior building materials shall be continued to the finished grade on any elevation. 
(4)  Building facades utilizing smooth-faced concrete block, or unfinished or untreated tilt-up concrete panels, shall be limited to building facades not visible from public streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(c)  Facade Transparency   
(1)  The front building facade facing a street shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 35 percent of the facade area between 2 and 8 feet above average grade. 
(2)  Ground level side facades facing a street shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 20 percent of the facade area between 2 and 8 feet of the floor. 
(3)  Upper stories on front and side facades facing a street shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 20 percent of the upper story facade area per floor as measured between 2 and 8 feet. 
(4)  Civic, religious institution, and utilities use categories are exempt from these transparency requirements. 
(d)  Primary Entrance   
(1)  Except for corner buildings, the primary entrance of a building shall face the street from which the building derives its street address. 
(2)  The primary entrance on corner buildings may be located to face the corner. 
(3)  The primary entrance shall be distinguishable from the balance of the front facade through the use of one or more of any of the following or other similar features: 
(i)  Projecting or recessed entry; 
(ii)  Transom or sidelight windows; 
(iii)  Pediments, columns, or other vertical features; or 
(iv)  Marquees, arcades, or overhangs. 
(e)  Roof-Mounted Equipment   
(1)  Flat roofs shall incorporate parapet walls designed to screen the roof and roof-mounted equipment from view from the primary street fronting the building and any abutting side streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. The parapet wall should be finished in the same or similar material and color as the building. 
(2)  For sloped roofs, equipment and other roof penetrations should be located and screened to have a minimal visual impact as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(3)  In cases where complete screening is not practicable, all roof-mounted equipment and other roof penetrations shall be camouflaged through the use of paint or architectural techniques to minimize its appearance. 
(4)  Green roofs, which use vegetation to improve stormwater quality and reduce runoff, are exempt from the screening requirements described in this subsection. 
(f)  Service or Vehicular Bays   
(1)  Service or vehicular bays and their doors shall not be located so as to face the primary fronting street if the door is located within 50 feet of the primary fronting street right-of-way. 
(2)  Other than the primary fronting street, all service or vehicular bay doors that face a street and are within 50 feet of the street right-of-way shall use the same or a similar color as the building so as to blend it in with the building they serve, to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.  Reserved   
5.  Block Design In cases where development in the MX district proposes a new street, the following block design standards shall apply: 
(a)  Block Length Block length shall be limited to 800 linear feet. The TRC may allow modifications from these block length standards if: 
(1)  Environmental or topographic constraints exist; 
(2)  A site has an irregular shape; or 
(3)  A longer block will reduce the number of railroad grade or major stream crossings. 
(b)  Block Width To the maximum extent practicable, the width of a block shall be sufficient to permit at least 2 tiers of lots exclusive of any public alleys, watercourses, or other rights-of-way located outside platted lots. 
(c)  Mid-Block Access If a block length exceeds 800 feet, sidewalks or multi-use paths shall be provided mid-block to connect parallel sidewalks on the long side of the block. 
6.  Street Network In cases where new streets are proposed, the following standards shall apply: 
(a)  The streets in a MX district shall be interconnected to provide efficient connections between uses and to accommodate vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation, as well as existing or future transit service. 
(b)  Streets in a MX district shall maintain a narrow cross section of 3 or fewer travel lanes with a maximum width of 12 feet per lane. 
(c)  Streets shall connect with existing streets and be configured in a grid or modified grid pattern. 
(d)  New streets shall be a logical continuation of the existing street network. 
(e)  On-street parking shall be provided along both sides of all streets (except alleys) in a MX district. 
(f)  Alleys of 14 to 16 feet in width shall be provided between tiers of lots in the middle of a block, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(g)  Lots served by an alley shall provide vehicular access from the alley. 
D.  Specific Standards for the MX-W District   
1.  Applicability The Mixed-Use Washington Street District was established on March 31, 2008 in accordance with the Core City Plan and the Washington Drive District Plan. In addition to Section 3.5.7 C, General Standards for All MX Districts, the standards in this section apply to all lands within the MX-W district on the Official Zoning Map. 
2.  Dimensional Standards The dimensional standards in Table 3.5.7.D, Dimensional Standards in the MX-W District, shall apply to all development in the MX-W District. 
TABLE 3.5.7.D, DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS IN THE MX-W DISTRICT 
REQUIREMENT STANDARD Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a Minimum Lot Area (square feet) n/a Minimum Lot Width [1] n/a Minimum Street Setback (feet) 0, 12 from back of curb [2] Maximum Street Setback (feet) [3] [4] 15 Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to Residential District 10 Adjacent to Nonresidential District 0/5 [5] Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 NOTES: [1] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [2] All buildings shall be at least 12 feet from the back of curb. [3] For all new buildings subject to a maximum street setback, at least 60% of the front building facade shall be located parallel to and within the required setbacks. [4] Buildings are exempt from the maximum street setback, if they provide a civic space (see Section 3.5.7 C.2(b) Exemption from Maximum Setback). [5] No setback is required, but if provided, shall be at least 5 feet.  
3.  Drive-Throughs Drive-through lanes and windows are prohibited. 
E.  Specific Standards for the MX-D District   
1.  Applicability The Mixed-Use Downtown district was established on November 20, 2017 in accordance with the High Point Downtown Mixed-Use Area Plan. In addition to Section 3.5.7 C, General Standards for All MX Districts, the standards in this section apply to all lands within the MX-D district on the Official Zoning Map. 
2.  Dimensional Standards The dimensional standards in Table 3.5.7.E, Dimensional Standards in the MX-D District, shall apply to all development in the MX-D District. 
TABLE 3.5.7.E, DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS IN THE MX-D DISTRICT 
REQUIREMENT STANDARD Maximum Density (units/acre) n/a Minimum Lot Area (square feet) n/a Minimum Lot Width [1] n/a Minimum Street Setback (feet) 0, 12 from back of curb [2] Maximum Street Setback 
(Elm and Main Street Only) [3] [4] 20 Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) Adjacent to Residential District 10 Adjacent to Nonresidential District 0/5 [5] Maximum Building Height (feet) n/a [1] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [2] All buildings shall be at least 12 feet from the back of curb. [3] For all new buildings subject to a maximum street setback, at least 60% of the front building facade shall be located parallel to and within the required setbacks. [4] Buildings are exempt from the maximum street setback, if they provide a civic space (see Section 3.5.7 C.2(b) Exemption from Maximum Setback). [5] No setback is required, but if provided, it shall be at least 5 feet.  
3.  Service or Vehicular Bays No service or vehicular bay doors shall face Elm Street or Main Street. 
4.  Drive-Throughs   
(a)  Outdoor speakers associated with the drive-through shall be at least 50 feet from a residential district. 
(b)  Drive-through windows, menu boards, drive aisles, and speakers shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way. For corner lots, the drive aisles shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 2, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7363/17-106 , §§ 1-4, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7389/18-18 , §§ 2-4, 2-19-2018; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , §§ 3.F, 3.G, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 1.E, 7.D, 12-3-2018) 
3.5.8. - Parks and Natural Resources (PNR) 
PNR 
PARKS & NATURAL
RESOURCES
DISTRICT 
A. DISTRICT PURPOSE The PNR district is established to preserve and protect identifiable natural resources in the city. The district is used to protect watercourses from erosion and sedimentation; retain open spaces and greenways and protect their environmentally-sensitive character; preserve wildlife and plant life habitats and protect them from the intrusions of urbanization; provide for city parks and recreation facilities; and preserve and maintain the aesthetic qualities and appearance of the city. The district also discourages development that creates risks for loss of life or property from normal natural processes and events in natural hazard areas (e.g., floodplains). B. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE # OUTSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA INSIDE 
CORE CITY AREA All Uses All Uses Minimum Development Size (acres) 5 2 Minimum Lot Width (feet) [1] 100 100 Minimum Street Setback (feet) 30 30 Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) 30 15 Maximum Building Height (feet) 50/80 [2] 80 [3] [1] All development shall comply with the City's Driveway Ordinance requirements. [2] The perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1 foot in height for each additional foot in height beyond 50. [3] When abutting a single-family residential zoning district, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased 1 foot for each foot in height beyond 50 feet.  
C. TYPICAL BUILDING FORMS 
D. TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
E. DISTRICT DIMENSIONS 
F. TYPICAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
 
3.6. - Conditional Zoning Districts 

3.6.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The rezoning of land to a conditional zoning district is intended to provide a landowner and the City an alternative to rezoning the land to a general zoning district, where the general zoning district allows certain uses and development that may be appropriate but also allows uses and development that may not conform to adopted policy guidance or would have adverse impacts on public facilities or surrounding lands. Reclassification of land to a conditional zoning district allows a landowner to propose, and the City Council to consider, additional conditions or restrictions on the range of allowable uses, use standards, development intensities, development standards, and other regulations applicable in the parallel general zoning district. This enables the City and the landowner to tailor a zoning classification to accommodate desirable development while avoiding or addressing anticipated problems that may arise from development otherwise allowed by the general zoning district. 
3.6.2. - Classification 
Land shall be classified into a conditional zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 2.4.6, Conditional Zoning. 
3.6.3. - Districts Established 
The following conditional zoning districts, each bearing the designation "CZ", are hereby established: 
A.  Residential Conditional Zoning Districts The residential conditional zoning districts include: CZ-R-3, CZ-R-5, CZ-R-7, CZ-RM-5, CZ-RM-16, and CZ-RM-26. 
B.  Business Conditional Zoning Districts The business conditional zoning districts include: CZ-TO, CZ-OI, CZ-LB, CZ-GB, CZ-RC, CZ-CB, CZ-EC, CZ-LI, and CZ-HI. 
C.  Special Conditional Zoning Districts The special conditional zoning districts include: CZ-AGR, CZ-I, CZ-PNR, CZ-MS, and CZ-MX. 
3.6.4. - Applicable Standards 
Development in a conditional zoning district shall be subject to all the use and development standards and requirements that apply to development in the parallel general zoning district, plus any conditions imposed as part of the conditional zoning approval (including a conditional zoning plan, if provided), which may not be less restrictive than the regulations for the parallel general zoning district. 
3.6.5. - Conditional Zoning Plan 
Applications for establishment of a conditional zoning district may include a conditional zoning plan as part of the application for a conditional zoning. The primary purpose for a conditional zoning plan is to illustrate conditions that are difficult to describe with text. A conditional zoning plan shall be of sufficient detail to depict the conditions proposed by the applicant. 
3.6.6. - Relationship to Overlay District Standards 
Regulations governing development in an overlay zoning district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing development in the conditional zoning district. If the standards governing a conditional zoning district expressly conflict with those governing an overlay zoning district, the more restrictive standards shall control. 
3.7. - Planned Development Zoning Districts 

3.7.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The Planned Development (PD) districts are established to allow development under unified control to occur utilizing more flexible standards and procedures than would otherwise result from a strict application of general district and development standards. Planned development districts are intended to encourage innovative land planning and site design concepts that will produce a high quality, unified project that will not negatively impact adjacent land. More specifically, the intent of the PD districts is to: 
A.  Promote quality design and reduce or diminish the inflexibility of design that sometimes results from strict application of zoning and development standards designed primarily for individual lots; 
B.  Allow greater freedom in selecting the means of providing access, open space, and design amenities; 
C.  Allow greater freedom in providing a well-integrated mix of residential and non-residential uses in the same development, including a mix of housing types, lot sizes, and densities; 
D.  Provide for efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lowering development and housing costs; 
E.  Enhance pedestrian orientation and make greater accommodations for alternative forms of transportation such as walking, bicycling, and transit; and 
F.  Promote environmentally sensitive development that respects surrounding established land use character and respects and takes advantage of a site's natural and man-made features, such as trees, wetlands, slopes in excess of 25 percent, special flood hazard area, and historic resources. 
3.7.2. - General Provisions 
A.  Classification of Planned Development Districts Land shall be classified as a planned development zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 2.4.9, Planned Development, and this section. 
B.  Organization of Planned Development District Regulations Section 3.7.3, Standards Applied to All Planned Development Districts, sets out general standards applicable to all planned development districts. Sections 3.7.5, Planned Development-Core City (PD-CC), and 3.7.6, Planned Development-Periphery (PD-P), set out the purpose statements and standards applicable to each of the specific planned development districts. The more restrictive requirements between the general standards in this section and the standards in the PD-CC or PD-P districts shall control. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 3.B, 11-20-2017) 
3.7.3. - Standards Applied to All Planned Development Districts 
Before approving a PD zoning district, the City Council shall determine that the application, as well as the master plan map, the statement of intent and development standards document, and the common signage plan if included as part of the application, comply with the following standards, unless expressly stated otherwise. 
A.  Planned Development Master Plan Map A master plan map shall be included with the application and shall be a part of the planned development approval. It shall: 
1.  Identify the general location and acreage of individual development areas by land use(s) and/or development density or intensity; 
2.  Depict the general configuration and relationship of the principal elements of the proposed development; 
3.  Identify the general location, amount and type (active or passive) of open space; 
4.  Identify the general configuration of the on-site transportation network, including public and private vehicular, transit, and pedestrian facilities and how they will connect with existing and planned City systems; 
5.  Identify the general location of on-site potable water, sanitary sewer, and stormwater management facilities and how they will connect to City systems; 
6.  Identify the general location of any other on-site public facilities serving the development, such as schools, police or fire protection, EMS, and solid waste management; and 
7.  Identify the general sequence or phases in which development of the district is proposed to occur. 
B.  Statement of Intent and Development Standards The statement of intent and development standards document shall incorporate by reference or include, but not be limited to: 
1.  A written statement of intent for the development, including a description of planning objectives and overall vision for the development at build-out; 
2.  A listing of all permitted uses; 
3.  Residential and non-residential dimensional standards, which include at a minimum, lot area, lot width, setbacks, building height, and setbacks from adjoining residential development or residential zoning districts; 
4.  For the entire PD district and each development area, the acreage, types, and mix of land uses, number of residential units (by use type), non-residential acreage (by use type), residential development density, and non-residential intensity standards; 
5.  Identification of all areas where a modification from the required development standards or use standards is proposed, description of the proposed modification, and explanation of why it is needed; 
6.  The master plan map and specific development standards related to its approval, including any standards related to the form and design of development shown on the master plan map; 
7.  Provisions addressing how transportation, potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater management and other infrastructure will be provided to accommodate the proposed development; 
8.  Provisions related to environmental protection and monitoring; 
9.  A phasing narrative, including how residential and non-residential development will be timed, how infrastructure, transportation improvements, and open space will be timed, and how the development will be coordinated with any planned City capital improvements; and 
10.  Any other provisions the City Council determines are relevant and necessary to the development of the PD in accordance with applicable standards and regulations. 
C.  Allowable Uses   
1.  Every planned development district shall establish permitted uses by use category and use type as appropriate, from those listed in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. 
2.  Proposed uses shall be consistent with the City's adopted policy guidance, the purpose of the particular type of PD district, and are subject to any additional requirements set forth in Sections 3.7.5 and 3.7.6 for the particular type of PD district. 
3.  Uses are subject to all applicable use standards for the use type in Section 4.3, Use Standards, unless modified by the statement of intent and standards document. 
D.  Mandatory Use Mix Unless exempted by the City Council, a PD district shall include at least one use type from 2 of the following four use classifications or at least 2 different use types from the use types listed in the Residential Use Classification, in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table: 
1.  Residential uses; 
2.  Institutional uses; 
3.  Commercial uses; and 
4.  Industrial uses. 
E.  Prohibited Uses The following use categories and use types are prohibited in a PD district: 
1.  Extractive industry; 
2.  Asphalt plants; 
3.  Major manufacturing use types; and 
4.  Waste related services. 
F.  Development Standards   
1.  General   
(a)  Unless indicated otherwise, all development in a PD district shall comply with the development standards of Chapter 5: Development Standards, the environmental protection standards in Chapter 6: Environmental Standards, and the subdivision and infrastructure design standards of Chapter 7: Subdivision and Infrastructure Standards. 
(b)  Except where otherwise indicated, nothing shall limit the ability of a planned development to modify the development standards of Chapter 5, provided the planned development master plan map and statement of intent and standards document demonstrates how and why the proposed modification is needed. 
2.  Open Space All development within a PD district shall comply with the standards in Section 5.12, Open Space, which shall not be modified as part of the approval of a PD district. 
3.  Fences In no instance shall a PD master plan modify compliance with the standards in Section 5.11.4, Locational Requirements. 
4.  Exterior Lighting Development around the perimeter of a PD district shall comply with the standards in Table 5.10.6.A, Maximum Illumination Levels, which shall not be modified as part of the approval of a PD district. 
5.  Screening Development in a PD district shall comply with the standards in Section 5.6, Screening, which shall not be modified as part of the approval of a PD district. 
6.  Subdivision and Infrastructure Standards A planned development shall not modify the subdivision and infrastructure standards in Chapter 7 of this Ordinance. 
G.  Maximum Allowable Density Dwelling units within a PD district may be concentrated or evenly distributed throughout the development, provided the maximum allowable density for the development as a whole is not exceeded. 
H.  Maximum Building Height The maximum building height for all buildings in a PD district shall be specified on the planned development master plan map or the statement of intent and development standards document, but in no instance shall the maximum building height exceed 50 feet within 50 feet of a single-family residential district. 
I.  Signs   
1.  All signs in any PD district shall meet the requirements of Section 5.7, Signage, except as otherwise provided in this subsection. 
2.  A common signage plan, prepared in accordance with Section 5.7.12, Common Signage Plan, and the Development Guide shall be submitted and approved by the Planning and Development Director prior to issuance of the first building permit within the planned development. 
3.  In preparing the common signage plan, sign specifications shall be as restrictive or more restrictive than the regulations of Table 3.7.3.I, Planned Development Signage Standards. 
TABLE 3.7.3.I: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIGNAGE STANDARDS 
PREDOMINANT USE TYPE 
SIGNAGE STANDARDS NO LESS RESTRICTIVE THAN THOSE IN: Residential (other than live/work) RM-16 district Live/Work TO district Office OI district Commercial RC district Industrial LI district  
4.  Within a PD district, Table 5.7.8.B, Requirements For A Sign Not Requiring A Sign Permit, shall be interpreted to mean "use" where the word "district" is noted. 
5.  Directional signs pointing the way to specific named sections of a planned development may be permitted along interior streets, provided: 
(a)  Signs shall be not more than 12 square feet in area and 6 feet in height; 
(b)  The number of signs and their location shall be shown and approved with the PD common signage plan; and 
(c)  Illumination shall be by indirect methods only. 
6.  All indirect lighting of signs shall be concealed from view and oriented away from adjacent properties and roadways. 
J.  Final Plat Approval No final plat for a phase of a planned development shall be approved unless: 
1.  All open space and common elements and public improvements included in previous phases have been conveyed, completed, or subject to a valid financial guarantee; 
2.  There is no violation of the PD master plan map or any provision or condition of the PD district in any previous phase; and 
3.  When a development contains common areas, owners' association documents have been prepared and reviewed, and are ready for recordation, or have been recorded, with the Register of Deeds in the county where the development is located. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 10, 1-17-2017) 
3.7.4. - Amendments to Approved Planned Development Master Plan Map or the Statement of Intent and Development Standards 
Amendments or modifications to a planned development master plan map or to the statement of intent and development standards shall be considered in accordance with the standards in Section 2.4.9, Planned Development. 
3.7.5. - Planned Development-Core City (PD-CC) 
A.  Purpose The PD-CC district is established to provide a flexible means of accommodating high density mixed-use development with an urban character in the Core City area. The district encourages a well-balanced mix of residential, commercial, employment, recreation, and entertainment uses configured in a manner that supports pedestrian orientation and human interaction. It promotes shop fronts, attractive streetscapes, vertical use-mixing, active civic spaces, entertainment destinations for residents after working hours, alternative forms of transportation, and high-quality design. 
B.  Allowable Location A PD-CC district may only be established on lots within the Core City area identified on the Official Zoning Map. 
C.  Minimum Average Residential Density   
1.  When selected as one or both of the two use types required by Section 3.7.3 D, Mandatory Use Mix, the entire area of a PD-CC district shall maintain a residential density of at least four dwelling units per acre. 
2.  For the purposes of this section, the residential density shall be determined by dividing the total land area in a PD-CC district by the total number of residential dwelling units proposed in a PD master plan map. 
3.  A residential use type included in a PD-CC that is not identified as one of the two use types required by Section 3.7.3 D, Mandatory Use Mix, shall not be subject to the residential density requirement, but shall not occupy more than 1/3 of the total area of the PD-CC district. 
D.  District Standards In addition to complying with the standards in Section 3.7.3, Standards Applied to All Planned Development Districts, development in a PD-CC district shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  Off-Street Parking In no instance shall development in a PD-CC district deviate from the standards in Section 5.4.7, Standards for Off-Street Parking Spaces and Loading Areas. 
2.  Landscaping A PD-CC district shall comply with the standards in Section 5.5, Landscaping, and may be modified by the PD master plan in ways consistent with the purpose of the district and Section 3.7, Planned Development Zoning Districts, except for the following: 
(a)  Vehicular use area landscaping shall be provided around off-street parking lots visible from areas outside the district. 
(b)  Screening, in accordance with Section 5.6, Screening, shall be provided around features required to be screened when these features are visible from lands outside the district. 
(c)  Perimeter landscape yards are not required. 
(d)  If streetyard landscaping requirements are modified by a PD master plan, the PD master plan shall include provisions that ensure an effective transition from the existing streetyard conditions surrounding the PD-CC district. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 11, 12, 12-3-2018) 
3.7.6. - Planned Development-Periphery (PD-P) 
A.  Purpose The PD-P district is established and intended to encourage the use of innovative and creative design to provide a mix of different residential, nonresidential, and institutional uses in close proximity to services, recreation uses, and open space resources on lands outside the Core City area. The district provides a wide degree of flexibility from the typical development standards with the expectation that the resulting development will exceed the quality that otherwise results from a strict application of the standards in this Ordinance while at the same time not creating adverse impacts on adjacent lands. 
B.  Allowable Location A PD-P district may only be established on land located outside the Core City area identified on the Official Zoning Map. 
C.  District Standards In addition to complying with the standards in Section 3.7.3, Standards Applied to All Planned Development Districts, development in a PD-P district shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  District Size A PD-P district shall be at least 10 acres in area. 
2.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Development in a PD-P district shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Section 5.4.7 E, Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles; 
(b)  Section 5.4.7 I, Stacking Spaces; 
(c)  Development in a PD-P may reduce the amount of required off-street parking in Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards, by up to 30 percent. Nothing shall limit additional use of the parking flexibility provisions in Section 5.4.8, Parking Alternatives; 
(d)  All other standards in Section 5.4, Off-Street Parking and Loading, may be modified by the PD master plan map or statement of intent and development standards in accordance with the standards in Section 3.7.3, Standards Applied to All Planned Development Districts. 
3.  Landscaping A PD-P district shall comply with the standards in Section 5.5, Landscaping, and may be modified by the PD master plan map or statement of intent and development standards in ways consistent with the purpose for the district, except for the following: 
(a)  Vehicular use area landscaping shall be provided but may be modified through an alternative landscaping plan. 
(b)  Perimeter landscape yards shall not be required between uses internal to a PD-P district, but shall be provided along the district perimeter. 
(c)  If streetyard landscaping requirements are modified by a PD master plan, the PD master plan shall include provisions that ensure an effective transition from the existing streetyard conditions surrounding the PD-P district. 
3.8. - Overlay Zoning Districts 

3.8.1. - Purpose 
Overlay zoning districts are superimposed over either all or a portion of 1 or more underlying general zoning districts or conditional zoning districts with the intent of supplementing generally applicable development regulations with additional development regulations that address special area-specific conditions, features, or plans while maintaining the character and purposes of the underlying zoning district. 
3.8.2. - Establishment 
Table 3.8.2, Overlay Zoning Districts Established, sets out the overlay zoning districts established by this Ordinance. 
TABLE 3.8.2: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 
DISTRICT NAME ABBREVIATION 
Airport Overlay ARO Gateway Corridor Overlay GCO Local Historic Overlay LHO Manufactured Housing Overlay MHO Neighborhood Conservation Overlay NCO Watershed Overlay WSO  
3.8.3. - Classification 
Land shall be classified or reclassified into an overlay zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment. 
3.8.4. - Relationship to Underlying Zoning Districts 
A.  Regulations governing development in an overlay zoning district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing development in the underlying zoning district, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
B.  If the standards governing an overlay zoning district expressly conflict with those governing an underlying zoning district, the standards governing the overlay district shall control, unless otherwise stated. 
C.  Where land is classified into multiple overlay zoning districts and the standards governing one overlay zoning district expressly conflict with those governing another overlay district, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
3.8.5. - Airport Overlay (ARO) 
A.  Purpose The purpose of the Airport Overlay (ARO) district is to establish noise mitigation measures and prohibit certain uses in the vicinity of the Piedmont Triad International Airport (PTIA) and to: 
1.  Facilitate orderly development around PTIA. 
2.  Ensure land use compatibility by protecting noise sensitive uses from objectionable aircraft noise impacts. 
3.  Mitigate noise impacts from aircraft overflights. 
4.  Contribute to the safe operation of the airport. 
B.  Applicability The ARO district applies to designated land in the vicinity of the PTIA. 
1.  The district boundaries are defined on the Official Zoning Map. The boundaries generally follow physical features and property lines and are associated with aircraft noise impacts as identified by a FAR Part 150 Study. 
2.  None of the provisions of the ARO district shall be construed to prohibit the continuance, expansion, or re-establishment of an existing use. The noise level reduction design standards apply only to new uses and not to the expansion of existing uses or to structure additions. Only new subdivisions of land developed within the district shall be required to grant a waiver of claim. 
3.  Nothing in the ARO district is intended to state that objectionable levels of noise from overhead aircraft will be confined to the limits of the district. 
C.  ARO District Zone Boundaries The ARO district is divided into the four zones in order to manage the development of uses that are sensitive to and incompatible with certain levels of daytime and nighttime aircraft noise and to mitigate adverse noise impacts to the public, where possible. 
1.  Zone 1 Zone 1 is based on the 65 Ldn noise contour developed by the FAR Part 150 Study for the Piedmont Triad International Airport . The intent of Zone 1 is to prevent the development of uses sensitive to objectionable noise resulting from daytime and nighttime aircraft flights and those uses that could pose safety hazards to aircraft. 
2.  Zone 2 Zone 2 is based on the NA 90(1) contour developed by the FAR Part 150 Study for the Piedmont Triad International Airport . The intent of Zone 2 is to prevent the development of uses sensitive to objectionable noise resulting from nighttime aircraft flights. 
3.  Zone 3 Zone 3 is also based on the NA 90(1) contour developed by the FAR Part 150 Study for the Piedmont Triad International Airport . The intent of Zone 3 is to protect residential uses and their residents by reducing the interior level of objectionable noise resulting from nighttime aircraft flights. 
4.  Zone 4 Zone 4 is based on the NA 85(2) contour developed by the FAR Part 150 Study for the Piedmont Triad International Airport . The intent of Zone 4, along with the other 3 zones, is to provide public notification of potential night time aircraft noise impacts. 
D.  Aircraft Noise Mitigation Requirements Aircraft noise mitigation requirements for each zone are identified in Table 3.8.5.D, Aircraft Noise Mitigation Requirements. 
TABLE 3.8.5.D: AIRCRAFT NOISE MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS 
x = Applicable 
ZONE PUBLIC 
NOTIFICATION 
(SEC. 3.8.5.E) WAIVER 
OF CLAIM 
(SEC. 3.8.5.F) PROHIBITED 
USES 
(SEC. 3.8.5.G) NLR DESIGN 
STANDARD 
(30 DB NLR) 
(Sec. 3.8.5.H) 1 x x x · 2 x x x · 3 x x x x 4 x x · ·  
E.  Public Notification of Potential Aircraft Noise Impacts Public notification of the potential aircraft noise impacts made to existing landowners and to prospective purchasers of property within the ARO district shall be made in accordance with the following requirements. 
1.  Where public notification statements are required or provided for property within the district, the following statement shall be used: "This property is located within the City of High Point Airport Overlay District and is subject to aircraft overflights and to aircraft noise that may be objectionable dependent upon the use and location of the property. Please refer to the City's Airport Overlay District regulations and the Planning and Development Department for more information on potential noise impacts." 
2.  In accordance with the N.C. Residential Property Disclosure Act in Section 47E of the North Carolina General Statutes, all landowners and their agents shall provide a public notification statement to all prospective purchasers through a written disclosure statement. 
3.  A public notification statement shall appear on the recorded final plat for all subdivisions of land within the district. In addition, the subdivision owner shall provide public notice to all prospective lot purchasers through a written disclosure statement. 
4.  The Planning and Development Department shall provide notification of potential aircraft noise impacts to the landowners of lots that are located within the ARO district. After a lot is included in the district, such notice shall be given once by first class mail to the landowner at the address listed on the county tax listing. 
F.  Waiver of Claim A waiver of claim shall be required for all subdivisions of land within the ARO district. The waiver shall be executed by the landowner of the property for the benefit of the City, and it shall waive all existing and future landowners' right to any claim or cause of action against the City in connection with adverse aircraft noise impacts or other consequences of the district's noise mitigation requirements. The waiver statement shall appear on the final plat before the plat may be approved and recorded. 
G.  Prohibited Uses Unless lawfully established prior to August 7, 2003, or before the effective date of an ordinance applying the ARO designation to other lands after August 7, 2003, uses indicated as prohibited in a particular zone of the ARO district in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, shall be prohibited in the zone. 
H.  Noise Level Reduction Design In Zone 3, a new residential use shall be designed to achieve an outside to inside noise reduction level of at least 30 decibels (dB). This performance measure may be achieved by any suitable combination of building design, building materials and construction standards so as to reduce the interior noise levels from overhead aircraft flights. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a residential use, a qualified acoustical professional satisfactory to the Planning and Development Department shall certify that the design standards, construction methods, and materials used to construct the residential use will achieve at least a 30 dB noise level reduction. 
I.  Aircraft Interference No structure may be constructed or altered in a manner or at a height that constitutes a safety hazard to aerial navigation as determined by the FAA in accordance with Section 10.2.6 B, Structure Height Restrictions. 
J.  Noise Impact Information   
1.  The Planning and Development Department shall maintain and provide district information depicting potential aircraft noise impacts which shall be available to the public and other interested parties. 
2.  The noise level reduction design standards and waiver of claim provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(a)  Lots of record in the ARO created prior to August 7, 2003 or the date of an ordinance extending the ARO designation to other lands after August 7, 2003; 
(b)  Lots created by a valid preliminary subdivision plat that was approved prior to August 7, 2003 or the date of an ordinance extending the ARO designation to other lands after August 7, 2003; or 
(c)  Residential uses in the ARO depicted on a valid site plan or group development plan that was approved prior to August 7, 2003 or the date of an ordinance extending the ARO designation to other lands after August 7, 2003. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 11, 1-17-2017) 
3.8.6. - Reserved 
3.8.7. - Gateway Corridor Overlay (GCO) 
A.  Purpose The Gateway Corridor Overlay (GCO) district regulations are intended to enhance the visual appeal of certain thoroughfares in the City, and to: 
1.  Preserve and enhance the appearance and operational characteristics of certain designated roadways that serve as gateways to the City; and 
2.  Address development issues of special concern along these gateways, with specific requirements which relate to use, development form, traffic movement, access, environment, landscaping, visual quality, image, and aesthetics. 
B.  Procedure for Establishment of Gateway Corridor Overlay (GCO) Districts Prior to establishment of a GCO district for a specific gateway corridor, a gateway corridor plan for the specific gateway shall be adopted by the City Council. The gateway corridor plan shall describe the conditions, boundaries, development goals, and standards for the proposed GCO district. The plan shall, at a minimum, address the following: 
1.  The arrangement of uses along the corridor which shall create a visually pleasing impression. 
2.  The unique qualities of the corridor, such as significant buildings, views and vistas, and natural features which lend themselves to special consideration. 
3.  The value of the corridor as an entryway to the City which can influence the perception of citizens and persons or businesses considering investment in the City. 
4.  Transportation conditions on the corridor, including vehicular access, dedication of right-of-way, driveway limitations, and traffic impact. 
5.  The vision and general goals for development along the corridor, and specific recommendations for regulatory changes to achieve the vision and development goals. 
C.  Gateway Corridor Plan Approval The gateway corridor plan shall be forwarded to the P&Z for its review and recommendations. Upon completion of its review, the plan along with the recommendations of the P&Z shall be forwarded to the City Council for review. A gateway corridor plan shall be approved by the City Council for a specific gateway corridor before establishment of a GCO district for the specific corridor. 
D.  Establishment The specific GCO district shall be established in accordance with Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment, and Section 2.4.15, Text Amendment (as appropriate), and included as a district in this section. 
E.  General Standards GCO district standards for a specific gateway corridor shall follow the policy direction in the gateway corridor plan approved by the City Council. The GCO district shall, at a minimum, address the following elements: 
1.  The name and boundaries of the overlay district. 
2.  The development along the corridor to which the overlay district applies (typically all new development and certain expansions and remodels). 
3.  Any variations from the requirements of the underlying general zoning district(s). 
4.  The uses allowed in the district, if appropriate. 
5.  The development and form standards of the overlay district, including some or all of the following: 
(a)  Dimensions (height, setbacks, build-to-lines, etc.); 
(b)  Streetscape landscaping; 
(c)  Sidewalks and pedestrian circulation features; 
(d)  Off-street parking; 
(e)  Landscaping and tree preservation/reforestation; 
(f)  Open space set-asides; 
(g)  Signage; 
(h)  Exterior lighting; 
(i)  Building design and form; and 
(j)  Road access and traffic circulation. 
6.  The extent to which a general or district-specific standard may be modified. 
F.  Eastchester GCO District Standards The Eastchester GCO district is hereby established, and shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Boundaries of the District The boundaries of the Eastchester GCO district are shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
2.  Applicability   
(a)  Application The Eastchester GCO district regulations shall apply to all principal and accessory buildings, off-street parking and vehicular storage areas on lots, or open uses of land constructed, reconstructed, or established after November 5, 1986, or the effective date of the district upon the land, or otherwise provided in Section 3.8.7 F.2(b), Exemptions. 
(b)  Exemptions The following development is exempt from the requirements of the Eastchester GCO district regulations: 
(1)  A single-family detached dwelling or a duplex dwelling on its own lot. 
(2)  Lots with an existing structure subject to a building permit application for improvement, repair, or renovation, provided the proposed changes do not result in a change in the type of occupancy under the State Building Code. 
(3)  Existing development or development that has a vested right under North Carolina law as of November 5, 1986 or the effective date of the district upon the land. 
3.  Minimum Building Setbacks Lots within the Eastchester GCO shall be subject to minimum building setbacks from Eastchester Drive in accordance with the standards in Table 3.8.7.F.3, Minimum Building Setbacks. The minimum building setback may be reduced to the average streetyard width, in accordance with Table 3.8.7.F.5, Eastchester GCO Landscaping Standards, when off-street parking areas are not located between the front building line and Eastchester Drive and the building facades facing a public street include windows or fenestration, and the inclusion of an entryway with a roof form that differs from the rest of the facade. 
Ground-based mechanical equipment shall not be placed between the front building line and Eastchester Drive. 
TABLE 3.8.7.F.3, MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACKS 
STREET SEGMENT OF EASTCHESTER DRIVE MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACK FROM ROW EDGE (FEET) North Main Street North to Johnson Street 50 Johnson Street North to Penny Road 50 Penny Road North to Gallimore Dairy Road 75  
4.  Site Standards   
(a)  Drive-Throughs   
(1)  Outdoor speakers associated with a drive-through shall be located at least 50 feet from a residential district. 
(2)  Drive-through windows, menu boards, drive aisles, and speakers shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way. For corner lots, drive aisles shall not be located between the principal building line and the front street right-of-way, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(b)  Fuel Pumps and Canopies Fuel pumps and canopies shall be located behind the rear building line of the principal building, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(c)  Ground-based Mechanical Equipment Screening Ground-based mechanical equipment should be located to the rear of the principal building(s), and shall be screened in accordance with Section 5.6, Screening. 
(d)  Off-Street Loading Off-street loading areas shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building and shall not face Eastchester Drive. 
5.  Landscaping Requirements Landscaping in the Eastchester GCO shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.5, Landscaping, Table 3.8.7.F.5, Eastchester GCO Landscaping Standards, and the following requirements. In the case of conflict, the stricter standard shall apply. 
(a)  Retention of existing trees to meet planting requirements within landscape yards is strongly encouraged. Existing trees may be credited towards landscaping requirements in accordance with Section 5.5.8, Credit for Existing Vegetation. 
(b)  Stormwater detention ponds shall be screened with landscaping so as to obscure, to the maximum extent practicable, the view from public right-of-way. 
TABLE 3.8.7.F.5: EASTCHESTER GCO LANDSCAPING STANDARDS 
REQUIREMENT NORTH 
MAIN ST. TO 
JOHNSON ST. JOHNSON ST. 
NORTH TO 
PENNY RD. PENNY RD NORTH TO GALLIMORE DAIRY RD. Minimum streetyard width (feet) 10 20 Average streetyard width (feet) [1] 20 40 Maximum streetyard width (feet) 35 50 Minimum number of canopy trees required per 25 linear feet of streetyard 1 Minimum number of shrubs required per 100 linear feet of streetyard 17 25 NOTES: [1] At least 50 percent of required plantings shall be located within the average streetyard width.  
6.  Signage Signage shall be in accordance with Table 3.8.7.F.6, Eastchester GCO Signage Standards, Section 5.7, Signage, and the following requirements. In case of conflict, the stricter standard shall apply. 
(a)  In addition to signage prohibited by Section 5.7.6, Prohibited Signs, the following signs shall be prohibited in the Eastchester GCO district: 
(1)  Changeable copy signs (message boards), except for fuel pricing and religious institution identification signs as allowed in subsection 3.8.7 F.6.b & d.3 below; 
(2)  Animated signs, including electronic changeable copy signs, except for time and temperature signs which do not exceed 15 square feet of copy area; 
(b)  Religious institution identification signs shall display only the institution name, service hours, and related events. 
(c)  In the business districts, illumination of all signage, except wall signage, shall be limited to cut-out letters and indirect lighting. Back lit wall signage shall be permitted; however, the background of the sign face shall be opaque and light shall only come through the lettering of the sign. 
(d)  Freestanding signs shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be monument style only; 
(2)  Display only the name, trademark, and a registered logo; 
(3)  Fuel pricing signs shall display only the name, trademark, registered logo, and the vehicular fuel product and prices. 
TABLE 3.8.7.F.6: EASTCHESTER GCO SIGNAGE STANDARDS 
REQUIREMENT NORTH MAIN ST. TO JOHNSON ST. JOHNSON ST. NORTH TO PENNY RD. PENNY RD NORTH TO GALLIMORE DAIRY RD. ATTACHED (WALL) Number permitted 1/wall Maximum area (signs may be grouped on the same wall) [1] 7.5 percent of wall area not to exceed 100 sq. ft. [2] 7.5 percent of wall area not to exceed 100 sq. ft. Maximum height top of wall FREESTANDING Number permitted 1/frontage Setback Same as right-of-way setback Maximum area (square feet) 50 for single businesses; 90 for group developments less than 25,000 square feet in floor area; 135 for group developments of 25,000 square feet or more Maximum height (feet) 6 for lots with less than 200 feet of street frontage; for lots with 200 feet or more of street frontage, the height shall be permitted in the underlying district in accordance with Table 5.7.9.B, Requirements for a Freestanding Sign Requiring a Sign Permit, up to a maximum of 20 feet in height NOTES: [1] For multiple franchised businesses, the number of signs per wall and the maximum sign area may be increased in accordance with Section 5.7.10 B.4, Multiple Franchised Businesses in a Single Building, [2] Shopping centers of over 190,000 sq. ft. of floor area whose storefront is at least 300 feet from the facing right-of-way shall be allowed the following attached (wall) signage:  a) stores of over 150 feet of width shall be allowed 7.5 percent of the wall area, with no maximum limit;  b) stores of less than 150 feet of width shall be allowed 10 percent of the wall area, with no maximum limit;  c) no letter on a sign shall exceed 6 feet in height.  
7.  Building Standards The following standards are applied to all multi-family residential and nonresidential buildings, except for locally or nationally designated individual historic structures and contributing structures within a locally or nationally designated historic district, provided such structures comply with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation or are issued a Certificate of Appropriateness, as applicable. 
(a)  Facade Materials   
(1)  Exterior building materials should be continued to the finished grade on any elevation. 
(2)  Building facades utilizing smooth-faced concrete block, or unfinished or untreated tilt-up concrete panels, shall be limited to building facades not visible from public streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(3)  The use of vinyl siding or corrugated metal siding and other vertical metal siding is prohibited. 
(4)  The use of high intensity (bright), metallic, or fluorescent colors shall be limited to facade trim or accents and total less than 20% of the area of any building facade. 
(5)  The use of lighting by direct illumination to outline or accentuate all or part of a structure, building or architectural features of a building, including but not limited to rooflines, windows, doors, cupolas, exterior walls, porches, canopies and awnings, with narrow band, strip, tube or other methods of lighting, is prohibited. 
(6)  Primary facade materials should not change at outside corners, and should continue around the corner to a logical point of conclusion such as a window or change in facade plane. 
(b)  Roof-Mounted Equipment   
(1)  Flat roofs shall incorporate parapet walls designed to screen the roof and roof-mounted equipment from view from the primary street fronting the building and any abutting side streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. The parapet wall should be finished in the same or similar material and color as the building. 
(2)  For sloped roofs, equipment and other roof penetrations should be located and screened to have a minimal visual impact as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(3)  In cases where complete screening is not practicable, all roof- mounted equipment and other roof penetrations shall be camouflaged through the use of paint or architectural techniques to minimize its appearance. 
(4)  Green roofs, which use vegetation to improve stormwater quality and reduce runoff, are exempt from the screening requirements described in this subsection. 
(c)  Service or Vehicular Bays Service or vehicular bays and their doors shall not face Eastchester Drive, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(d)  Statement of Design Guidelines   
(1)  General Design guidelines for multi-tenant commercial developments and/or nonresidential group developments shall be required for the purpose of facilitating unified developments with compatible architecture, scale, proportion and building elements that provide visual unity and are harmonious with other buildings in the surrounding area. Prior to the development of any phase of a commercial multi-tenant and/or non-residential group development, design guidelines governing the appearance of all buildings within the property shall be submitted by the developer for the review and approval of the Planning and Development Director prior to the approval of any site plan, group development, or final subdivision plat. The guidelines shall address and include the following criteria: 
(i)  Common signage plan requirements and criteria, including locations, area, copy, illumination proposed, height, material, proposed color schemes, and provisions for shared use of signage. 
(ii)  Exterior building materials and colors, including examples of materials and colors to be consistent throughout the development. 
(iii)  Roof shape and materials, including examples of materials and colors to be consistent throughout the development. 
(iv)  Facade design, mass, and rhythm. 
(v)  Common landscaping scheme, including street yard, and peripheral plantings, parking area plantings, and tree preservation. 
(2)  Amendment   
(i)  A statement of design guidelines may be amended by an applicant provided the proposed amendments are in keeping with the character, scale, materials, and configuration of the established development or approved statement. 
(ii)  In no instance shall an amendment be requested after 75 percent or more of the total development has been constructed. 
8.  Character of Entrances to Existing Residential Subdivisions   
(a)  Exterior modifications, alterations, additions, or construction of a new multi-family or nonresidential structure on land located at an entrance to a residential subdivision shall retain a residential character, nature and appearance, and be consistent with the following: 
(1)  A maximum of 2 stories in height. 
(2)  A roof line compatible with adjacent residences. 
(3)  Building materials compatible with adjacent residences. 
(4)  Parking areas that are located in a manner which minimizes the impact on adjacent residential dwellings. 
(5)  Window treatments that are compatible with adjacent residences. 
(6)  Landscaping around the foundation of principal buildings. 
(7)  Style, size, and location of exterior lighting. 
(8)  Location, size, color, materials, height, and illumination of signage. 
(b)  Design guidelines which, at a minimum, address the above criteria, shall be submitted by the developer for the review and approval of the Planning and Development Director prior to the approval of any preliminary plat or the issuance of any permit. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 9, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 2.B, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7488/19-05 , § 1, 2-4-2019) 
3.8.8. - Local Historic Overlay (LHO) 
A.  Purpose The purpose of the Local Historic Overlay (LHO) district is to maintain the historic integrity of certain areas within the city and to: 
1.  Protect, safeguard, and conserve the heritage of the city; and 
2.  Promote the sound and orderly preservation of historic areas within the city which embody important elements of the social, economic, political or architectural history of the city, region, state or nation, for the education, pleasure and enrichment of all citizens. 
B.  Establishment and Applicability The following actions shall occur prior to the City's initial designation of a LHO district, or any amendment of Official Zoning Map boundaries affecting an existing LHO district. 
1.  Local Designation Report The local HPC shall prepare and adopt a local designation report which shall: 
(a)  Describe the boundaries of the newly proposed or amended LHO district; and 
(b)  Describe the significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites, or surroundings in terms of their historic, pre-historic, architectural or cultural importance, integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or association. 
2.  Local Designation Report Recommendations   
(a)  Local Historic Preservation Commission The local HPC shall forward the local designation report and its recommendation to the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources (NCDCR) for its review and comment. 
(b)  NCDCR   
(1)  Based on the local designation report, the NCDCR, acting through the State Historic Preservation Officer, or a designee, shall make an analysis of, and recommendation concerning the proposed LHO district, and shall submit its recommendation to the City Council. 
(2)  Failure of the NCDCR to submit its recommendation to the City Council within 30 calendar days after receipt of a written request for such from the City, shall relieve the City Council of its responsibility to await the recommendation. 
(c)  Planning and Zoning Commission Prior to action by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the recommendations of the HPC and the NCDCR, and forward its comments and recommendation to the City Council. 
(d)  Other Reviewers The City Council may, prior to taking any action, refer the local designation report and proposed boundaries to other local preservation groups or other interested parties for comment and recommendation. 
3.  Action by City Council   
(a)  After receipt of the comments and recommendations of the HPC, NCDCR - if received in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section - and the P&Z, the City Council, at its discretion, may determine whether to proceed with the initiation of an application for a zoning map amendment for a LHO district, in accordance with Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment. 
(b)  The City Council shall decide a zoning map amendment application to classify land as a LHO district only after determining that the proposed district is of special significance in terms of its historic, pre-historic, architectural or cultural importance, and possesses integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or association. 
4.  Architectural and Historic Guidelines   
(a)  Purpose Architectural and historic guidelines provide a framework from which recommendations may be offered about the appropriateness of exterior treatment in an LHO. 
(b)  Adoption Following the adoption of an LHO by City Council and prior to the effective date of the LHO, the HPC shall adopt detailed architectural and historic guidelines applicable to proposals within a designated LHO. Review and comment by City Council shall be required before the HPC adopts any such guidelines. 
(c)  Contents   
(1)  These guidelines shall take into account the historic, architectural, and visual elements of the district. 
(2)  The guidelines should give consideration to exterior form and appearance including, but not limited to: 
(i)  Height; 
(ii)  Setback, orientation, and lot coverage; 
(iii)  Construction materials; 
(iv)  Architectural detailing; 
(v)  Roof shapes, forms, and materials; 
(vi)  Fenestrations (arrangement of doors and windows); 
(vii)  General form and proportions; 
(viii)  Appurtenant fixtures and features such as lighting; 
(ix)  Structural condition and soundness; 
(x)  Use of local or regional architectural traditions; and 
(xi)  The effect of trees and other landscape elements. 
(d)  Amendments The guidelines may be amended in accordance with the procedures and standards established for their original approval 
C.  Certificate of Appropriateness Required A certificate of appropriateness shall be required in accordance with Section 2.4.5, Certificate of Appropriateness, whether a building permit is required or not. 
D.  Dimensional Standards and Exceptions Buildings and structures within a LHO district shall comply with all requirements of the underlying zoning district, except as follows: 
1.  Buildings erected or altered in a LHO district may use the average setbacks of existing buildings on the same block face. 
2.  Variances shall be decided following a recommendation from the HPC and may be granted only if it is found that the request complies with the intent of the architectural and historic guidelines of the LHO District. 
3.  Where the HPC, in considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, finds the number of off-street parking spaces and/or design standards for parking specified by this Ordinance would render the site incompatible with the historic district design guidelines and the historic character of the LHO District, it may provide a recommendation for an Administrative Adjustment in accordance with Section 2.5.2, Administrative Adjustment. 
E.  Boundaries of Designated LHO Districts The exact boundaries of all LHO Districts are as shown on the Official Zoning Map. In general, they may be described as follows: 
1.  Johnson Street Historic District Lots fronting on Johnson Street from East Parkway Avenue north to East Lexington Avenue; 
2.  Sherrod Park Historic District Lots fronting on Woodrow Avenue from North Hamilton Street east to Forrest Street; and 
3.  West High Avenue Historic District Lots fronting on the south side of West High Avenue west of Lindsay Street to its terminus, and lots fronting Oak Street north of West Green Drive. 
(Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 8.A, 5-21-2018) 
3.8.9. - Manufactured Housing Overlay (MHO) 
A.  Purpose and Intent The Manufactured Housing Overlay (MHO) district is established as a means of providing reasonable opportunities for the placement of manufactured dwellings in the City's zoning jurisdiction. More specifically, the district is intended to: 
1.  Provide alternative, affordable housing opportunities for low and moderate-income residents in residential areas by allowing for the use of manufactured dwellings. 
2.  Establish requirements designed to assure acceptable similarity in exterior appearance between manufactured dwellings and single-family dwellings constructed on adjacent or nearby lots. 
3.  Protect property values and preserve the character and integrity of the community or individual neighborhoods within the community. 
4.  Require new manufactured dwellings to meet the minimum requirements for manufactured dwellings in Section 4.3.2 B.4, Manufactured Dwelling. 
B.  Establishment   
1.  Manufactured Housing Overlay (MHO) districts shall be established in accordance with Section 160A-383.1 of the North Carolina General Statutes and Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment. 
2.  MHO districts are permitted in accordance with Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. 
3.  In requesting the establishment of an MHO district, an applicant shall present factual information to ensure, in the discretion of the City Council, that property values of surrounding lands are protected, that the character and integrity of the neighborhood are adequately safeguarded, and the proposed MHO district is consistent with these standards. 
4.  To assure acceptable similarity in exterior appearance between proposed manufactured dwellings and dwellings that are constructed on adjacent or nearby land, an applicant may, for illustrative purposes only, present examples of the types and design of such proposed dwellings. 
C.  Overlay District Standards Land to be designated with a MHO district classification shall consist of: 
1.  10 contiguous lots occupying at least 90,000 square feet in total area, excluding public street rights-of-way; or 
2.  Unsubdivided land occupying at least 120,000 square feet in total area, excluding public street rights-of-way. 
D.  Development Authorized   
1.  Land within an MHO district may accommodate the following types of uses: 
(a)  A single manufactured home on an individual lot configured in accordance with 4.3.2 B.4, Manufactured Dwelling; 
(b)  A principal use authorized in the underlying zoning district in accordance with Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table; 
(c)  An accessory or temporary use associated with an allowed principal use. 
2.  Manufactured homes located on lots or sites outside of a MHO district shall be considered nonconforming in accordance with Section 8.2, Nonconforming Uses. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 12, 1-17-2017) 
3.8.10. - Neighborhood Conservation Overlay (NCO) 
A.  Purpose The Neighborhood Conservation Overlay (NCO) District is intended to protect and preserve the unique design features and character of established neighborhoods throughout the City, and to promote new construction that is compatible with the existing neighborhood character. The NCO district is a flexible tool that may be applied to multiple neighborhoods, each of which will have its own unique architectural, natural, cultural, and historic attributes. 
B.  Procedure for Establishment of Individual Neighborhood Conservation Districts   
1.  Initiation of Plan Prior to the establishment of an NCO district for a specific neighborhood, a plan shall be initiated by: 
(a)  City Council; 
(b)  P&Z; or 
(c)  By petition of 66 percent or more of the landowners in a neighborhood proposing an NCO. 
2.  Criteria for a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Plan Before commencement of a plan, it shall be verified that the area proposed for an NCO district complies with the following criteria: 
(a)  Contains a minimum of 1 block (2 opposing street frontages or sharing common property lines). 
(b)  At least 66 percent of the land area within the proposed NCO district, not including street and other right-of-way, was developed at least 25 years prior to the plan being initiated; 
(c)  There is existing or the potential for incompatible new development or redevelopment within the district; 
(d)  The area possesses one or more of the following distinctive features that create a cohesive identifiable setting, character or association: 
(1)  Scale, size, type of construction, or distinctive building materials; 
(2)  Lot layouts, setbacks, street layouts, alleys or sidewalks; 
(3)  Special natural or streetscape characteristics, such as creek beds, parks, gardens or street landscaping; 
(4)  Land use patterns, including mixed or unique uses or activities; 
(5)  Abuts or links designated local historic districts and/or landmarks; or 
(6)  Designation as a National Register District. 
3.  Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Plan Contents The neighborhood plan: 
(a)  Should comply with the City's adopted policy guidance; 
(b)  Include a map of the proposed boundaries; 
(c)  Describe the distinctive features, characteristics and conditions that were identified in the criteria for establishing a neighborhood conservation plan, that make the area unique and could therefore become standards of the overlay district; and 
(d)  Development goals for the character of the neighborhood. 
4.  Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Plan Approval After completion, the plan shall be forwarded to the P&Z for its review and recommendations following a public hearing. Upon completion of its review, the P&Z shall forward the plan along with its recommendations to the City Council for review and a public hearing. An NCO plan shall be approved by the City Council for a specific neighborhood before establishment of an NCO district for the neighborhood is initiated by City Council. 
5.  Establishment of Individual Neighborhood Conservation Districts After the approval of an NCO plan, the City Council may initiate the establishment of an individual NCO district in accordance with this section and the following: 
(a)  Section 2.4.20, Zoning Map Amendment; and 
(b)  Section 2.4.15, Text Amendment. 
C.  District Development Standards The text amendment for each area designated as an individual NCO district shall follow the policy guidance in the NCO plan and identify, with specificity, the standards to be applied to all new construction and expansion of existing structures. 
1.  General The NCO shall include an NCO district name and a reference to the district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map. 
2.  Standards for All forms of Development The standards chosen should be for the purpose of maintaining the general character and appearance of existing development in the district. Aspects of development that these standards may address, include, but are not be limited to the following (except as prohibited by state law). 
(a)  Dimensional standards such as lot area, lot width, and setbacks; 
(b)  Location of proposed buildings or additions; 
(c)  Building size (for principal and accessory structures), and orientation; 
(d)  Landscaping and screening; 
(e)  Paving requirements or limitations; 
(f)  Exterior lighting; 
(g)  Uses; and 
(h)  Views of or from specific locations. 
3.  Additional Standards for Multi-family and Nonresidential Buildings In addition to the standards in (2) above, multi-family and nonresidential buildings in an NCO may also be subject to the following additional standards: 
(a)  Exterior building materials; 
(b)  Building roof line and pitch; 
(c)  Building foundation treatment; and 
(d)  Required features on a front facade. 
D.  Compliance for All NCO Districts   
1.  Compliance with Underlying Zoning District The development standards of the specific NCO can supplement and can be more or less restrictive than the applicable standards found in the underlying zoning district. 
2.  Conflict In the event that standards in a NCO district conflict with the standards in the underlying zoning district, the standards in the NCO shall control. 
3.  Compliance with Development Standards Once an NCO district is established, no permit for any new construction or expansion of an existing structure may be issued until the Planning and Development Director determines that the proposal complies with all development standards established for the NCO district where the land is located. 
3.8.11. - Reserved 
3.8.12. - Watershed Overlay (WSO) 
A.  Purpose The purpose of a Watershed Overlay (WSO) district is to ensure the availability of public water supplies at a safe and acceptable level of water quality, to ensure protection of public water supplies for recreational and aesthetic purposes, to minimize sedimentation of streams, and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of High Point. More specifically, these standards are intended to: 
1.  Ensure compliance with all applicable federal and state laws governing the protection of water supply watersheds and the provision of stormwater management to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare. 
2.  Protect those portions of designated water supply watersheds which lie closest to existing and proposed water supply reservoirs from activities which could degrade water quality in the reservoirs; 
3.  Minimize pollution entering municipal reservoirs to assure the public health and the public provision of a continued supply of safe drinking water thereby protecting the water quality of these water supply reservoirs and promoting public awareness; and 
4.  Encourage a low intensity of land development in the most sensitive portions of the water supply watersheds (Watershed Critical Areas) thereby reducing the risks to water quality posed by higher density residential and nonresidential uses. 
B.  Standards See Section 6.2, Watershed Protection, for the WSO district standards. 
CHAPTER 4: - USES 
4.1. - Principal Use Table 

4.1.1. - Use Table Structure 
A.  General Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, lists principal use types and indicates for each zoning district whether the principal use type is permitted by right, permitted by right only inside the Core City Area, permitted as a special use, or permitted only with an overlay district. Also, the principal use table references district use prohibitions and additional standards that are applicable to a specific use type. 
B.  Conditional Zoning Districts The range of permitted uses in a conditional zoning district shall be the same as the range of permitted uses within the corresponding general zoning district unless the conditions associated with the approved conditional zoning district further limit them. In no instance shall the range of permitted uses in a conditional zoning district exceed the range of permitted uses in the corresponding general zoning district. 
4.1.2. - Uses Permitted By-Right 
A "P" in a cell of the principal use table indicates that the specific use type is permitted by right in the corresponding zoning district, subject to compliance with the additional standards referenced in the principal use table. A "P*" in a cell of the principal use table indicates that the specific use type is permitted by right in the corresponding zoning district only when located inside the Core City Area and subject to compliance with the additional standards referenced in the principal use table. 
4.1.3. - Uses Requiring Special Use Review 
An "S" in a cell of the principal use table indicates that the specific use type is permitted in the corresponding zoning district only upon approval of a special use in accordance with Section 2.4.12, Special Use, and any additional standards referenced in the principal use table. 
4.1.4. - Uses Requiring Overlay District 
An "O" in a cell of the principal use table indicates the specific use type is permitted in the corresponding zoning district only upon approval of an overlay district and any additional standards referenced in the principal use table. 
4.1.5. - Prohibited Uses 
A.  A blank cell in the principal use table indicates that the specific use type is prohibited in the corresponding zoning district. 
B.  The following principal uses are prohibited throughout the City's zoning jurisdiction in all zoning districts: 
1.  Explosives manufacturing; 
2.  Leather and leather products manufacturing involving tanning; 
3.  Slaughter or rendering of animals; 
4.  Outdoor flea markets; 
5.  Manufactured dwellings (except in a Manufactured Housing Overlay District); 
6.  Recreational Vehicle Parks (except as a public recreation facility); and 
7.  Outdoor shooting ranges (except as a public safety facility). 
C.  Section 6.2.13, Standards Applicable in the GWA, identifies uses prohibited within general watershed areas of the WSO. 
D.  Section 6.2.14, Standards Applicable in the WCA, identifies uses prohibited within watershed critical area (WCA)s of the WSO. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 13, 12-3-2018) 
4.1.6. - District Use Prohibition 
Regardless of whether the principal use table lists a specific use type as a permitted use, the specific use type may be prohibited in accordance with the overlay district or sub-district provisions in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts. The principal use table references prohibitions for a specific use type in the column titled "District Use Prohibitions." 
4.1.7. - Additional Standards 
A.  When a specific use type is permitted in a zoning district, there may be additional standards that are applicable. Such additional standards are referenced in the principal use table column titled "Additional Standards." These standards shall apply to a specific use type regardless of the zoning district, unless otherwise specified. 
B.  In addition, use types are also subject to the district standards listed in the applicable zoning district in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts. 
4.1.8. - Unlisted Uses 
For land uses not listed in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, not listed as a part of a use category or use type, and not listed as a prohibited use in Section 4.1.5, Prohibited Uses, the Planning and Development Director shall determine which use category or use type to which the land use belongs in accordance with Section 2.5.4, Determination. 
4.1.9. - Principal Use Table 
  
TABLE 4.1.9: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE 
P=Permitted  P*=Permitted only inside Core City area  S=Permitted with special use  O=Overlay required  D=Development Type 
Permitted uses may be subject to additional zoning district standards in Chapter 3. 
USE CATEGORY 
USE TYPE R-3 R-5 R-7 RM-5 RM-16 RM-26 TO OI LB GB RC CB EC LI HI AGR I PNR MS MX District Use Prohibition Additional Standards Residential Business Special Agricultural Use Classification Agriculture Agriculture production (crops) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P WSO (WCA) 4.3.1 A.1 Agriculture production (livestock) P WSO (WCA) Residential Use Classification Common elements recreation Common Elements Recreation P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.2 A.1 Household Living Duplex dwelling P* P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 B.1 Family care home P P P P P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 B.2 Live/work dwelling P P P P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 B.3 Manufactured dwelling O O O O P ARO Zone 1-3 4.3.2 B.4 Multi-family dwelling P P P P P P P P P P P* P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 B.5 Single-family attached dwelling P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 B.6 Single-family detached dwelling P P P P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 Triplex/quadplex P* P* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 B.7 Group Living Dormitory, private P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 C.1 Fraternity or sorority house P P P ARO Zone 1-2 Rooming house P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 Single room occupancy (SRO) S S S ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 C.2 Social service facility, major S S S S S ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 C.3 Social service facility, minor S P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 C.3 Life Care Assisted living facility P P P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 D.1 Continuing care retirement community P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.2 D.2 Long-term care/skilled nursing facility P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 Institutional Use Classification Civic Assembly, major P P P P P* P P P P ARO Zone 1 4.3.3 A.1 Assembly, minor S S S S S P P P P P P P P P* P P P P P 4.3.3 A.1 Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3 A.2 Cultural facility, major P P P P P* P P P ARO Zone 1 4.3.3 A.3 Cultural facility, minor P P P P P P P P* P P P P 4.3.3 A.3 Correctional facility S S S ARO Zone 1 Government facility P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Public recreation facility P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3 A.4 Public safety facility, major P P P P P P P P P P Public safety facility, minor P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Day Care Day care center S S S S S S P P P P P P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1 4.3.3 B.1 Education College or university P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 Other post-secondary educational facility P P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1 4.3.3 C.1 School, major S S S S S S S P ARO Zone 1 4.3.3 C.2 School, minor S S S S S S P P P S P P P ARO Zone 1 4.3.3 C.2 Truck driving school P P WSO (WCA) Health Care Hospital P ARO Zone 1-2 Medical care facility, major P P P P P P P P Medical care facility, minor P P P P P P P P P P P Specialty hospital P ARO Zone 1-2 Religious Institution Religious institution P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1-2 4.3.3 D Transportation Airport S S WSO (WCA) Park and ride facility P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3 E.1 Passenger terminal, surface transportation P P P P P P P P WSO (WCA) Taxi or limousine service facility P P P P WSO (WCA) Utilities Communication or broadcasting facilities P P P P P P P Solar array P P P P 4.3.3 F.1 Utility facility, major P P WSO (WCA) 4.3.3 F.2 Utility facility, minor P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3 F.2 Wireless telecommunication facility, major S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S 4.3.3 F.3 Wireless telecommunication facility, minor P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3 F.3 Commercial Use Classification Adult Entertainment Adult entertainment P 4.3.4 A Animal Care Animal care, major P P P 4.3.4 B.1 Animal care, minor P P P P P P P P P P P P Eating Establishments Bar or nightclub P P P P P P P 4.3.4 C.1 Restaurant, major P P P MS (B&C) 4.3.4 C.2 Restaurant, minor D D P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.4 C.2 & 5.14.3 Offices Office, major P P P P P P P P P P P Office, minor P P P P P P P P P P P P Parking, Commercial Parking, commercial P P P P P P P P P P P Personal Services Personal service, major P P P P P* P P MS (B) 4.3.4 D.1 Personal service, minor D D P P P P P P P P P 5.14.3 Repair establishment P P P P P P P P P 4.3.4 D.2 Tattoo/body piercing P Recreation and Leisure Amusement and entertainment P P P P P Amusement parks P P ARO Zone 1 4.3.4 E.1 Sports and fitness centers P P P P P P P P P 4.3.4 E.2 Retail Sales Bulky item sales P 4.3.4 F.1 Convenience store with fuel sales P P P P P P MS (B&C) WSO (WCA) Flea market/antique mall, indoor P P P P P MS (B) 4.3.4 F.2 Pawnshop P P P P P MS (B) Retail sales, large P P P 5.14.4 Retail sales, major P P P P P* P P 4.3.4 F.3 Retail sales, minor D D P P P P P P P* P P 4.3.4 F.3 & 5.14.3 Truck stop S P 4.3.4 F.4 Vehicle Establishments Vehicle establishment, major P P P P MS (B), WSO (WCA) 4.3.4 G.1 Vehicle establishment, minor P P P P P MS (B), WSO (WCA) 4.3.4 G.1 Visitor Accommodation Bed & breakfast S S S S P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.4 H.1 Hotels or motels P P P P P P P ARO Zone 1 Industrial Use Classification Extractive Industry Extractive industry S ARO Zone 1, WSO (WCA) 4.3.5 A.1 Industrial Services Industrial service, major P P WSO (WCA) Industrial service, minor P P P WSO (WCA) Manufacturing and Production Asphalt plants S WSO (WCA) 4.3.5 B.1 Manufacturing, major P WSO (WCA) Manufacturing, minor P P P P WSO (WCA) 4.3.5 B.2 Microbrewery, microdistillery, or microwinery P P P P P P P Motion picture production P P P P Warehousing and Freight Movement Freight movement P P WSO (WCA) Self-storage, external access P P P 4.3.5 C.1 Self-storage, internal access P P P P 4.3.5 C.2 Warehouse and distribution P P P P P WSO (WCA) 4.3.5 C.3 Waste Related Service Hazardous waste disposal S ARO Zone 1, WSO (WCA & GWA) Landfill, major S S ARO Zone 1, WSO (WCA & GWA) 4.3.5 D.1 Landfill, minor S S WSO (WCA & GWA) 4.3.5 D.1 Recycling center (major and minor) P P S 4.3.5 D.2 Salvage or junk yard S WSO (WCA) 4.3.5 D.3 Transfer station S ARO Zone 1, WSO (WCA & GWA) 4.3.5 D.4 Wholesale Trade Market Showroom P 4.3.5 E.1 Toxic chemicals or substances, pesticides or fertilizers P WSO (WCA) 4.3.5 E.2 Wholesale, major P P P 4.3.5 E.3 Wholesale, minor P P P P 4.3.5 E.3  
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 13, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , §§ 4, 5, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7363/17-106 , § 5, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 5, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , §§ 4.A, 4.B, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 14.A, 12-3-2018; 7489/19-06 , § 1, 2-4-2019) 
4.2. - Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types 

4.2.1. - Purpose 
This section is intended to provide a systematic framework for identifying, describing, categorizing, consolidating, and distinguishing land uses to determine how a specific land use activity, or combination of activities, is to be considered when applying the principal use table and other provisions in this Ordinance. 
4.2.2. - Organization of Uses 
Section 4.2, Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types, organizes principal uses by use classifications, use categories, and use types to provide a systematic basis for identifying, describing, categorizing, consolidating, and distinguishing land uses to determine whether a specific use is permitted in a particular zoning district. 
A.  Use Classifications The use classifications identify broad classifications of land use and include agricultural uses, residential uses, institutional uses, commercial uses, and industrial uses. Use classifications are further broken down into a series of general "use categories" and specific "use types." 
B.  Use Categories The use categories describe the major sub-groups of the respective use classifications and are based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, and site conditions. For example, the Residential Use Classification is divided into the Common Elements Recreation, Household Living, Group Living, and Life Care use categories. Use categories are further broken down into a series of individual "use types". 
C.  Use Types The specific use types are included in the respective use category. They identify the specific principal uses that are considered to fall within characteristics identified in the use category. For example, family care homes, live/work dwellings, manufactured dwellings, multi-family dwellings, single-family attached dwellings, single-family detached dwellings, and duplex dwellings are use types in the Household Living Use Category. 
D.  Developments with Multiple Principal Uses When all principal uses of a development fall within one use category, the entire development is assigned to that use category. A development that contains a coffee shop, bookstore, and bakery, for example, would be classified in the Retail Sales Use Category because all of the development's principal uses are in that use category. When the principal uses of a development fall within different use categories, then each principal use is classified in the applicable use category and each use is subject to applicable regulations for that use category. Developments with multiple principal uses, such as shopping centers, shall incorporate only those use types allowed in the applicable zoning district. 
E.  Table Organization The characteristics, use types, and exceptions of each of the use categories in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, are listed in the following tables. Table 4.2.2.E, Use Classification, below shows how the information is organized. 
TABLE 4.2.2.E: USE CLASSIFICATION 
A. USE CATEGORY 1. CHARACTERISTICS:  Listing of use category characteristics 2. USE TYPES: (a) Use type Use type description  1) Major/minor use type description 3. EXCEPTIONS: Listing of uses that are not included in the use category  
4.2.3. - Agricultural Use Classification 
Table 4.2.3, Agricultural Use Classification , sets out the use categories and use types included in the agricultural use classification in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. Table 4.2.3 describes the characteristics of the agriculture use category and defines the use types included within the use category. 
TABLE 4.2.3: AGRICULTURAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
A. AGRICULTURE 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Agriculture Use Category includes use types related to the production of field crops, fruits, vegetables, ornamental and flowering plants, and the breeding, or raising of livestock, poultry, swine, or other animals for food or other marketable products. The Agriculture Use Category also includes forestry activities related to the planting, management, protection, and harvesting of trees for timber or other forest products. Examples include animal confinement facilities (the raising of livestock, dairy cattle, swine, or poultry in confined areas), animal production and dairying other than in animal confinement facilities (including fish farms and hatcheries), crop production (including the raising of grains, vegetables, fruits, nuts, cotton, and tobacco), community gardens, forestry and logging, and greenhouse, nursery, and floriculture production. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Agricultural production (crops) Active and on-going agricultural activities, including agronomy, biotechnical agriculture (including education parks for biotechnical agriculture or a demonstration farm), community gardens, forestry, and similar uses. (b) Agricultural production (livestock) Active and on-going agricultural activities related to the raising and breeding of livestock, including cows, horses, goats, pigs, fowl, and other forms of domesticated animals typically associated with farming uses. 3. EXCEPTIONS: a) The Agriculture Use Category does not include the processing of animal or plant products for wholesale or retail sale purposes, which is generally considered a manufacturing and production use. b) Retail nurseries are considered Retail Sales.  
4.2.4. - Residential Use Classification 
Table 4.2.4, Residential Use Classification, sets out the use categories and use types included in the residential use classification in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. Table 4.2.4 describes the characteristics of the common elements recreation, household living, group living, and life care use categories and defines the use types included within each use category. 
TABLE 4.2.4: RESIDENTIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
A. COMMON ELEMENTS RECREATION 1. CHARACTERISTICS: Common Elements Recreation includes recreational facilities that are located in common elements provided in areas of common ownership under the control of an owners association. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Common Elements Recreation A recreational facility that is located in common elements provided in areas of common ownership under the control of an owners association. B. HOUSEHOLD LIVING 1. CHARACTERISTICS: Household Living includes use types that provide for the residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Accessory uses commonly associated with household living are recreational activities, raising of pets, hobbies, and parking of the occupants' vehicles. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Duplex dwelling A single structure comprised of 2 dwelling units that share common vertical walls or horizontal floors/ceilings. Both dwelling units are on the same lot. (b) Family care home A home for 6 or fewer persons that provides room and board, personal care, and habilitation services in a family environment for the residents, who have a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or mental disability (including, but not limited to, mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional disturbances, and orthopedic impairments, but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in North Carolina General Statutes Section 122C-3(11)b.) See North Carolina General Statutes Section 168-21. (c) Live/work dwelling A structure or portion of a structure combining a dwelling unit with an integrated nonresidential work space typically used by 1 or more of the residents. The nonresidential work space is found on the building's ground floor. (d) Manufactured dwelling A dwelling constructed after June 15, 1976 that is composed of one or more components, each of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported on its own chassis. It bears a valid seal indicating conformance with the construction standards promulgated by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of its construction. (e) Multi-family dwelling A dwelling comprised of more than 4 dwelling units that share common vertical walls or horizontal floors/ceilings (or both) that are not on individual lots. Examples include apartments and condominiums. (f) Single-family attached dwelling A dwelling unit that is physically attached to 1 or more dwelling units, each on its own lot. Individual lots may or may not be surrounded by a larger tract that incorporates shared parking, recreation features, or access. The larger tract may or may not be owned in common by the landowners of individual lots. Examples include townhouses, patio homes, and row houses. (g) Single-family detached dwelling A dwelling containing 1 dwelling unit that is occupied by 1 family and that is not physically attached to any other principal structure on an individual lot. For regulatory purposes, this term does not include manufactured dwellings, recreational vehicles, or other forms of temporary or portable housing. (h) Triplex/quadplex A type of residential structure that includes 3 or 4 individual dwelling units located on 1 lot or configured so that each unit is on its own individual lot. C. GROUP LIVING 1. CHARACTERISTICS: Group Living includes use types that provide for the residential occupancy of a building by a group. The occupancy of the building may be larger than found in Household Living. Tenancy is arranged on a monthly or longer basis. Generally, group living development has a common eating area for residents. The residents may receive care, training, or treatment. Accessory uses may include recreational facilities, dining facilities, and parking of vehicles for occupants and staff. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Dormitory, private A residential facility, not located on a campus, which is established directly or indirectly in association with a college, business college, trade school, or university for the purpose of housing students registered and attending the institution. Typically it includes bedrooms with shared bathrooms and other shared living spaces. A private dormitory may contain food preparation and eating facilities primarily for the use of its occupants. (b) Fraternity or sorority house A building used as group living quarters for students of a college, university, or seminary, who are members of a fraternity or sorority that has been officially recognized by the college, university, or seminary but is not located on the campus with which it is associated. Accessory uses may include sleeping areas, cooking facilities, and areas for meeting and socializing. (c) Rooming house A dwelling that provides rental accommodations to tenants in up to 5 individual rooms for periods of 1 week or longer. The dwelling is accessed by a shared entry with a common kitchen. Meals may be provided to the tenants. (d) Single room occupancy (SRO) A building that provides rental accommodations to tenants in more than 5 individual rooms for periods of 1 week or longer. The rooms may have cooking facilities and private bathrooms. (e) Social service facility A residential facility with support and supervisory personnel that provides temporary room and board, housekeeping, personal care, or rehabilitation services for those needing emergency services, post-incarceration services, or drug or alcohol rehabilitation assistance (but not including those with mental illness who are dangerous to others). Examples include homeless shelters, orphanages, shelters for victims of domestic abuse, crisis centers, halfway houses, and drug and alcohol treatment facilities.  1) Major - Social service facilities that provide assistance for 7 or more patrons.  2) Minor - Social service facilities that provide assistance for 6 or fewer patrons. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Extended stay hotels are considered Visitor Accommodations. (b) Family care homes are considered Household Living. D. LIFE CARE 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The life care use category includes use types that provide services for elderly people, including a wide range of services for aging or disabled residents, including room and board, housekeeping, personal care, medical care, and end-of-life care. Such uses may include a spectrum of housing options from independent living to assisted living to dependent living for residents. Accessory uses may include common dining facilities, laundries, transportation, recreation, and on-site retail or personal services intended solely for residents, their guests, or employees. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Assisted living facility A residential facility with support and supervisory personnel for the elderly that provide rooms, meals, personal care, and supervision of self-administered medication. They may provide other services such as recreational and social activities, financial services, transportation, laundry, and other services appropriate for the residents and designed to provide a relatively independent lifestyle. Examples include congregate care and rest homes. (b) Continuing care retirement community (CCRC) A CCRC is a retirement community configured as a single unified campus that includes independent living dwellings, assisted living facilities, and skilled nursing facilities that are owned and operated by a private company that provides a continuum of care to residents of the community. A CCRC may include on-site dining, medical care, and recreation and social facilities in addition to guest lodging and employee housing. (c) Long-term care/skilled nursing facility An institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under skilled medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours. Examples include restorative services, nursing homes, and hospice homes.  
4.2.5. - Institutional Use Classification 
Table 4.2.5, Institutional Use Classification, sets out the use categories and use types included in the institutional use classification in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. Table 4.2.5 describes the characteristics of the civic, day care, education, health care, religious institutions, transportation, and utilities use categories and defines the use types included within each use category. 
TABLE 4.2.5: INSTITUTIONAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
A. CIVIC 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Civic Use Category includes use types of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature that provide a local service to people of the community in a variety of facilities. Uses include meeting areas for civic or fraternal club activities, as well as indoor facilities used primarily for business or professional conferences, seminars, and training programs. Generally, such uses are open to or provide services to members of the general public. This includes, but is not limited to, assembly facilities, public safety facilities, community and cultural facilities, and government facilities. Accessory uses may include parking, training facilities, kitchens/cafeterias, recreation areas, offices, meeting rooms, storage, food sales or consumption. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Assembly A facility for assembly, including buildings that primarily provide meeting areas for civic, fraternal, business or professional organizations for conferences, seminars, recreation, training programs, sports, or entertainment. Examples include private clubs or lodges, YMCA, YWCA, swim and tennis club, country club, boys and girls club, meeting facilities, auditoriums, banquet halls, dinner theaters, convention centers, amphitheaters, stadiums, coliseums, and conference centers.  1) Major - An assembly use with more than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area.  2) Minor - An assembly use with 15,000 square feet of gross floor area or less. (b) Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum Uses intended for the burial of the dead that are dedicated for cemetery purposes. They may include a mausoleum or columbarium (a structure or vault lined with recesses for cinerary urns). (c) Cultural facilities A use that provides education, training, or resources of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature. Examples include community centers, libraries, art galleries, and museums. Accessory uses may include offices, meeting rooms, food preparation, parking, health, and therapy areas.  1) Major - A cultural facility with more than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area.  2) Minor - A cultural facility with 15,000 square feet of gross floor area or less. (d) Correctional facility Publicly or privately operated facilities housing persons awaiting trial or persons serving a sentence after being found guilty of a criminal offense. Accessory uses may include cafeterias, housing for facility staff, outdoor storage and maintenance areas, recreational areas, agricultural facilities, and facilities for the production of goods or materials produced for sale by the inmates. (e) Governmental facility A facility that provides for the general operations and functions of local, state, or federal governments. Examples include government operations or maintenance facilities, school administration offices, and government offices. Accessory uses may include offices, maintenance, storage (indoor and outdoor), fueling facilities, auditoriums, communications equipment, and parking areas. (f) Public recreation facility A facility that provides recreation services to the general public. Examples include recreation centers, senior centers, community centers, parks and gardens, and golf courses. (g) Public safety facility A facility that provides public safety services to the general public. Examples include fire stations, police stations, EMS stations, and governmental training facilities such as an outdoor shooting range or fire training facility. Accessory uses may include offices, teaching rooms, meeting areas, food preparation and consumption areas, sleeping quarters, communications equipment, storage, parking, and maintenance facilities.  1) Major - A public safety facility with more than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area, or that includes maintenance facilities or outdoor facilities.  2) Minor - A public safety facility with 15,000 square feet of gross floor area or less. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Crematoriums are considered Personal Services. (b) Parking lots and structures owned and operated by the government are considered Commercial Parking. (c) Wastewater treatment plants, potable water treatment plants, utility substations, water towers and other similar facilities are considered Utilities. B. DAY CARE 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Day Care Use Category includes use types that provide care, protection, and supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence, and for less than 24 hours a day. Care can include education and development activities. Care can be provided during daytime or nighttime hours. Accessory uses include offices, food preparation, recreation areas, and parking. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Day care center A facility, other than an occupied dwelling, that provides for the care of more than 5 preschool age, or a combination of preschool and school age children under 13 years of age totaling 9 or more, or 9 or more adults, who do not reside in the facility, at least once per week for at least four hours, but less than 24 hours per day. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Home day care is considered an accessory use. (b) Drop-in or short-term day care provided in connection with employment or at a shopping center, recreational facility, religious institution, hotel, or other principal uses are not considered in the Day Care Use Category. C. EDUCATION 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Education Use Category includes use types that provide for all levels of education. Examples include elementary, secondary, post-secondary, technical, and specialized instructional schools. 2. USE TYPES: (a) College or university A public or private institution for post-secondary education offering courses in general or technical education, which operates within buildings on land owned or leased by the institution for administrative and faculty offices, classrooms, laboratories, chapels, auditoriums, lecture halls, libraries, student and faculty centers, athletic facilities, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, residential units, and other facilities which further the educational mission of the institution in a campus setting. In no event shall this definition prohibit a college or university from engaging in an activity historically conducted by the institution. (b) Other post-secondary educational facility A post-secondary school other than a college or university that provides on-site training for business, commercial, and/or trade skills such as accounting, data processing, automobile repair, construction skills, and computer repair. This use type includes satellite classrooms for larger colleges and universities. (c) School An educational institution that provides elementary or secondary education. Accessory uses may include offices, play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums, and before- or after-school day care.  1) Major - Any high school or a middle school designed for 800 or more students.  2) Minor - An elementary school or middle school designed for less than 800 students, or any combination thereof designed for less than 800 students. (d) Truck driving school A specialized instructional school that provides on-site and on the-road training in the operation of heavy trucks, tractor trailers, and transport vehicles. D. HEALTH CAR E 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Health Care Use Category includes use types that provide medical or surgical care and treatment to patients as well as laboratory services Accessory uses may include offices, laboratories, laundry facilities, teaching facilities, meeting areas, cafeterias, parking, maintenance facilities, housing for staff or trainees, and limited accommodations for family members. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Hospital An inpatient facility specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to human patients and injured persons, that is licensed by State law to provide facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics, or general medical practice. Such facilities may include outpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, and related facilities such as laboratories, training facilities and central services facilities. Accessory uses may include staff offices, cafeterias, parking, and maintenance facilities. (b) Medical care facility An outpatient facility where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by 1 or more physicians, dentists, opticians, psychiatrists, or psychologists. Patients receive outpatient care only, which may be provided overnight (as in the case of sleep disorder centers). Accessory uses may include sleeping rooms for care workers and members of patient's families.  1) Major - A medical care facility with more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.  2) Minor - A medical care facility with 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or less. (c) Specialty hospital A hospital with highly specialized personnel, equipment, procedures, or facilities for the treatment of unique conditions, patients, or specific ailments. Examples include psychiatric hospitals, hospitals for children, hospitals that specialize in cancer care, or hospitals that focus on treating particular conditions such as burns. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) A use type that involves provision of residential care for the elderly is classified as Life Care. (b) A use type that provides exclusive care and planned treatment or training for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug issues, where patients are residents and participants in a program are classified as Group Living. E. RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Religious Institutions Use Category includes use types that provide meeting areas for religious activities. Accessory uses may include kitchens/cafeterias, recreation areas, offices, meeting rooms, and parking. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Religious Institution A place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals, and education are held, together with accessory uses (including locations used for education and recreation activities), operated and maintained under the direction of the religious group. Examples include churches, mosques, synagogues, and temples. Accessory uses may include parking, caretaker's housing, pastor's housing, day care, and group living facilities for persons associated with the religious organization, such as convents. F. TRANSPORTATION 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Transportation Use Category includes use types that provide for the landing and takeoff of airplanes and helicopters, and passenger terminals for surface transportation. Accessory uses may include freight handling areas, concessions, offices, parking, maintenance, and fueling facilities. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Airport A facility that provides for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including helicopters, and all necessary facilities for the housing, maintenance, and repair of aircraft. (b) Park and ride facility A facility that provides mass transportation from a parking lot. (c) Passenger terminal, surface transportation A facility where the principal use is the handling, receiving, transfer, and discharging of passengers of various modes of surface transportation. Examples include terminals for bus, trolley, railroad, shuttle van, or other similar vehicular services. (d) Taxi or limousine service facility A facility that provides transportation service via a taxi, limousine, or shuttle, and includes storage and maintenance of vehicles. 3. EXCEPTIONS: Transit route facilities such as bus stops and bus shelters are exempt from this Ordinance. G. UTILITIES 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Utilities Use Category includes both major and minor utilities as well as wireless telecommunications facilities. Major utilities are infrastructure services that provide regional or community-wide service. Minor utilities are neighborhood or subdivision infrastructure services that need to be located in or near the neighborhood or subdivision where the service is provided. Communication or broadcasting facilities and wireless telecommunication facilities are also types of utilities. Services may be publicly or privately provided. Accessory uses may include offices, parking, monitoring, storage areas, or data transmission equipment. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Communication or broadcasting facilities A radio, television, or other digital signal broadcasting facility engaged in the distribution of audio and/or video content to a dispersed audience via any audio or visual mass communications medium. (b) Solar array A group or series of photovoltaic (or solar) panels placed to convert solar radiation into usable direct current electricity and provide that electricity to a use on-site or to the larger electrical network. (c) Utility facility All facilities and equipment related to the provision, distribution, collection, transmission, or disposal of water, stormwater, sanitary sewage, natural gas, electricity, cable television, telephones, and wired telecommunications.  (1) Major - A utility providing regional or community-wide service that normally entails the construction of new buildings or structures. Examples include wastewater treatment plants, potable water treatment plants, electrical generation plants, utility equipment and storage yards, and wind and energy facilities.  (2) Minor - A utility providing a localized service or network function that is small in scale and impact. Examples include natural gas border stations, utility substations, water towers, water and sewage pump stations, stormwater management facilities, and telephone exchanges. (d) Wireless telecommunication facility A facility engaged in the transmission or reception of wireless communications signals consisting of digital or analog voice and data information. Wireless telecommunications facilities include free-standing towers, antenna, and ground-based equipment. Antenna may also be placed on buildings and other structures such as water towers, electrical transmission towers, church steeples, and other vertical projections. Accessory uses typically include equipment buildings and parking areas. Additional definitions related to concealed wireless facility (stealth wireless facility) uses are included in Section 10.4, Definitions.  1) Major - Any application for wireless facilities and/or wireless support structures other than those meeting the definition of a minor wireless telecommunications facility.  2) Minor - Any application for a wireless facility and/or wireless support structure that:   (a) Is a new wireless support structure that is 60 feet or less in height or collocated on an existing building in accordance with Section 4.3.3 F.3(e)(4), Collocation of Antennae on an Existing Building, located in any zoning district, or   (b) Is a new wireless support structure that is 200 feet or less in height in any PNR, I, LI, or HI zoning district, or   (c) Is a concealed wireless facility that is 80 feet or less, in any residential zoning district, or   (d) Is a concealed wireless facility that is 150 feet or less in height in any zoning district except residential, or   (e) Is a monopole or replacement pole located on public property or within an electrical transmission line easement in any zoning district, or   (f) Is considered a substantial modification, as defined in this ordinance, of an existing wireless facility or support structure. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Distribution poles, transmission poles, ground-based electrical/telephone/cable vaults, and transmission lines are exempt from this ordinance. (b) Landfills, recycling and salvage centers, and waste composting uses are considered Waste-Related Services.  
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 15, 12-3-2018) 
4.2.6. - Commercial Use Classification 
Table 4.2.6, Commercial Use Classification, sets out the Use Categories and use types included in the commercial use classification in 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. Table 4.2.6 describes the characteristics of the adult entertainment, animal care, eating establishments, offices, commercial parking, recreation and leisure, retail sales and services, vehicle establishments, and visitor accommodations use categories; and defines the use types included within each use category. 
TABLE 4.2.6: COMMERCIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
A. ADULT
ENTERTAINMENT 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Adult Entertainment Use Category includes use types that sell, distribute, or present material or feature performances or other activities that emphasize the depiction or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined by the North Carolina General Statutes. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Adult entertainment An adult entertainment use is a commercial establishment involved in the provision of services, entertainment, or sales of goods at retail intended solely for consumption by persons over the age of 18. Adult entertainment means adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center, or any combination of the foregoing. Additional definitions related to adult entertainment uses are included in Section 10.4, Definitions. B. ANIMAL CARE 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Animal Care Use Category is characterized by use types related to the provision of medical services and treatment to animals, including veterinary services, animal hospitals, and the boarding of animals related to the provision of these services. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Animal care A facility for the provision of medical services and treatment to animals, including veterinary services, animal hospitals, and the boarding of animals related to the provision of these services. Examples include animal shelters, kennels, grooming facilities, animal hospitals, veterinary offices, and veterinary clinics.  1) Major - Animal care uses that include outdoor kennels, runs, or exercise areas.  2) Minor - Animal care uses that do not include outdoor kennels, runs, or exercise areas. C. EATING
ESTABLISHMENTS 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Eating Establishments Use Category includes use types that prepare and sell food and beverages for immediate or direct on- or off-premise consumption. Examples include restaurants (including brewpubs) with indoor and outdoor seating, bars or nightclubs, caterers, restaurants with drive-through service, specialty eating establishments (ice cream parlors, bakery shops, dessert shops, juice or coffee houses). Accessory uses may include bars or cocktail lounges associated with the establishment, decks and patios for outdoor seating, drive-through facilities, facilities for live entertainment or dancing, customer and employee parking areas, and valet parking facilities. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Bar or nightclub An establishment primarily devoted to the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption, where the sale of food is incidental. Activities may include dancing or other forms of entertainment (including live performances that are not considered adult entertainment uses) such as billiard tables, darts, and karaoke. (b) Restaurant An establishment that prepares and sells food and beverages for immediate or direct on- or off-premise consumption.  1) Major - A restaurant with a drive-through.  2) Minor - A restaurant with no drive-through. 3. EXCEPTIONS: Banquet halls and dinner theatres are considered Civic. D. OFFICES 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Office Use Category includes use types that provide for activities that are conducted in an office setting and generally focus on business, professional, or financial services. Examples include offices for conducting the affairs of a general business establishment, financial services or sales of real estate or other personal property, investment banking, stock brokerage, investment services, real estate sales, offices for lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects, planners, and similar professions. Accessory uses may include cafeterias, day care facilities, recreational or fitness facilities, parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the office. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Office A use where the affairs of a business professional, or financial service establishment is conducted.  1) Major - An office with more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.  2) Minor - An office with 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or less. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) An office that is part of and located with a principal use in another use category is considered accessory to the establishment's primary activity. A headquarter office that is located in conjunction with or adjacent and related to a principal use in another use category and on the same site is considered part of the other use category. (b) Contractors and others who perform services off-site are included in the Offices Use Category if equipment and materials are not stored outside and no fabrication, service, or similar work is carried on at the site; otherwise they are considered as Industrial Service. (c) Government offices are considered as Government Facilities. (d) Banks, saving and loans, or credit unions are considered as Personal Services. (e) Medical care facilities, including doctor and dental offices, are considered Health Care. E. PARKING,
COMMERCIAL 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Commercial Parking Use Category includes use types that provide motor vehicle parking facilities that are designed to serve the public and private needs of uses located on another lot. A fee may or may not be charged for the right to park at the facility. Accessory uses may include small shelters for parking attendants. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Parking, commercial Parking facilities, including parking garages, parking decks and surface parking, devoted to motor vehicle parking that is not accessory to a principal use on the same lot. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Parking provided for a principal use located on another lot, either in conjunction with a commercial parking facility or in conjunction with the accessory parking of another principal use, is considered accessory off-site or shared parking. (b) Park-and-ride facilities are classified as Transportation. (c) Parking facilities that serve and are located on a lot with nonresidential, residential, or mixed-use development are considered an accessory use. F. PERSONAL SERVICES 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Personal Service Use Category is characterized by use types related to the provision of services or product repair for consumers. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Personal service establishment An establishment meeting frequent or recurrent service needs of a personal nature, including the repair of small personal items such as shoes, watches, jewelry, and clothing. Examples include laundromats, massage therapy and day spas, laundry and dry-cleaning pick-up and drop-off establishments, banks, savings and loans, credit unions, photography studios, funeral homes and crematoriums, mailing or packaging services, photocopy services, screen printer, barber/beauty shops, and tanning and nail salons.  (1) Major - A personal services establishment with more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area.  (2) Minor - A personal services establishment with 4,000 square feet of gross floor area or less. (b) Repair establishments An establishment engaged in the provision of repair services of durable consumer and households goods, computers, yard equipment, lawn mowers, lamps, and small household appliances. (c) Tattoo/body piercing establishment An establishment whose principal business activity is the inserting of permanent markings or coloration, or the producing of scars, upon or under human skin or the creation of an opening in the body of a person so as to create a permanent hole for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Travel agencies are considered Offices. (b) Repair of heavy equipment is considered Industrial Services. G. RECREATION AND LEISURE 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Recreation and Leisure Use Category is characterized by use types that provide recreational, amusement, and entertainment opportunities that are commercial in nature. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Amusement and entertainment A commercial use that is typically indoors and that provides recreational, amusement, and entertainment opportunities. Examples include billiards, bingo, bowling, fortune tellers, sweepstakes, skating rinks, movie theaters, coin-operated games, and shooting ranges. (b) Amusement parks A commercial facility that is typically outdoors and that provides entertainment, recreational, and amusement opportunities. Examples include water parks, miniature golf, and go-kart tracks. (c) Sports and fitness centers A commercial facility that focuses on physical fitness, and sports training and instruction. Examples include dance and yoga studios, fitness centers, sports instructional schools, and martial arts instruction. H. RETAIL SALES 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Retail Sales Use Category includes use types involved in the sale, lease, or rent of new or used products primarily intended for the general public. Accessory uses may include offices, storage of goods, limited assembly, processing, or repackaging of goods for on-site sale, concessions, ATM machines, outdoor display/sales areas, and parking. Use types within this use category are categorized based on their intensity, scale, and function. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Bulky item sales An establishment engaged in the retail sale and display of large or bulky consumer goods for sale, including but not limited to truck camper tops, bed liners, prefabricated outdoor buildings, manufactured homes, modular homes, play equipment, portable storage containers, or hot tubs. (b) Convenience store with fuel sales A small retail establishment selling items that include but are not limited to food products, household items, newspapers and magazines, candy and beverages, a limited amount of freshly prepared foods such as sandwiches and salad for on- or off-site consumption, and gasoline sales. (c) Flea market/antique mall, indoor Where goods are offered for sale to the general public by individual sellers from open or rented sales areas. Accessory uses may include parking, concessions, restrooms, and indoor storage. (d) Pawnshop An establishment engaged in loaning money upon deposit of personal property. Such uses also store personal property on site and sell retail goods. (e) Retail sales establishment An establishment that sells goods directly to the consumer, where such goods are available for immediate purchase and removal by the purchaser. Examples include stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business goods, whether new or used, including art and art supply stores, audio/video stores, bicycle sales, book stores, clothing stores, convenience stores, department stores, dry good sales, electronic equipment stores, fabric shops, furniture stores, florist shops, garden supply centers, gift shops, grocery stores, hardware stores, stores that sell household products, jewelry stores, office supply stores, pet and pet supply stores, and pharmacies. Accessory uses may include storage of products for sale, offices, concessions, seating areas, areas for testing of products prior to purchase, and provision of product-related service or repair.  1) Large - A retail sales establishment with more than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area on the ground floor for a single tenant, or more than 150,000 square feet on the ground floor serving multiple tenants, including outparcels.  2) Major - A retail sales establishment between more than 4,000 and 50,000 square feet of gross floor area.  3) Minor - A retail sales establishment with 4,000 square feet of gross floor area or less. (f) Truck stop An establishment typically engaged in fuel sales that serve commercial truck drivers. The use may provide food, maintenance services, overnight parking, showering rooms, laundry facilities, basic convenience retail items and other services related to the use. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Laundry and dry-cleaning plants are considered Industrial Services. (b) Building trade contractors with on-site storage that sell primarily to contractors and do not have a retail orientation are considered Industrial Services. (c) Repair and service of automobiles, motorcycles, and light and medium trucks are considered as Vehicle Establishments. (d) Bars, nightclubs, and similar establishments, as well as bakeries are considered Eating Establishments. (e) An establishment that provides financial, professional or business services in an office setting are considered Office. (f) An establishment that involves the sale, distribution, or presentation of materials or activities emphasizing sexually explicit content are considered Adult Entertainment. I. VEHICLE
ESTABLISHMENTS 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Vehicle Establishments Use Category includes use types involving the direct sale; rental; storage; and servicing of automobiles, trucks, boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and other consumer motor vehicles intended to transport persons or goods over land or water or through the air, whether for recreation, commerce, or personal transport. Accessory uses may include offices, sales of parts, maintenance facilities, parking, outdoor display, and vehicle storage. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Vehicle establishments Uses involving the direct sales and service of motorized vehicles.  1) Major - Establishments that are primarily engaged in vehicle sales, rental, storage, towing, and major repair such as transmission, engine repair and bodywork and repainting.  2) Minor - Establishments that are primarily engaged in washing cars, tire sales, minor repair such as diagnostic work, lubricating, wheel alignment and inspections, but no vehicle sales or rental. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Auto parts and supply sales are considered Retail Sales. (b) Refueling and maintenance facilities for vehicles belonging to a specific principal use (fleet vehicles) are considered accessory uses if located on the site of the principal use. (c) Storage of salvaged or junk vehicles or parts is considered a Waste-Related Service. J. VISITOR
ACCOMMODATIONS 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Visitor Accommodations Use Category includes use types that provide lodging units or space for short-term stays for rent, lease, or interval occupancy. Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational facilities, limited storage, restaurants, bars, supporting commercial, meeting facilities, offices, and parking. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Bed and breakfast A private residence, typically a single-family detached structure engaged in the renting of 1 or more rooms on a daily basis to tourists, vacationers, or business people where the provision of meals is limited to guests only. (b) Hotel or motel A building or group of buildings in which sleeping accommodations are offered to the public and intended for temporary occupancy on an overnight or short term basis. Accessory uses may include restaurants, bars, offices, and onsite recreational facilities. Some rooms may include in-room kitchen, dining, and laundry facilities.  
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 14.B, 12-3-2018) 
4.2.7. - Industrial Use Classification 
Table 4.2.7, Industrial Use Classification, sets out the use categories and use types included in the industrial use classification in 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. Table 4.2.7 describes the characteristics of the extractive industry, industrial services, manufacturing and production, warehousing and freight movement, waste-related service, and wholesale trade, and defines the use types included within each use category. 
TABLE 4.2.7: INDUSTRIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
A. EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Extractive Industry Use Category includes use types involving the extraction, removal, or basic processing of minerals, liquids, gases, or other natural resources. Such uses also include quarrying, well operation, drilling, mining, or other procedures typically done at an extraction site. Accessory uses may include offices, limited wholesale sales, security or caretakers quarters, outdoor storage, and maintenance facilities. Examples include quarries, borrow pits, mining, and sand and gravel operations. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Extractive industry A use involving the extraction, removal, or basic processing of minerals, liquids, gases, or other natural resources. B. INDUSTRIAL SERVICE 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Industrial Service Use Category includes use types involving the repair or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery equipment, products, or byproducts. Firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Examples include machine shops; tool repair; heavy equipment servicing and repair; and general industrial service uses. Accessory uses may include limited retail or wholesale sales, offices, parking, warehousing, and outdoor storage. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Industrial service Establishments engaged in the repair or servicing of agriculture, industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site.  1) Major - Uses that include, but are not limited to, heavy equipment sales, rental, or storage; heavy equipment servicing and repair; building, heating, plumbing, or electrical contractors; fuel oil or bottled gas distributors; septic tank services; and well drilling.  2) Minor - Uses that include, but are not limited to tool repair, electric motor repair; repair of scientific or professional instruments; and laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants, that typically are, or can be, contained within an enclosed building. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Contractors and others who perform services off-site are considered Offices if equipment and materials are not stored outside and no fabrication, services, or similar work is carried on at the site. (b) Drop-off and pick-up dry cleaners are considered Personal Services. C. MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Manufacturing and Production Use Category includes use types involving the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. This use category also includes custom industries (establishments primarily engaged in on-site production of goods by use of hand tools and small-scale equipment). Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, such sales are a subordinate part of total sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site. Accessory uses may include retail or wholesale sales, offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreation facilities, warehouses, storage yards, repair facilities, truck fleets, fueling facilities, security and caretaker's quarters. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Asphalt plant An industrial establishment engaged in the production of asphalt, macadam, or blacktop for use in the construction and repair in roadways and vehicular use areas. The use involves the stockpiling of sand, binder and filler, as well as a heater to mix the ingredients. Accessory uses may include the storage and maintenance of paving equipment as well as the stockpiling of used asphalt for re-use. (b) Manufacturing An establishment involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of raw materials, or partially finished goods.  (1) Major - Uses that tend to require large amounts of bulk or unrefined materials which are typically processed and stored outdoors on the site. These uses require a significant amount of energy for the processing of raw materials, and are likely to generate significant noise, vibration, dust, glare, heat, odor, smoke, truck traffic, in the immediate vicinity of the use. Examples include manufacturing and assembly of machinery; manufacturing of petroleum or petroleum-related products; rubber and plastics manufacturing; and adhesives, coatings, or paint manufacturing.  (2) Minor - Uses that involve indoor processing or assembly of finished or partially finished goods and do not require large stockpiles of raw material. Processing and storage activities take place within enclosed buildings, which limit the creation of noise, vibration, dust, glare, heat, odor, and smoke. Minor manufacturing examples include production or repair of small electronic parts and equipment; sewing or assembly of textiles into consumer products; computer and electronics assembly; furniture assembly; and the assembly of pre-fabricated parts. (c) Microbrewery, microdistillery, or microwinery An establishment engaged in the production and packaging of malt beverages, wine or spirits for distribution, retail, or wholesale both on and off-premise. A microbrewery is a facility that produces less than 15,000 barrels of beer per year and sells the majority of the beer it produces for off-site resale and consumption. A microwinery produces less than 100,000 gallons of wine per year. A microdistillery produces less than 15,000 gallons of alcoholic spirits per year. Accessory uses may include a taproom, seating areas, ancillary sales of related merchandise, event space, and warehouse space for stored product. (d) Motion picture production An activity involving the design and production of a specific type of audiovisual work wherein the images, when displayed, give the impression of motion. Audiovisual works include movies, as well as slide shows, and video games. 3. EXCEPTIONS: Manufacturing and production of goods from salvage or composting material is classified as Waste-Related Services. D. WAREHOUSE AND FREIGHT MOVEMENT 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Warehouse and Freight Movement Use Category includes use types involving the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms or businesses. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for some will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales activity with the customer present. Examples include separate storage warehouses (used for storage by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores); distribution warehouses; cold storage plants; and self-service storage. Accessory uses may include offices, truck fleet parking, outdoor storage, and maintenance areas. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Freight movement Uses involved in the short-term storage and movement of goods for individuals or businesses. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer. Accessory uses may include offices, truck parking, outdoor storage, maintenance areas, and security facilities. (b) Self-storage, external access A storage building or buildings that are divided into sections or compartments for the storage of business or personal items on a temporary or long-term basis only where all units have individual exterior access. (c) Self-storage, internal access A storage building or buildings that are divided into sections or compartments for the storage of business or personal items on a temporary or long-term basis only where all units have common internal access. (d) Warehouse and distribution A use engaged in the temporary or long-term storage and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, products for sale or resale, equipment, or personal goods. Accessory uses may include offices and service operations. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Contractors and others who perform services off-site are considered Offices if equipment and materials are not stored outside and no fabrication, services, or similar work is carried on at the site. (b) Use types that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes are considered Waste-Related Services. E. WASTE-RELATED SERVICE 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Waste-Related Service Use Category includes use types that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material or processing of scrap or waste material. Examples include recycling centers, salvage and junk yards, transfer stations, major and minor landfills. Accessory uses may include offices, outdoor storage, recycling of materials, and repackaging and trans-shipment of by-products. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Hazardous waste disposal The systematic control of the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, processing, treatment, recovery, and disposal of hazardous wastes. Examples include halogenated and non-halogenated solvents, wastewater treatment sludge, plating bath solutions, metal heat treating solutions, pesticide derivatives, distillation residues and tars, incineration residues, chemicals from the wood preservation process, petroleum refinery by-products, leachate liquids, purification solids, slags, slurry, or any material listed on the EPA's F-, K-, P-, or U-lists of listed hazardous wastes. (b) Landfill A site for solid waste disposal.  1) Major - A solid waste or sanitary landfill designed to collect and store nonhazardous household waste.  2) Minor - A construction and demolition debris landfill that also accepts vegetative debris, or Land Clearing and Inert Debris (LCID). These facilities could also include a recycling center as part of the operation. Accessory uses include stockpiled bricks and concrete available for use as inert fill material and mulch generated on site for resale. (c) Recycling center A facility used for collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of materials for efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, sorting, shredding, and cleaning.  1) Major - A recycling center that handles construction and demolition debris or LCID.  2) Minor - A recycling center that handles household recyclables such as glass, plastic, metal, cardboard, and paper. (d) Salvage or junk yard An establishment where junk, waste, discarded, salvaged, or similar materials such as old metals, wood, lumber, glass, paper, rags, cloth, bagging, cordage, barrels, containers, appliances, and the like, are brought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, stored, or handled. Examples include automobile wrecking or automobile wrecking yards; heavy equipment wrecking yards; and yards where salvaged structural steel materials are stored, handled, and sold. (e) Transfer station A storage or collection facility where solid waste from collection vehicles is consolidated and temporarily stored for subsequent transport to a permanent disposal site 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Wastewater treatment plants and potable water treatment plants are considered Utilities. (b) Temporary LCID landfills are considered a temporary use. F. WHOLESALE TRADE 1. CHARACTERISTICS: The Wholesale Trade Use Category includes use types involving the sale, lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, trade or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or taking of orders and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. Accessory uses may include offices, product repair, warehouses, minor fabrication services, outdoor storage, and repackaging of goods. 2. USE TYPES: (a) Market showroom A use associated with the furniture and home furnishings industry and primarily engaged in the display of wholesale furniture, home furnishings and accessories. (b) Toxic chemicals or substances, pesticides, or fertilizers Establishments primarily engaged in selling toxic chemicals or substances, pesticides or fertilizers to retailers, professional business owners, or to other wholesalers. (c) Wholesale Establishments primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, professional business owners, or to other wholesalers.  (1) Major - A wholesale use located in a building of more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, or that includes outdoor storage, and does not sell toxic chemicals or substances, pesticides, or fertilizers.  (2) Minor - A wholesale use located in a building of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or less that does not include outdoor storage and does not sell toxic chemicals or substances, pesticides, or fertilizers. 3. EXCEPTIONS: (a) Establishments that engage primarily in sales to the general public or on a membership basis are considered Retail Sales. (b) Establishments that are primarily storing goods with little on-site business activity are considered Warehousing and Freight Movement.  
4.3. - Use Standards 
Use standards are additional requirements applied to certain individual use types identified in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table by a section reference in the Additional Standards column. Use standards are fully applicable to new principal uses within those individual use types. Use standards are also applicable, to the maximum extent practicable, to existing principal uses within those individual use types. 
(Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 5.A, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 16, 12-3-2018) 

4.3.1. - Agriculture Uses 
A.  Agriculture   
1.  Agricultural Production (crops) Sale of produce grown on-site or on an adjacent lot that is part of the same agricultural operation is permitted provided they take place outside the right-of-way. 
4.3.2. - Residential Uses 
A.  Common Elements Recreation   
1.  Common Elements Recreation Outdoor courts, swimming pools, and athletic fields shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line abutting a residential district. 
B.  Household Living   
1.  Duplex Dwelling Duplex dwellings shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  It shall face the street from which the dwelling derives its street address; and 
(b)  It shall be limited to a maximum of 1 driveway on a block face in the R-5 and R-7 districts. Circular driveways are excluded from this requirement. 
2.  Family Care Home A family care home shall not be located within one-half mile (2,640 feet) of an existing family care home. 
3.  Live/Work Dwelling A live/work dwelling shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  The residential portion of the building shall occupy at least 50 percent of the gross floor area. 
(b)  The nonresidential portion of the building is limited to an office, personal service, retail sales, or restaurant, minor use type. 
(c)  Drive-through facilities are prohibited. 
(d)  Signage for the nonresidential portion of the building is allowed in accordance with the standards in Section 5.7, Signage. In the RM-16 and RM-26 districts wall signs shall be allowed in accordance with the TO district, except that the size shall be limited to a 25 square foot minimum and maximum of 5 percent of the wall area of the first floor facade. The sign height shall be limited to the top of the first floor facade. Freestanding signs are prohibited in RM-16 and RM-26. 
4.  Manufactured Dwelling A manufactured dwelling shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  It shall be located on a parcel of land in an MHO district; 
(b)  It shall be occupied only as a single family dwelling; 
(c)  It shall be served by public water and sewer; 
(d)  It shall be set up in accordance with the standards established by the North Carolina Department of Insurance and the most current version of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured/Mobile Homes; 
(e)  It shall maintain a minimum width of 16 feet; 
(f)  It shall be oriented with the longest axis parallel to the lot frontage, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(g)  Towing apparatus, wheels, axles, and transporting lights shall be removed; 
(h)  It shall include a continuous, permanent masonry foundation or masonry curtain wall of solid brick or brick veneer, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, installed under the perimeter; 
(i)  It shall include stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps, and other means of entrance and exit that are installed or constructed in accordance with the standards set by the North Carolina Building Code. They shall be attached firmly to the primary structure and anchored securely to the ground; 
(j)  It shall maintain exterior siding comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction, which consists of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Vinyl or aluminum lap siding (whose reflectivity does not exceed that of flat white paint); 
(2)  Cedar or other wood siding; 
(3)  Stucco siding; 
(4)  Brick or stone siding. 
(k)  It shall maintain a roof pitch with a minimum vertical rise of 3 feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run; 
(l)  It shall include a roof finished with a Class C or better roofing material that is commonly used in standard residential construction; and 
(m)  It shall provide an eave projection of no less than 6 inches, which may include a gutter. 
5.  Multi-Family Dwelling Multi-family development shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Building Placement   
(1)  A minimum 10 feet of separation shall be maintained between all buildings in the development. 
(2)  Buildings must be set back from private drives and parking lots a minimum of 10 feet as measured from back of curb or edge of pavement, if no curb is provided. 
(b)  Building Length   
(1)  The maximum length of a multi-family building shall be 250 linear feet, except in the CB and MX districts, where no maximum length is applied. 
(2)  No maximum building length shall be applied if the building is designed for occupancy by the elderly and it has central facilities for dining and recreation. 
(3)  In no instance shall the provision of a firewall between different building sections constitute 2 separate buildings for the purpose of meeting the building length requirement. 
(c)  Open Space The development shall comply with the open space standards of Section 5.12, Open Space. 
(d)  Recreation Facilities Active recreation facilities must be placed a minimum of 50 feet from adjacent land used for single-family residential purposes. 
(e)  Pedestrian Connections Pedestrian connections shall be: 
(1)  Provided between building entrances, parking lots, public sidewalks, and recreational facilities; 
(2)  At least 4 feet in width and constructed of a dustless all-weather surface; and 
(3)  Configured to connect to parks and greenways that abut the development, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(f)  Utilities Underground All electric, communications, water, and sewer utility lines shall be installed underground. 
(g)  Adaptive Reuse in the Core City In order to reuse the existing buildings in the Core City in accordance with the City's adopted policy guidance, multi-family uses are permitted in the LI district, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The LI district must be located in the Core City area; 
(2)  The new use must reuse an existing building or buildings; 
(3)  The total square footage of all building additions for multi-family; personal service, major; major and minor retail sales; major and minor assembly; and major and minor cultural facility uses shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all principal buildings existing on the site as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(4)  The site is only required to meet the standards of 4.3.2.B.5.e and f. 
6.  Single-Family Attached Dwelling Single-family attached development shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Building Placement   
(1)  A minimum ten feet of separation must be maintained between all buildings in the development. 
(2)  Buildings must be set back from private drives and parking lots a minimum of ten feet as measured from back of curb or edge of pavement, if no curb is provided. 
(b)  Maximum Number of Units per Building   
(1)  In the R-5 and R-7 districts the maximum number of attached dwellings shall be 2 per building (twin home). 
(2)  In the RM-5 and TO districts, the maximum number of attached dwelling units shall be 6 per building. 
(3)  In the RM-16, OI, LB, EC, and I districts, the maximum number of attached dwelling units shall be 8 per building. 
(4)  In the RM-26, GB, and RC districts, the maximum number of attached dwelling units shall be 10 per building. 
(c)  Internal Street Setback On a street constructed within a single-family attached development, the street setback may be reduced to a minimum of 15 feet in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  For attached units abutting a street or private drive with a sidewalk, the individual driveways for the units must be a minimum length of 20 feet as measured from the sidewalk. 
(2)  For attached units abutting a street or private drive without a sidewalk, the individual driveways for the units must be a minimum length of 20 feet as measured from back of curb or edge of pavement for streets and drives without a curb. 
(d)  Open Space The development shall be in conformance with the open space standards of Section 5.12, Open Space. 
(e)  Recreation Facilities Active recreation facilities must be placed a minimum of 50 feet from adjacent land used for single-family residential purposes. 
(f)  Utilities All electric, communications, water and sewer utility lines shall be installed underground. 
7.  Triplex and Quadplex Triplex and quadplex dwellings shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  The dwelling shall face the street from which the dwelling derives its street address. 
(b)  If a parking lot is provided, it shall be located to the interior side or rear of the dwelling and not be located between the dwelling and the street. 
(c)  Where permitted in the R-5 and R-7 Districts, the dwelling shall be limited to a corner lot. 
C.  Group Living   
1.  Dormitory, Private A private dormitory shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Be located on a lot or site located within a half-mile radius of the primary college or university it serves. 
(b)  Calculate density in accordance with Section 10.2.5, Density and Intensity, (2 bedrooms shall be equivalent to 1 dwelling unit). 
2.  Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Single room occupancy uses shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  There shall be a minimum of 70 square feet of gross floor area provided for each rooming unit. 
(b)  Each building used for a single room occupancy use shall include a common area in the form of recreation rooms, living rooms, lounges, dining rooms, or other gathering areas at a rate of 5 square feet per unit. In no instance shall a single room occupancy use include less than 250 square feet of common area. 
(c)  Bathrooms, laundries, hallways, lobby areas, vending areas, and kitchens shall not be counted as common area. 
(d)  On site management shall be provided on a 24-hour basis. 
(e)  Calculate density in accordance with Section 10.2.5, Density and Intensity: when calculating density for an SRO, a rooming unit of less than 150 square feet shall be equivalent to 1/2 a dwelling unit; and a rooming unit of 150 square feet or more shall be equivalent 1 dwelling unit. 
3.  Social Service Facility (Major and Minor) A social service facility (major and minor) shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  At least 50 square feet of gross floor area shall be provided for each person being housed or sheltered at the facility. 
(b)  The facility operator(s) shall provide continuous on-site supervision during the hours of operation through employee(s) and/or volunteer(s). 
D.  Life Care   
1.  Assisted Living Facility A major life care facility shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  If provided, shared food preparation, service, and major dining areas shall be centrally located. 
(b)  Common social and service facilities shall be provided at a minimum rate of 30 square feet per dwelling or rooming unit in addition to the minimum amount of required open space. 
(c)  All facilities and services shall be solely for the use of residents and their guests. 
(d)  Facilities for administrative services and limited medical services for the exclusive use of the residents may be located on the site. 
(e)  Density should be calculated in accordance with Section 10.2.5, Density and Intensity: 2 bedrooms shall be equivalent to 1 dwelling unit. 
2.  Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC) A CCRC shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Retail, personal service, and institutional uses are intended to serve residents and their guests, and shall not be located within individual stand-alone buildings. 
(b)  The setback requirements of the zoning district are applied only to the development along the perimeter of the CCRC. 
(c)  Unless otherwise stated below, a CCRC shall comply with the development standards in Chapter 5: Development Standards. 
(1)  The landscaping requirements in Section 5.5, Landscaping Standards, shall apply to portions of a CCRC within 50 linear feet of the edge of the development. 
(2)  A CCRC shall comply with the applicable open space standards for residential development in Section 5.12, Open Space, except that the floor area associated with exercise and rehabilitation facilities shall be credited towards open space requirements. 
(d)  Density should be calculated in accordance with Section 10.2.5, Density and Intensity, (2 bedrooms shall be equivalent to 1 dwelling unit). 
(Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 5.B, 5-21-2018) 
4.3.3. - Institutional Uses 
A.  Civic   
1.  Assembly (Major and Minor) An assembly use (major and minor) shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Have street frontage on a street classified higher than a residential local street. 
(b)  Have no access from a residential local street, unless the use is located on a corner lot with street frontage on a thoroughfare street. 
(c)  Outdoor courts, swimming pools, and athletic fields shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line abutting a residential district. 
(d)  Assembly uses in residential districts shall be on a lot of at least 2 acres. 
(e)  Assembly uses with permanent seating for 1,000 or more shall require a special use in accordance with Section 2.4.12, Special Use. 
(f)  In order to reuse the existing buildings in the Core City in accordance with the City's adopted policy guidance, major and minor assembly uses are permitted in the LI district, subject to the following standards: 
(i)  The LI district must be located in the Core City area; 
(ii)  The new use must reuse an existing building or buildings; 
(iii)  The total square footage of all building additions for multi-family; personal service, major; major and minor retail sales; major and minor assembly; and major and minor cultural facility uses shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all principal buildings existing on the site as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
2.  Cemetery, Columbarium, Mausoleum A cemetery shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Be located on a lot or site at least 3 acres in area; 
(b)  Provide space for on-site parking and maneuvering of funeral processions; 
(c)  Have street frontage on a street classified higher than a residential local street; 
(d)  Have no access from a residential local street, unless the use is located on a corner lot with street frontage on a thoroughfare street; and 
(e)  Ensure interments take place at least 50 feet from a lot line and comply with the requirements of State law. 
3.  Cultural Facility (Major and Minor) In order to reuse the existing buildings in the Core City in accordance with the City's adopted policy guidance, major and minor cultural facility uses are permitted in the LI district, subject to the following standards: 
(a)  The LI district must be located in the Core City area; 
(b)  The new use must reuse an existing building or buildings; 
(c)  The total square footage of all building additions for multi-family; personal service, major; major and minor retail sales; major and minor assembly; and major and minor cultural facility uses shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all principal buildings existing on the site as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
4.  Public Recreation Facility Outdoor courts, swimming pools, and athletic fields shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line abutting a residential district. 
B.  Day Care   
1.  Day Care Center A day care center shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Meet all applicable State licensing requirements; 
(b)  Have street frontage on a street classified higher than a residential local street; 
(c)  Have no access from a residential local street; unless the use is located on a corner lot with street frontage on a thoroughfare street; 
(d)  Outdoor recreation areas shall: 
(1)  Be located behind the front building line of the principal building; 
(2)  Be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least 4 feet in height; and 
(3)  Be safely segregated from parking, loading, or service areas. 
(e)  Screen outdoor recreation areas adjacent to a residential district with an opaque fence, wall, or other allowed method in Section 5.5.6, Screening Methods, to a height of 6 feet above grade level; 
(f)  If located in a residential district, signage is limited to 1 monument sign with a maximum area of 24 square feet and a maximum height of 6 feet. 
C.  Education   
1.  Other Post-Secondary Educational Facility Facilities within a post-secondary school which generate significant noise or fumes, such as auto body or engine repair, industrial/auto body painting, or manufacturing processes, and that are adjacent to a residential district shall be at least 100 feet from any lot line abutting the residential district. 
2.  School (Major and Minor) A school (major and minor) shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Have street frontage and gain primary access on a street classified higher than a residential local street. 
(b)  Have no access from a residential local street, unless the use is located on a corner lot with street frontage on a thoroughfare street. 
D.  Religious Institutions   
A religious institution in a residential district on a lot of 3 acres in area or larger shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Have street frontage and gain primary access on a street classified higher than a residential local street. 
(b)  Have no access from a residential local street, unless the use is located on a corner lot with street frontage on a thoroughfare street. 
E.  Transportation   
1.  Park and Ride Facility A park and ride facility shall not front on or gain access from a residential local street. 
F.  Utilities   
1.  Solar Array A solar array use shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Be on a site of at least 1 acre in area; 
(b)  Signage shall be limited to ownership and contact information, and any other information required by government regulation. Commercial advertising is prohibited. Notwithstanding, nothing in this section shall prohibit signage that is legally approved for other uses on the same lot or site on which the solar array facility is located; 
(c)  Be enclosed with a fence of at least 6 feet in height; and 
(d)  Not create glare or shadows on adjacent lands. 
2.  Utility Facility (Major and Minor) Utility facilities (major and minor) shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Setbacks All facilities, substations and buildings shall meet the setback requirements of the zoning district. 
(b)  Height A water tower may exceed the maximum height of the zoning district, if 1 foot of additional setback is provided from all property lines for every 2 feet the tower exceeds the maximum height limit. 
(c)  Landscaping Required landscaping shall be planted between the building setback line and the lot line, except landscaping material shall not be required in areas where minimum safety clearances are required. 
(d)  Appearance When located in a residential district, or adjacent to a residential district, all habitable principal and accessory buildings shall have a roof pitch with a minimum vertical rise of 3 and one-half feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run, and include materials compatible with buildings in the vicinity. 
3.  Wireless Telecommunication Facility (Major and Minor)   
(a)  Purpose This section establishes general standards for the siting of wireless telecommunications facilities that will provide for the public health, safety, and welfare. The standards are intended to ensure that residents, businesses, and public safety operations in the city have reliable access to wireless telecommunications networks and state of the art mobile broadband communications services. More specifically, the provisions of this section are intended to: 
(1)  Ensure adequate protection of residential areas and uses from potential adverse impacts of wireless support structures and antennae, and to generally encourage the location of these facilities in areas where adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(2)  Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing wireless support structures so as to minimize the number of new towers throughout the city, and establish stealth towers as the primary option for single user wireless facilities; 
(3)  Enhance the ability of telecommunications services providers to provide services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; and 
(4)  Encourage wireless support structures that are carefully engineered, sited, and screened to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure, and to minimize adverse visual impact. 
(b)  Applicability A new wireless telecommunications facility, whether considered a principal or accessory use, shall comply with the standards of this section, unless specifically exempted in accordance with subsection (c) below. All wireless facilities and support structures shall comply with or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and any other agency of the State or federal government that regulates telecommunications facilities. 
(c)  Exemptions The following shall be exempt from the standards of this section, but shall be required to comply with all other relevant standards in this Ordinance: 
(1)  Removal or replacement of transmission equipment on an existing wireless support structure or base station that does not result in a substantial modification. 
(2)  Ordinary maintenance of existing wireless facilities and support structures. 
(3)  Wireless facilities placed on utility poles or on electric transmission line towers with the permission of the utility owning the pole or tower. 
(4)  Temporary wireless communication facilities (or "COWs") in accordance with Section 4.5.4 J, Temporary Wireless Telecommunications Facility. 
(5)  Satellite dish antennae, receive-only television or radio antennae for noncommercial use, and antennae legally operated by FCC-licensed amateur radio operators in accordance with Section 4.4, Accessory Structures and Uses. 
(d)  Facilities Distinguished   
(1)  Minor Wireless Telecommunications Facility The following uses are considered minor wireless telecommunications facilities that may only be established in accordance with the standards of this section and Section 2.5.14, Site Plan: 
(i)  A new wireless support structure of 60 feet in height or less in any zoning district; 
(ii)  A concealed or stealth wireless facility of 80 feet in height or less in a residential district; 
(iii)  A concealed or stealth wireless facility of 150 feet in height or less in a business, special, or planned development district; 
(iv)  A new wireless support structure of 200 feet in height or less in a PNR, I, LI, or HI district; 
(v)  Collocation of equipment on an existing wireless telecommunications facility, support structure, or building in any district; or 
(vi)  A substantial modification of an existing wireless facility or support structure in any district. 
(2)  Major Wireless Telecommunications Facility Uses that do not meet the criteria for a minor wireless communications facility in subsection (d)(1) above are considered major wireless telecommunications facilities that may only be established in accordance with the standards of this section and Section 2.4.12, Special Use. 
(e)  General Standards and Design Requirements   
(1)  Type of Support Structure Permitted   
(i)  Concealed or Stealth facilities and support structures shall be permitted in any zoning district. 
(ii)  Monopole support structures shall be permitted in all zoning districts EXCEPT: TO, LB, CB, MS, MX, PD-CC, PD-P, and any Gateway Corridor and Local Historic Overlay Districts. 
(iii)  Lattice or Guyed support structures shall be permitted ONLY in the EC, LI, HI, AGR and PNR zoning districts. 
(2)  Collocation New wireless support structures shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum number of collocations based upon their height. 
(i)  Support structures 60 to 100 feet in height shall support at least 2 additional telecommunications providers. 
(ii)  Support structures greater than 100 feet and less than 150 feet in height shall support at least 3 additional telecommunications providers. 
(iii)  Support structures greater than 150 feet in height shall support at least 4 additional telecommunications providers. 
(iv)  An applicant proposing a new wireless support facility other than a concealed or stealth wireless facility shall demonstrate that no suitable existing wireless support structure, building or other structure within the coverage area is available for the collocation of antennae. 
(v)  The Planning and Development Director, upon request of the applicant, may modify the requirement that new wireless support structures accommodate the collocation of other service providers if it is determined that collocation at the site is not essential to the public interest, or that the construction of a shorter support structure with fewer antennae will promote community compatibility. 
(3)  Collocation First Right of Refusal   
(i)  The owner of any new telecommunications support structure, except stealth structures, shall offer first right of refusal to the City for purposes of collocation, at least 30 days prior to entering into the first collocation agreement or lease. 
(ii)  The City shall respond in writing within 30 days of its receipt of the offer with either a letter of intent or a waiver of rights. If the City decides to locate facilities on the support structure to enhance public safety communications, the site shall be provided at no cost to the City. 
(iii)  If the City waives its right of first refusal, or fails to respond to the owner's notification with the 30 day period, or has not commenced use of the site as intended and has not made a good faith effort to do so within 180 days of communicating its intent to the owner, the collocation site shall be deemed abandoned by the City and the owner shall be under no further obligation to provide a collocation site to the City on that support structure. 
(4)  Collocation of Antennae on an Existing Building An antenna may be attached to a nonresidential or multi-family residential building in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  The antenna height, including any support structure, shall not extend more than 20 percent higher than the height of the building on which it is located. 
(ii)  The antenna and associated equipment shall comply with the applicable provisions of this section. 
(iii)  An antenna visible from an adjacent street shall be omni-directional, and screened or camouflaged to the extent practicable to minimize its appearance. 
(iv)  Equipment shall be located within the building or screened in some other fashion to prevent off-site views. 
(f)  Maximum Height In residential districts, wireless support structures, including stealth support structures, shall not exceed 200 feet in height from the base of the structure to the top of the highest point, including appurtenances. Additional height may be requested as part of a special use, provided the applicant submits technical information or other justification to document the need for the additional height and is in compliance with Section 10.2.6 B, Structure Height Restrictions. 
(g)  Setbacks   
(1)  Except for roof-mounted antenna, all wireless support structures, including those anchored or attached to existing buildings or other structures, shall be set back from all lot lines a distance greater than or equal to the minimum distance necessary to insure the support structure will remain on its site following collapse (its fall zone) as certified by a licensed professional engineer. In the absence of such certification, the required setback shall be equal to 80 percent of the height of the wireless support structure. 
(2)  Roof mounted antennae and stealth facilities located within other structures are exempt from these requirements. 
(h)  Lighting and Marking Wireless telecommunications facilities or support structures shall not be lighted or marked unless required by the FCC or FAA. Strobe lights shall not be used for nighttime lighting unless specifically required by the FCC or FAA. 
(i)  Color Other than concealed or stealth facilities, wireless support structures shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or be painted a neutral, matte color designed to blend with its surroundings, unless otherwise required by the FCC or FAA. 
(j)  Signage Signs located at a wireless telecommunications facility shall be limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna registration number (if required) and any other information required by government regulation. Commercial advertising is prohibited. Notwithstanding, nothing in this section shall prohibit signage that is legally approved for other uses on the same lot or site on which the wireless facility is located. 
(k)  Fencing   
(1)  Ground mounted accessory equipment and wireless support structures shall be secured and enclosed with a fence not less than 8 feet in height, placed between the equipment compound and any required landscaping. 
(2)  Fencing shall not be required for concealed or stealth wireless facilities, or for support structures. 
(l)  Landscaping Landscaping shall be required around the perimeter of the site or equipment compound when ground equipment within the compound is visible from a public street. Landscaping shall be designed to screen such equipment from view in accordance with the ground-based mechanical equipment requirements in Section 5.6, Screening. 
(m)  Accessory Equipment Accessory Equipment, including any buildings, cabinets or shelters, shall be used only to house equipment and other supplies in direct support of the operation of the wireless facility or support structure. Any equipment not used in direct support of such operation shall not be stored on the site. 
(n)  Additional Standards for Concealed or Stealth Wireless Facilities A concealed, or stealth, wireless telecommunications facility and support structure shall be designed and located to complement the surrounding landscape in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  A stealth wireless facility and support structure shall take a form other than that of a typical wireless facility and support structure, including but not limited to; bell towers, clock towers, water towers, silos, chimneys, steeples, evergreen trees, or flag poles. (See Figure 4.3.3.F, Stealth Wireless Telecommunications Facilities). 
FIGURE 4.3.3.F STEALTH WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

(2)  The equipment compound shall be designed, located, and camouflaged in a manner compatible with the support structure portion of the facility. Ground equipment shall be located within a structure or building, to the maximum extent practicable. Antennae, cables, and related appurtenances shall be enclosed, camouflaged, screened, or obscured so that they are not readily apparent to a casual off-site observer. 
(3)  Stealth wireless facilities are encouraged (but not required) to be designed to accommodate the collocation of other antennae whenever technically and economically feasible. 
(o)  Existing Wireless Facilities and Wireless Support Structures   
(1)  General   
(i)  An existing wireless facility or support structure that was legally permitted on or before the effective date of this Ordinance shall be considered a lawful permitted use if it complies with all applicable provisions of this section, or a nonconforming use if it does not comply with all applicable provisions of this section. 
(ii)  An existing and otherwise lawful facility or support structure that was not permitted by special use that, as a result of this Ordinance, would now require special use approval shall not be considered nonconforming. 
(2)  Activities at Nonconforming Wireless Facilities or Support Structures   
(i)  Ordinary maintenance may be performed on a nonconforming wireless facility or support structure. 
(ii)  Collocation of wireless facilities on an existing nonconforming wireless support structure shall not be construed as an expansion, enlargement, or increase of a nonconforming structure and/or use and shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the site plan process as stated in Section 2.5.14, provided that the collocation is NOT considered a substantial modification of the facility or support structure. 
(iii)  Collocation of wireless facilities on an existing nonconforming wireless support structure shall not be construed as an expansion, enlargement, or increase of a nonconformity and shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with Section 2.5.14, Site Plan. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 14, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 6, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , §§ 4.E, 6, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , §§ 5.C, 5.D, 5-21-2018) 
4.3.4. - Commercial Uses 
A.  Adult Entertainment   
1.  Purpose An adult entertainment establishment, as listed and defined in Article 26A of the North Carolina General Statutes, is recognized as having certain serious objectionable operational characteristics and a deleterious effect on adjacent areas, particularly when such establishments are concentrated. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure their adverse effects do not contribute to degradation or decline of surrounding areas. The primary intent of the standards in this subsection is to prevent a concentration of these uses in any one area of the City's planning jurisdiction. 
2.  Separation Standards   
(a)  Other Adult Entertainment Establishments An adult entertainment establishment shall not be located within 1,200 feet of any other adult entertainment establishment, measured as a straight line from lot line to lot line. 
(b)  Other Uses An adult entertainment establishment shall not be located within 650 feet of a religious institution, school, day care, public park, land in a residential district, or an establishment with an on premise ABC license, measured as a straight line from lot line to lot line. 
3.  Maximum Area The gross floor area of any adult entertainment establishment shall not exceed 3,000 square feet. 
4.  Prohibition of Sleeping Quarters Except for an adult motel, an adult entertainment establishment shall not have sleeping quarters. 
5.  Restriction of Uses   
(a)  There shall not be more than 1 adult entertainment establishment in the same building, structure, or portion thereof. 
(b)  No other principal or accessory use may occupy the same building, structure, property, or portion thereof with an adult entertainment establishment. 
B.  Animal Care   
1.  Animal Care, Major Outdoor areas used to house or exercise animals shall be enclosed by a fence at least 6 feet in height and located 50 feet from a lot line abutting a residential district. 
C.  Eating Establishments   
1.  Bar or Nightclub A bar or nightclub shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Be separated from a religious institution or a school by at least 200 feet. The minimum separation is reduced to 100 feet in the MS district and there is no separation requirement in the MX district. 
(b)  Not orient the primary entrance toward an abutting lot in a residential district. 
(c)  Have a 6-foot high opaque fence or masonry wall along all lot lines abutting a residential district. 
2.  Restaurant (Major and Minor) A restaurant (major and minor) shall have a 6-foot high opaque fence or masonry wall along all lot lines abutting a residential district. 
D.  Personal Services   
1.  Personal Services Establishment, Major In order to reuse the existing buildings in the Core City in accordance with the City's adopted policy guidance, major personal services establishments are permitted in the LI district, subject to the following standards: 
(a)  The LI district must be located in the Core City area; 
(b)  The new use must reuse an existing building or buildings; 
(c)  The total square footage of all building additions for multi-family; personal service, major; major and minor retail sales; major and minor assembly; and major and minor cultural facility uses shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all principal buildings existing on the site as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
2.  Repair Establishments Repair activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
E.  Recreation and Leisure   
1.  Amusement Parks Amusement equipment, machinery, mechanical devices, or go-kart tracks shall not be operated within 200 feet of a residential district. 
2.  Sports and Fitness Centers A sports or fitness center shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  In All Districts Except OI and LB Outdoor courts, swimming pools, and athletic fields shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line abutting a residential district. 
(b)  In the OI and LB Districts   
(1)  A sports or fitness center shall be a maximum of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Outdoor facilities are prohibited. 
F.  Retail Sales   
1.  Bulky Item Sales The outdoor display of bulky goods shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Portable storage containers and dumpsters that are utilized for the purpose of display and any item that exceeds 10 feet in height shall not be placed within required setbacks, parking or landscape areas. 
(b)  Other bulky items that are less than or equal to 10 feet in height must be located at least 10 feet from any public street and shall not be placed within required parking or landscape areas. 
2.  Flea Market/Antique Mall, Indoor All items for sale at an indoor flea market/antique mall must be located within an enclosed building. 
3.  Retail Sales Establishment   
(a)  Major   
(1)  In the MS District In the MS district, a use primarily engaged in the sale of used merchandise shall: 
(i)  Not front on Main Street; and 
(ii)  For other sites, be less than 25,000 square feet of gross floor area and located in an existing building designed with a single storefront that is intended for a single occupant. 
(2)  In the LI District In order to reuse the existing buildings in the Core City in accordance with the City's adopted policy guidance, major retail sales establishments are permitted in the LI district, subject to the following standards: 
(i)  The LI district must be located in the Core City area; 
(ii)  The new use must reuse an existing building or buildings; 
(iii)  The total square footage of all building additions for multi-family; personal service, major; major and minor retail sales; major and minor assembly; and major and minor cultural facility uses shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all principal buildings existing on the site as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Minor In order to reuse the existing buildings in the Core City in accordance with the City's adopted policy guidance, minor retail sales establishments are permitted in the LI district, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The LI district must be located in the Core City area; 
(2)  The new use must reuse an existing building or buildings; 
(3)  The total square footage of all building additions for multi-family; personal service, major; major and minor retail sales; major and minor assembly; and major and minor cultural facility uses shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all principal buildings existing on the site as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
4.  Truck Stop A truck stop shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Setbacks All buildings, parking and service areas associated with the use shall be setback at least 50 feet from an abutting residential district. 
(b)  Location Have frontage on or be located within a 1/2 mile of an Interstate or US Primary Highway exit. 
G.  Vehicle Establishments   
1.  Vehicle Establishments   
(a)  General   
(1)  Tires shall be stored within an enclosed building or stored within the outdoor vehicle storage area and under cover in such a manner as to prevent a violation of the public nuisance code. 
(2)  Salvaging and storage of vehicle for parts is prohibited. 
(3)  Repair of all vehicles and the storage of all parts shall be within an enclosed building. 
(4)  In all districts except LI and HI, outdoor vehicle storage is limited to an area less than 25 percent of the lot. The storage area shall be located behind the front building line of the principal building and be screened with an opaque, wall, fence, or other approved method to a height of 6 feet above grade. 
(5)  In the LI and HI districts, outdoor vehicle storage may occupy up to 50 percent of the lot. The storage area shall be located behind the front building line of the principal building and be screened with an opaque fence, wall, or other approved method, to a height of 6 feet above grade level. 
(b)  Major   
(1)  Vehicles for sale or rent shall not be: 
(i)  Located within the right-of-way, 
(ii)  Less than 10 feet from the edge of the pavement or the curb, 
(iii)  In a required planting area, 
(iv)  In a sight distance easement, or 
(v)  In an area required for off-street parking. 
(2)  All vehicles shall be located on an all-weather surface. 
(c)  Minor Vehicle washing or detailing shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The washing operation shall take place within a building. 
(2)  Buildings shall be setback at least 75 feet from an abutting residential district. 
(3)  Specific areas shall be provided for the manual drying, waxing, polishing and vacuuming of vehicles when these services are provided. These areas shall not conflict with on-site circulation patterns. 
(4)  The use shall be screened with an opaque fence, wall, or by any other allowed method in Section 5.6.6, Screening Methods, to a height of 6 feet above grade level along all lot lines abutting a residential district. 
H.  Visitor Accommodations   
1.  Bed and Breakfast A bed and breakfast shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Be owner-occupied or have a manager who resides on the premises; 
(b)  Have no more than 6 sleeping rooms; 
(c)  Have only 1 kitchen; 
(d)  Limit meals served on the premises to overnight guests only; 
(e)  If in a residential district, ensure signage complies with the identification sign requirements of Table 5.7.8.B, Requirements for a Sign not Requiring a Sign Permit. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , §§ 4.F, 7, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , §§ 5.E, 5.F, 5-21-2018) 
4.3.5. - Industrial Uses 
A.  Extractive Industry   
1.  Extractive Industry An extractive industry use (including, mining, quarrying, or drilling) shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Setbacks   
(1)  The following features shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line: 
(i)  The edges of a pit where an extraction operation is located; 
(ii)  Any equipment used in the processing of rock or gravel; and 
(iii)  Any asphalt plant or other industrial use operated in conjunction with an extraction use. 
(2)  In an instance where the extraction operation site is bounded by a railroad right-of-way, no setback is required between the railroad right-of-way and the extraction operation. 
(b)  Security Fencing A security fence, a minimum of 6 feet in height, shall be provided around the perimeter of both an existing and abandoned extraction operation. 
(c)  Rehabilitation   
(1)  Within 1 year of the cessation of the use, all equipment and stock piles incidental to the operation shall be dismantled and removed by and at the expense of the landowner; 
(2)  Except in an instance where redevelopment for another permitted use is in progress on the site of an abandoned extractive industry use: 
(i)  Excavations shall be graded to reduce the surface to gently rolling topography in substantial conformity to the land area immediately surrounding the site; and planted with a cover of sod, trees, shrubs, legumes, or grasses, which will minimize erosion; and 
(ii)  The site shall be drained to prevent the accumulation of standing water, and channelization of the drainage shall be designed and controlled so as not to cause erosion or silting of neighboring properties or public ways, nor to appreciably increase the turbidity of any natural water course, or to occlude any existing drainage course. 
(d)  Operation An operation involving blasting that is discernible beyond the exterior property line of the use shall only be conducted between the hours of 7:00 AM and 6:00 PM. 
(e)  Access   
(1)  Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition; 
(2)  Access shall be located no closer than 15 feet to any property line other than a railroad right-of-way line; and 
(3)  A plan shall be submitted showing truck routes to and from the site. Such routes shall be designed to minimize impacts on residential areas, schools, or other uses negatively affected by truck traffic. 
B.  Manufacturing and Production   
1.  Asphalt Plant An asphalt plant shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Setbacks An asphalt plant shall be located at least 50 feet from a property line. 
(b)  Security Fencing A security fence, a minimum of 6 feet in height, shall be provided around the use. 
(c)  Rehabilitation   
(1)  Within 1 year of the cessation of the use, all equipment and stock piles incidental to the operation shall be dismantled and removed by and at the expense of the landowner; 
(2)  On the site of an abandoned asphalt plant the site shall be drained to prevent the accumulation of standing water, and channelization of the drainage shall be designed and controlled so as not to cause erosion or silting of neighboring properties or public ways, nor to appreciably increase the turbidity of any natural water course, or to occlude any existing drainage course, except in an instance where redevelopment for another permitted use is in progress. 
(d)  Access   
(1)  Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition. 
(2)  Access roads shall be located no closer than 15 feet from a property line. 
(3)  A plan shall be submitted showing truck routes to and from the site. Such routes shall be designed to minimize impacts on residential areas, schools, or other uses negatively affected by truck traffic. 
2.  Manufacturing, Minor In order to reuse existing buildings in the Core City in accordance with the City's adopted policy guidance, minor manufacturing uses are permitted in the MX district, subject to the following standards: 
(a)  The new use must reuse an existing building or buildings; 
(b)  In the MX-D district the building must be located in the area bounded by North Lindsay Street, Lindsay Place, West Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, Virginia Place, and West English Road. 
C.  Warehouse and Freight Movement   
1.  Self-storage, External Access An external access self-storage establishment in the GB district shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Prohibited Storage Outdoor storage and storage of hazardous, toxic, or explosive substances shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Use Area   
(1)  A self-storage use shall be located on a lot or site between 2 and 5 acres in area. 
(2)  No more than 50 percent of the total site may be occupied by buildings. 
(c)  Maximum Height Self-storage buildings shall not exceed 20 feet or 1 story in height. 
(d)  Operation No activity other than storage shall take place within a storage unit. 
2.  Self-Storage, Internal Access An internal access self-storage establishment shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Visibility No indoor storage material, racks, bins, shelving or other evidence of the warehouse or wholesale operation shall be visible from the public right-of-way. Glass doors and windows shall contain curtains, blinds or other suitable treatment to screen the interior of the building from view. 
(b)  Transparency Maintained Windows shall not be boarded or paneled over from the outside or the inside. 
(c)  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage shall be prohibited. 
3.  Warehouse and Distribution A warehouse in the GB district shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Size The warehouse shall not exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage shall be prohibited. 
D.  Waste-Related Service   
1.  Landfill A landfill shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  General   
(1)  Provide a Type A landscape yard around its perimeter (see Section 5.5.11, Perimeter Landscape Yards). 
(2)  Access shall be controlled through the use of a fence, wall, gate, or other suitable device to prevent unregulated dumping. 
(3)  Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition. 
(b)  Major   
(1)  Be located at least 500 feet from a residential district. 
(2)  An existing major landfill located within a WSO (GWA and WCA) may continue to operate or expand, but no new major landfill shall be permitted in the WSO (GWA and WCA). 
(c)  Minor Be set back at least 50 from any property line and 300 feet from any existing residential district. 
2.  Recycling Center A recycling center shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  General   
(1)  Access shall be controlled through the use of a fence, wall, gate, or other suitable device to prevent unregulated dumping. 
(2)  Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition. 
(b)  Major   
(1)  Be located at least 300 feet from a residential district, except that an accessway or weighing station may be located 100 or more feet from a residential district. 
(2)  Materials may be stored outdoors provided they are located at least 200 feet from all property lines and are screened with an opaque fence, wall, or by any other allowed method in Section 5.6.6, Screening Methods, to a height of 8 feet above grade level. 
(c)  Minor   
(1)  Located at least 150 feet from a residential district and operated entirely within an enclosed building, except for loading facilities which may be located outdoors. 
(2)  Outdoor storage of recyclable materials is prohibited. 
3.  Salvage or Junk Yard A salvage or junk yard shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Be located on a lot of at least 5 acres. 
(b)  Be located at least 300 feet from a residential district. 
(c)  Locate the storage area behind the front building line of the principal building and be screened with an opaque wall, fence, or other approved means to a height of 8 feet above grade level. 
4.  Transfer Station A transfer station shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Access shall be controlled through the use of a fence, wall, gate, or other suitable device to prevent unregulated dumping. 
(b)  Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition. 
(c)  Be located at least 150 feet from a residential district and operated entirely within an enclosed building, except for loading facilities which may be located outdoors. 
(d)  Outdoor storage of waste material is prohibited. 
E.  Wholesale Trade   
1.  Market Showroom A market showroom use shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Exterior Product Display Exterior product display shall: 
(1)  Not take place within the right-of-way, 
(2)  Not exceed 2,500 square feet per lot, 
(3)  Consist of products from the same vendor or company that owns or leases space within the building, and 
(4)  Not be displayed earlier than 2 weeks prior to the official opening of the market, and be removed within 2 weeks of the official end of the market. 
(b)  Structure   
(1)  A market showroom shall be located: 
(i)  In a permanent building, or 
(ii)  In a combination of permanent buildings and a membrane structure located on the same lot, or 
(iii)  Entirely in 1 or more membrane structures on the same lot, only if a building permit for a permanent building has been issued. 
(2)  If a membrane structure is used as part of a market showroom, it shall: 
(i)  Be located on the same lot as a market showroom; 
(ii)  Be enclosed on all sides; and 
(iii)  Not be in place for more than 120 days in a calendar year. 
2.  Toxic Chemicals or Substances, Pesticides, or Fertilizers Toxic chemicals, pesticides, and fertilizers establishments shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition. 
(b)  Structures, buildings, and mechanical equipment used for the operation shall be at least 100 feet from a residential district. 
(c)  Security fencing, a minimum of 6 feet in height, shall be provided around all outdoor storage areas. 
3.  Wholesale (Major and Minor) Vehicular access for wholesale establishments shall be constructed with an all-weather surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition. 
(Ord. No. 7363/17-106 , § 6, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 4.G, 11-20-2017; 7489/19-06 , § 2, 2-4-2019) 
4.4. - Accessory Structures and Uses 

4.4.1. - Purpose 
This section authorizes the establishment of accessory uses and structures that are incidental and subordinate to principal uses. The purpose of this section is to allow a broad range of accessory uses and structures, provided they comply with the standards set forth in this section in order to reduce potentially adverse impacts on surrounding lands. 
4.4.2. - Procedure for Establishment 
Accessory uses or structures may be approved in conjunction with the approval of the principal use or subsequently following the establishment of the principal use. No accessory use or structure shall be approved, established, or constructed before the principal use is approved in accordance with this Ordinance. 
4.4.3. - General Standards 
A.  Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted accessory uses and structures include those listed in this section and those that the Planning & Development Director determines meet the following: 
1.  Are clearly incidental to an allowed principal use or structure; 
2.  Are subordinate to and serving an allowed principal use or structure; 
3.  Are subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal use or structure; 
4.  Contribute to the comfort, convenience or needs of occupants, business or industry associated with the principal use or structure. 
B.  Located on Same Lot as a Principal Use All accessory uses and structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal use or structure and not located within any street right-of-way, except as allowed by this Ordinance for specific accessory uses and structures. 
C.  Compliance with Ordinance Requirements Accessory uses and structures shall conform to the applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including this section, the district standards in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts, the development standards in Chapter 5: Development Standards, and the environmental standards in Chapter 6: Environmental Standards. 
4.4.4. - Standards for Accessory Structures 
A.  Dimensional Standards Accessory structures, which include accessory buildings, shall meet the applicable zoning district dimensional standards and district standards, except as provided in this section and in Section 10.2.4 G, Setback Encroachments. 
B.  Easements Accessory structures may not be located in an easement unless the easement or easement holder expressly states the allowance in writing. 
C.  Drive-up Accessory Structures Drive-up accessory structures, such as automated teller machines, ice vending, coffee stands, and similar accessory structures that provide drive-up or walk-up service and which are located within a surface parking area shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The accessory structure shall not be placed in any required parking spaces. 
2.  The location shall be designed so that any access or stacking lanes do not extend into a primary drive aisle. 
3.  The surface parking area shall be configured and restriped to maintain access and circulation to the principal use(s). 
4.  Any roof-top mechanical equipment shall be screened from the adjacent streets. 
D.  Residential Accessory Structures An accessory structure, including an accessory building, for a single-family or duplex dwelling shall meet the following: 
1.  Setbacks   
(a)  Rear and Side Accessory structures must setback 5 feet from side and rear lots lines. 
(b)  Corner Side For corner lots, accessory structures must meet the side street setback of the dimensional standards for the applicable zoning district. 
(c)  Through or Reverse Frontage Lots For through or reverse frontage lots, all accessory structures shall be setback 10 feet from the rear lot line abutting the street. 
(d)  Alleys For accessory structures that are located along an alley, the structure must setback a minimum of 10 feet from the rear lot line abutting the alley. 
2.  Utilities Utility service, such as water, sewer and electricity, to the accessory structure shall be provided by branching service from the principal structure. 
3.  Encroachments See Section 10.2.4 G, Setback Encroachments, for allowable encroachments into setbacks for specific accessory structures. 
4.  Accessory Buildings   
(a)  Location In addition to the setback requirements, accessory buildings shall be located behind the front building line of the principal structure, except on lots that are greater than 2 acres in area, for which 1 accessory building may be located in front of the principal structure provided it meets the street setback. 
(b)  Size The maximum total area of all accessory buildings on the lot shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross floor area of the principal structure or 600 square feet, whichever is greater. 
E.  Local Historic Overlay District Accessory structures located in a local historic overlay district may be subject to a Certificate of Appropriateness in accordance with Section 2.4.5, Certificate of Appropriateness. 
4.4.5. - Standards for Specific Accessory Uses 
In addition to the following specific standards, the listed accessory uses shall meet the requirements of Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures, except as expressly stated in the specific accessory use requirements. 
A.  Accessory Dwelling Unit An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is permitted as accessory to a single-family detached dwelling if it complies with the following standards: 
1.  General 
(a)  No more than 1 ADU shall be located on a lot with a single-family detached dwelling. 
(b)  An ADU shall have a maximum of 2 bedrooms. 
(c)  An ADU and the principal dwelling shall have the same street address and mailbox. 
(d)  An ADU shall not be subdivided or otherwise separated in ownership from the principal dwelling unit. 
(e)  An ADU and the principal dwelling shall utilize the same driveway, unless the ADU is accessed from a right-of-way not used by the principal dwelling (e.g., a rear alley or separate street access on a corner or through lot). 
(f)  An ADU shall be served by water, sanitary sewer, gas and electrical utilities as part of the principal dwelling. 
2.  Design An ADU shall maintain the architectural design, style, appearance and character of the principal dwelling by incorporating design elements such as similar materials, facade treatment, colors, window style, roof design, and roof pitch. 
3.  Location   
(a)  Principal Structure   
(1)  If an ADU is located within the principal structure, the ADU shall not exceed 30 percent of the gross floor area of the structure. 
(2)  Entrance doors or exterior stairways to the ADU facing streets shall be prohibited; separate access to the ADU shall be by means of a side or rear door in the principal structure. 
(b)  Accessory Structure If an ADU is located in an accessory structure, it shall meet the residential accessory structure requirements in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures. 
B.  Caretaker Dwelling One caretaker dwelling unit is permitted as accessory to a commercial, institutional or industrial use either within the principal building or in an accessory building on the lot. 
C.  Drive-Through See Chapter 3: Zoning Districts, for the applicable drive-through standards by zoning district. 
D.  Exterior Lighting See Section 5.10, Exterior Lighting, for the applicable standards. 
E.  Fences See Section 5.11, Fences, for the applicable standards. 
F.  Helistop A helistop is permitted as accessory to an institutional, commercial or industrial use if it complies with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations. 
G.  Home Day Care A home day care is permitted as accessory to a residential dwelling unit if it complies with the following standards: 
1.  Care is provided within a dwelling unit, for between 3 and 8 children less than 13 years of age, not more than 5 of which are preschool age, or up to 8 adults, who do not reside in the dwelling, for at least once per week for at least four hours, but less than 24 hours per day. 
2.  It complies with all applicable home occupation requirements, except the gross floor area requirement. 
3.  It is licensed by the State of North Carolina and complies with all applicable State requirements. 
H.  Home Occupation A home occupation is permitted as accessory to a residential dwelling unit if it complies with the following standards: 
1.  The home occupation shall be located in the residential dwelling unit and shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit. 
2.  The person operating the home occupation shall reside in the dwelling unit. 
3.  No more than 1 person shall work in the dwelling unit that is not a resident of the dwelling unit. 
4.  The home occupation shall not change the exterior appearance of the dwelling. 
5.  The home occupation shall not create traffic, parking congestion, noise, vibration, odor, glare, vibration, fumes, or electrical or communications interference beyond what normally occurs in the district where located. 
6.  No outdoor storage or display of products, materials, or equipment is permitted. 
7.  Activities and storage associated with a home occupation shall not take place in an accessory building, such as a detached garage. 
8.  No maintenance or repair of commercial equipment may be associated with a home occupation. 
9.  Only 1 commercial vehicle with 1 attached trailer associated with the home occupation may be parked or stored on the lot, but neither the truck nor the trailer shall exceed 24 feet in length. 
10.  Tutoring and instruction in music, dance, art, yoga, and other subjects shall be limited to no more than 5 students during any single class or instruction period. 
11.  There shall be no advertising on the property or other signs of the home occupation, which are visible from outside the dwelling, except for 1 sign that complies with the standards in Section 5.7.8, Signs not Requiring a Sign Permit. 
I.  Livestock The keeping of livestock is allowed as accessory to a single-family detached or duplex dwelling if it complies with the following standards: 
1.  In the AGR district, the accessory keeping of livestock is allowed, but is exempt from these standards. 
2.  The keeping of livestock shall require a lot of at least 5 acres in area. 
3.  Animals shall be maintained in a fenced area located at least 100 feet from all lot lines. 
4.  Fencing shall be at least 4 feet in height. 
5.  For large livestock such as horses, cows and other similar large-sized animals, no more than 1 animal over 6 months in age shall be maintained for every 20,000 square feet of fenced area. 
6.  For small livestock such as sheep, goats, and other similar-sized animals, no more than 1 animal over 6 months in age shall be maintained for every 10,000 square feet of fenced area. 
J.  Off-Street Parking and Loading See Section 5.4, Off-Street Parking and Loading, for the applicable standards. 
K.  Outdoor Display Outdoor display is allowed as accessory for retail sales and wholesale trade uses if it complies with the following standards: 
1.  The intent of these standards is to allow outdoor display, but not where the display of such goods is unsightly, impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or creates an unsafe condition. 
2.  The outdoor display of non-bulky goods is not subject to the requirements in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures, but shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Be located adjacent to the storefront or building sides, except for farmers market, plant nursery, garden center or similar operations; 
(b)  Not located in drive aisles, loading zones, fire lanes, or required landscaping yards; and 
(c)  Maintain at least 5 feet of space along the side of the display free of obstruction to allow for pedestrian and handicap movement, such that handicapped pedestrians and others do not have to enter the drive aisle to walk around the display. 
3.  The outdoor display of bulky goods shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Portable storage containers, dumpsters and any bulky item for display that exceeds 10 feet in height shall meet the requirements in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures; 
(b)  Not located in drive aisles, loading zones, fire lanes, or required parking spaces or landscaping yards; and 
(c)  Other bulky items that are less than or equal to 10 feet in height are not subject to the requirements in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures, but shall be located at least 10 feet from any public street and shall not be placed within any easements, required parking spaces or landscape yards. 
L.  Portable Storage Containers Portable storage containers are allowed as accessory to the principal use on the same lot, provided they comply with the following standards: 
1.  Residential Districts Portable storage containers located within any residential district shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  A portable storage container is not subject to the requirements in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures; however, it must be located on the lot and outside any street right-of-way. 
(b)  No more than 2 portable storage containers may be located on a lot with a single-family or duplex dwelling. 
(c)  The gross square footage of a portable storage container on a lot with a single-family or duplex dwelling shall not exceed 150 square feet. 
(d)  A portable storage container may remain on a lot up to 14 days in duration, except when the container is used in association with construction on the same site, which the container may remain for the duration of the construction project and shall be removed upon completion. 
2.  Business and Special Districts Portable storage containers located within any business or special district shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Portable storage containers shall meet the requirements in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures. 
(b)  The number, size and duration of portable storage containers on a lot are not regulated. 
(c)  Portable storage containers shall not be placed between a principal structure and a public street, except in the AGR, LI and HI districts. 
3.  Planned Development Districts Portable storage containers located within any planned district shall comply with the applicable residential, business or special district requirements of this section. 
M.  Renting of Rooms The renting of rooms is allowed as accessory to a residential dwelling if it complies with the following standards: 
1.  An occupant of the dwelling may rent rooms in the dwelling to a maximum of 2 tenants. 
2.  The renting of rooms to more than 2 tenants constitutes a rooming house, which is subject to other standards contained in this Ordinance. 
N.  Satellite Dishes, Amateur Radio and Television Antenna Towers Satellite dishes, amateur radio and television antenna towers are allowed as accessory to any use allowed by this Ordinance if they comply with the following standards: 
1.  The accessory structure and all supporting cables and anchors shall be contained on the lot. 
2.  The accessory structure is prohibited in easements but is not subject to the remaining requirements in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures. 
3.  The accessory structure shall not exceed 90 feet in height above grade. 
4.  In residential districts, the accessory structure must be located behind the front building line of the principal structure, except for satellite dishes less than 40 inches in diameter which are exempt from this requirement. 
5.  Towers attached to a principal structure shall be located on the principal structure's side or rear elevation. 
O.  Small Wind Energy Conversion (WEC) System A small (WEC) is permitted as accessory to any agriculture, commercial, institutional or industrial use allowed by this Ordinance if it complies with the following standards: 
1.  There shall be no more than 1 small (WEC) on a lot. 
2.  The maximum extended height of a small (WEC) shall be the maximum height allowed in the zoning district plus 70 feet. 
3.  The tower shall be set back from all lot lines a distance greater than or equal to the minimum distance necessary to insure the structure will remain on its site following collapse (its fall zone) as certified by a licensed professional engineer. In the absence of such certification, the required setback shall be equal to 80% of the height of the structure. 
4.  Sound produced by the WEC shall under normal operating conditions, as measured at the lot line, not exceed 55 decibels. The sound level may be exceeded during short term events that occur, that are beyond the landowner's control, such as utility outages and/or wind storms. 
5.  The blade tip or vane of any small (WEC) shall have a minimum ground clearance of 15 feet, as measured at the lowest point of the arc of the blades. No blade shall extend over parking areas, public rights-of-way, driveways, or sidewalks. 
6.  No illumination of the turbine or tower shall be allowed, unless required by the FAA. 
7.  The tower shall be designed to prevent unauthorized climbing. 
8.  A small (WEC) shall not include signage visible from a public street other than the manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification. 
9.  A small (WEC) intended to connect to the electric utility shall not be installed until evidence is submitted to the Planning and Development Director that the relevant electric utility is informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. 
10.  On determining that a small (WEC) is inoperable for 180 days or more, the Planning and Development Director shall send the owner a notice and order requiring restoration of the system. Failure of the owner to restore the system to operating condition shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 
P.  Solid Waste Collection See Section 5.6, Screening, for the applicable standards. 
Q.  Signage See Section 5.7, Signage, for the applicable standards. 
R.  Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs with a water depth of 24 inches or greater are permitted as accessory to any use allowed by this Ordinance if they are constructed in accordance with the State Building Code and comply with standards for accessory structures in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures, if applicable. 
S.  Vehicles The parking, storage, and use of vehicles are allowed as accessory to any use allowed by this Ordinance if it complies with the following standards: 
1.  Disabled Motor Vehicles The parking or storage of disabled motor vehicles shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Residential Uses   
(1)  One disabled vehicle is allowed on a lot with a single-family dwelling or duplex dwelling, provided the disabled vehicle is parked or stored behind the front building line of the principal structure. 
(2)  Additional disabled vehicles on a single-family or duplex lot and any disabled vehicle parked or stored on lot with any other residential use shall be located within a fully enclosed principal or accessory structure. 
(b)  All Other Uses   
(1)  A disabled motor vehicle may be parked or stored on a lot containing an agricultural, institutional, commercial, or industrial use, provided it is totally screened from view from any street or residential zoning district. 
(2)  The disabled vehicle shall be stored within a fully enclosed building or fully screened by a building, opaque fence, wall, or other approved method, to a height of 6 feet above grade level. 
2.  Improved Parking Area   
(a)  Any vehicle located on a lot with a single-family or a duplex dwelling that is parked, stored, or otherwise located between the principal structure and the street shall be parked, stored, or otherwise located on an improved parking area. 
(b)  An improved parking area shall be a portion of the lot that is graveled or paved with an all-weather surface (such as asphalt, concrete, brick, stone or similar material) and provides access to the street. 
3.  Large Vehicles The parking of vehicles in excess of 24 feet in length, or 14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight is prohibited in residential zoning districts, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  Temporary loading and unloading; 
(b)  Emergency and disaster service; 
(c)  Recreational vehicles, which includes travel trailers; 
(d)  Large vehicles on a religious institution or school property; and 
(e)  For use in the operation of a permitted principal use or nonconforming use that relies on a large vehicle for standard operation. 
4.  Recreational Vehicles The use of recreational vehicles, which includes travel trailers, for living purposes is allowed only in recreational vehicle parks and as a permitted temporary use. 
T.  Wireless Telecommunication Facility See Section 4.3.3 F.3, Wireless Telecommunication Facility (Major and Minor) for the applicable standards. 
U.  Yard Sales Yard sales are allowed as accessory to a residential dwelling unit if they comply with the following standards: 
1.  Yard sales are limited to a maximum of 2 occurrences per dwelling unit per calendar year, and no more than 2 days per occurrence. 
2.  Items displayed and sold are limited to household items. 
3.  The location of signs advertising the yard sale is restricted to the lot or site where the yard sale is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 4.H, 11-20-2017) 
4.5. - Temporary Uses 

4.5.1. - Purpose 
This section allows for the establishment of specific temporary uses of limited duration, provided that such uses do not negatively affect adjacent land, and provided that such temporary uses are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period. Temporary uses shall not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building or structure. 
4.5.2. - Applicability 
The standards in this section apply to non-permanent uses that take place on a temporary basis whether on the same site or in different locations in the jurisdiction. The activities listed in this section require the issuance of a zoning compliance permit, except as exempted, in accordance with the standards in Section 2.5.15, Zoning Compliance Permit. 
4.5.3. - General Standards For Temporary Uses 
All temporary uses shall comply with the following general standards, unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance: 
A.  General Standards   
1.  Secure written permission from the landowner; 
2.  Obtain the appropriate permits and licenses from the City and other agencies; 
3.  Comply with the requirements for temporary signs in Section 5.7, Signage; 
4.  Meet public utility and City requirements for proper connection to water, sewer, electrical and other utility service connections, as applicable; 
5.  Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that apply to a site or use on the site; 
6.  Not result in a situation where the principal use, if present, fails to comply with the standards of this Ordinance; 
7.  Contain sufficient land area for the temporary use and for the parking and traffic movement associated with the temporary use, without impacting environmentally sensitive lands; 
8.  Not remain in place for more than 90 days if located within a special flood hazard area; 
9.  Provide adequate on-site restroom facilities; and 
10.  Cease all outdoor activities within 500 feet of a residential use by 10:00 pm. 
B.  General Conditions In approving a temporary use permit, the Planning and Development Director is authorized to impose any of the following general conditions upon the premises benefited by the permit as may be necessary to reduce or minimize any potential adverse impacts upon other property in the area, as long as the condition relates to a situation created or aggravated by the proposed temporary use. The Planning and Development Director is authorized, where appropriate, to require: 
1.  Provision of temporary parking facilities, including vehicular access and egress; 
2.  Control of nuisance factors, such as but not limited to, the prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat; 
3.  Regulation of placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards; 
4.  Provision of sanitary and medical facilities; 
5.  Provision of solid waste collection and disposal; 
6.  Provision of security and safety measures; 
7.  Use of an alternate location or date; 
8.  Modification or elimination of certain proposed activities; 
9.  Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration to a shorter time period than requested or specified in this subsection; and 
10.  Submission of a financial guarantee to ensure that any temporary use will be removed from the lot or site within a reasonable time and the lot or site will be restored to its former condition. 
4.5.4. - Standards for Specific Temporary Uses 
A.  Construction-Related Uses A temporary construction-related use is permitted on a lot in a residential, business, special, or planned development district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  Temporary construction-related uses, including construction and business offices, storage buildings, equipment and outdoor storage lots, and employee parking areas, may occur on the same lot or site as the construction activity, or on a lot or site that is adjacent to the construction site. 
2.  The temporary use permit shall not be issued until a site plan is approved or a building permit is issued for a principal structure, except as allowed in Section 2.3.12, Effect of Development Approval. 
3.  A temporary construction-related use shall be removed within 30 days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the structure, or removed immediately if the building permit expires or is revoked. 
B.  Itinerant Merchant Sales Itinerant merchant sales, not including mobile food vendors, are permitted on a lot in a business, special, or planned development district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The sale of merchandise, products, or material must be a permitted principal use in the zoning district where the sales are temporarily located. 
2.  Itinerant merchant sales shall be located on a lot with a principal use and located outside of street rights-of way, required sight distance easements, required landscape areas, vehicular circulation areas, or areas where pedestrian access is needed to ensure safe movement through or across a site. 
3.  No signage is permitted other than signage that is affixed to the vehicle, trailer or stand. 
4.  All merchandise and related materials shall be removed from the site or properly stored each day following the sale. 
5.  The maximum period of operation of itinerant merchant sales shall be from 8:00 AM to 11:00 PM. 
6.  Permitted itinerant merchant sales shall be limited in duration to a maximum of 30 continuous days and there shall not be more than 3 itinerant merchant sales on a lot per calendar year. 
C.  Mobile Food Vendors   
1.  Exempt Vendors Mobile food vendors are not subject to the requirements of Section 4.5, Temporary Uses, but are subject to the applicable provisions of the City Code of Ordinances if: 
(a)  They operate for 2 or fewer days within a 180-day period on a lot with an established principal use; 
(b)  They operate in the public right-of-way; 
(c)  They are considered part of a special event allowed in accordance with Section 4.5.4 E, Special Events; or 
(d)  They are a part of a private event where food is not sold to the general public. 
2.  Subject to this Ordinance Mobile food vendors that are not exempted are permitted on a lot in a business, special, or planned development district, subject to the following standards: 
(a)  The sale of food must be a permitted principal use in the zoning district where the mobile food vendor is temporarily located. 
(b)  Mobile food vendors shall be located on a lot located outside of street rights-of-way, required landscape areas, vehicular circulation areas, or areas where pedestrian access is needed to ensure safe movement through or across a site. 
(c)  Mobile food vendors shall not obstruct visibility for motorists at any street intersection in accordance with the standards of Chapter 6 of the City Code, Visibility at Intersections. 
(d)  No signage is permitted other than signage that is affixed to the vehicle, trailer, cart, or stand. 
(e)  The vendor shall properly dispose all solid waste, grease and liquid waste and the vehicle, trailer, cart, or stand shall be removed from the site each day. 
(f)  The maximum period of operation of mobile food vendors shall be from 6:00 AM to 11:00 PM, or until the time the principal use on the lot closes, whichever is greater. 
(g)  Permitted mobile food vendors shall be limited in duration to a maximum of 12 months, except that the temporary use permit may be renewed. 
D.  Outdoor Seasonal Sales Outdoor seasonal sales are permitted on a lot in a residential, business, special, or planned development district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  Seasonal sales shall be limited to seasonal agricultural products such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, and living plants. 
2.  Outdoor seasonal sales shall only be allowed on a lot in a residential, office or institutional zoning district when operated by and on the site of a religious institution or nonprofit organization. 
3.  The maximum hours of operation of an outdoor seasonal sales use shall be from 8:00 AM to 11:00 PM, except when located in a residential district, then the seasonal sales use shall cease by 10:00 PM. 
4.  Exterior lighting shall comply with the requirements in Section 5.10, Exterior Lighting. 
5.  One recreational vehicle is allowed as a temporary dwelling for security purposes in association with the seasonal sales use, provided it meets the general standards of Section 4.5.4 F, Temporary Dwelling, and is removed at the end of the sales. 
6.  Outdoor seasonal sales shall be limited in duration to a maximum of 90 days and there shall not be more than 3 seasonal sales on a lot per calendar year. 
7.  The on-site accessory sales of seasonal products by an agricultural use or retail sales use is not considered outdoor seasonal sales and is not subject to these standards. 
E.  Special Events A special event is an infrequent, temporary activity not otherwise allowed by this Ordinance as defined in Section 10.4 of this Ordinance. 
1.  Exempt Events A special event is not subject to the requirements in Section 4.5, Temporary Uses, if the event is sponsored by the City, a county, or the State. 
2.  Subject to this Ordinance A special event not exempted from the standards in this section is permitted on a lot in a business, special, or planned development district, subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Circuses, carnivals and similar amusements may be subject to the applicable provisions of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Temporary dwelling(s) are allowed in association with the special event provided they meet the general standards of Section 4.5.4 F, Temporary Dwelling, and are removed at the end of the event. 
(c)  A special event shall be limited in duration to a maximum of 14 days, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Planning and Development Director. 
F.  Temporary Dwelling A temporary dwelling is permitted on a lot in a residential, business, special, or planned development district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  General Standards   
(a)  A temporary dwelling may be either a dwelling that meets all applicable NC State Building code requirements for a dwelling or a recreational vehicle. 
(b)  The temporary dwelling shall be located on a lot and meet the dimensional standards of the zoning district to the maximum extent practicable. 
2.  Temporary Emergency Dwelling   
(a)  Temporary emergency dwellings operated by a religious institution, governmental agency, or nonprofit organization may be located on a lot at least 1 acre in area to provide emergency shelter where fire, flood, or other natural disaster has displaced persons. 
(b)  The temporary dwellings shall be limited in duration to a maximum of 6 months, except that the temporary use permit may be renewed for good cause shown. 
3.  Temporary Construction Dwelling   
(a)  One temporary dwelling may be used to house occupants of the principal dwelling under construction or subject to repair or casualty damage. 
(b)  Temporary dwellings may be used on a construction site and occupied by persons having construction or security responsibilities over such construction site. 
(c)  Temporary dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the structure under construction. 
(d)  The temporary use permit shall not be issued until a site plan is approved or a building permit is issued for a principal structure. 
(e)  A temporary dwelling shall be removed within 30 days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the structure, or removed immediately if the building permit expires or is revoked. 
G.  Temporary Health Care Structure One temporary health care structure is permitted on a lot with a single-family detached dwelling, subject to the following standards: 
1.  Structure A temporary health care structure is one that: 
(a)  Is transportable and primarily assembled at a location other than the site of installation; 
(b)  Is located on a lot with an existing single-family detached dwelling; 
(c)  Is limited to 1 occupant who is a mentally or physically impaired person related to the caregiver; 
(d)  Is used by a caregiver or legal guardian in providing care for 1 mentally or physically impaired person on property owned or occupied as the caregiver's or guardian's residence; 
(e)  Has no more than 300 square feet of gross floor area; 
(f)  Is connected with water, sewer and electricity by branching service from the single-family detached dwelling; 
(g)  Has the same street address and mailbox as the existing single-family detached dwelling; 
(h)  Uses the same driveway as the existing single-family dwelling, unless the structure is accessed from a right-of-way not used by the dwelling (e.g., a rear alley or separate street access on a corner or through lot); 
(i)  Meets the dimensional standards of the zoning district for a single-family detached dwelling; and 
(j)  Meets the applicable provisions in the NC State Building Code; however, is not located on a permanent foundation. 
2.  Need and Relationship   
(a)  The occupant of the structure must be a mentally or physically impaired person that is a resident of the State who requires assistance with 2 or more activities of daily living (bathing, dressing, personal hygiene, ambulation or locomotion, transferring, toileting, and eating) as certified in writing by a physician licensed to practice in this State. 
(b)  The caregiver must be an individual 18 years of age or older who provides care for the mentally or physically impaired person and is a first or second degree relative of the impaired person. A first or second degree relative is a spouse, lineal ascendant, lineal descendant, sibling, uncle, aunt, nephew or niece, including half, step, and in-law relationships. 
3.  Permit Conditions   
(a)  Once the applicant provides sufficient proof that the temporary health care structure meets all standards, then the temporary structure shall be permitted for a period of 12 months. 
(b)  The applicant may renew the zoning compliance permit for a 12-month period and continue to renew it provided the applicant provides evidence of continued need and compliance with these standards. 
(c)  The City may make permit renewal and periodic inspections of the temporary structure at reasonable times convenient to the applicant. 
(d)  No signage shall be permitted on the exterior of the temporary structure or on the lot that identifies or promotes the existence of the structure. 
(e)  The temporary structure shall not be subdivided or otherwise separated in ownership from the single-family detached dwelling. 
(f)  The temporary structure shall be removed within 60 days if the impaired occupant is no longer receiving or in need of assistance. 
(g)  The temporary use permit may be revoked or other enforcement actions taken if these standards are violated. 
H.  Temporary LCID Landfill A temporary land clearing and inert debris landfill (LCID) is permitted on a lot in a residential, business, special, or planned development district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  A temporary LCID may not exceed 2 acres in area and shall meet all applicable State regulations for a LCID. 
2.  It shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 12 months, except that the temporary use permit may be renewed for good cause shown. 
3.  A LCID not meeting these standards constitutes a minor landfill, which is subject to other standards contained in this Ordinance. 
I.  Temporary Real Estate Office A temporary real estate office is permitted on a lot in a residential, business, special, or planned development district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The office is located on a lot that is part of the real estate development being sold or leased. 
2.  Signage complies with the standards of Section 5.7, Signage. 
3.  The office complies with the dimensional standards of the zoning district in which it is located. 
4.  The temporary office is converted into a dwelling or removed within 30 days after all units are sold or leased. 
J.  Temporary Wireless Telecommunications Facility A temporary wireless telecommunications facility, also known as a COW, is permitted on a lot in a residential, business, special, or planned development district, subject to the following standards: 
1.  A temporary wireless telecommunications facility may be allowed on a lot after a disaster or other emergency for a period not to exceed 30 days, except that the temporary use permit may be renewed for good cause shown. 
2.  A temporary wireless telecommunications facility may be allowed on a lot to evaluate the technical feasibility of a site for a period not to exceed 14 days, except that the temporary use permit may be renewed for good cause shown. 
3.  A temporary wireless telecommunications facility may be allowed on a lot in association with an event where the anticipated demand cannot be handled by existing facilities for a period not to exceed 14 days. 
4.  A temporary wireless telecommunications facility may be allowed on a lot with an existing permanent wireless telecommunications facility where the permanent structure is undergoing reconstruction or maintenance and the temporary facility is needed to maintain sufficient levels of service. The temporary facility shall be removed after reconstruction or maintenance is complete and service restored on the permanent structure. 
5.  All temporary wireless telecommunications facilities, including all supporting cables and anchors, shall be contained on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 17.A, 12-3-2018) 
CHAPTER 5: - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
5.1. - Public Infrastructure 

5.1.1. - Within Corporate Limits 
When development occurs within the corporate limits of the City, it shall be served by the City's public water and sewer systems, unless the Public Services Director determines that it is not required in accordance with the City Code. 
5.1.2. - Within the ETJ 
When development occurs within the City's ETJ, the applicable County Health Department is authorized to approve private well and on-site wastewater treatment systems. Connections to the City's public water and sewer system is authorized only in accordance with established City Council policy. 
5.2. - Zone Lot and Access 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 15, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, changed the title of § 5.2 from "Zone Lot and Access Standards" to "Zone Lot and Access." 

5.2.1. - Principal Buildings on a Zone lot 
Every building must be located on a zone lot. No more than 1 principal building is permitted on a zone lot, except as follows: 
A.  Nonresidential Group Development Two or more principal nonresidential buildings are permitted on a zone lot pursuant to a group development plan approved in accordance with Section 2.5.9, Group Development, and provided that vehicular access is maintained to each building for service and emergency vehicles. 
B.  Residential Group Development Two or more principal buildings are permitted on a zone lot in a multi-family, single-family attached, pocket neighborhood or tiny home neighborhood development pursuant to a group development plan approved in accordance with Section 2.5.9, Group Development, and provided that access is maintained to each building for service and emergency vehicles. 
C.  Multiple Lot Development Two or more principal buildings are permitted on a zone lot pursuant to Section 5.14.5, Multiple Lot Development, and provided that vehicular access is maintained to each building for service and emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 16, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7399/18-28 , § 2, 3-19-2018) 
5.2.2. - Street Access 
A.  General Standards Except where an alternative configuration is allowed is accordance with Section 5.2.2 B, Alternative Configuration, all development shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Every zone lot shall abut and have direct access to a publicly-maintained street. 
2.  No building or structure shall be constructed or placed on a zone lot that does not have direct access to a publicly-maintained street. 
3.  Direct access for a use to a publically maintained street through another zoning district is not allowed unless the other zoning district: 
(a)  Is classified as a business or special district; or 
(b)  Allows the use; or 
(c)  Provides the sole means of access for the use. 
B.  Alternative Configuration As an alternative to compliance with the general standards in section (A) above, development may incorporate one of the following alternative street access standards: 
1.  Dead-End Streets The terminus of a dead-end street does not provide the required access to a publically maintained street unless it is configured as a circular turnaround or other turnaround approved and constructed in conformance with Chapter 7: Subdivisions Standards. 
2.  Private Streets Private streets may be used to meet the access requirements for single-family lots in a planned development district, single-family attached developments, and multiple lot developments, provided the district or development as a whole abuts and has direct access to a publicly-maintained street. 
3.  Single-Family Attached Development   
(a)  Individual lots shall have rights of access through a common area containing private streets or private drives that are at least of 24 feet in width and lead to a publicly-maintained street. 
(b)  Direct access to a publicly-maintained street from an individual lot containing a single-family attached dwelling shall require approval from the TRC. 
4.  Multiple Lot Development Individual lots in a multiple lot development must have shared rights of access along private streets or private drives that are at least 24 feet in width and lead to a publicly-maintained street. 
5.  Access Through Easement Lots of record established as of July 1, 1992 that do not abut a publicly-maintained street may establish access through a recorded access easement provided the lot is used for only 1 single-family detached dwelling and meets the following criteria: 
(a)  The minimum easement width shall be 25 feet. 
(b)  The minimum separation between the easement and any other platted access or right-of-way shall be 150 feet. 
(c)  The location of the easement must be recorded on a plat. 
(d)  The easement shall permit ingress, egress, and regress and necessary utilities to serve the lot. 
6.  Access Through Unimproved Right-of-Way A single zone lot that has frontage on an existing unimproved public right-of-way, may obtain access through such right-of-way, provided that the following minimum criteria are met: 
(a)  A site plan, signed and sealed by a professional surveyor, shall be submitted that shows the lot has no other frontage on an improved public street; 
(b)  The unimproved public right-of-way is at least 20 feet in width; 
(c)  The access shall serve only 1 single-family detached dwelling and its uninhabited accessory structures; 
(d)  The access shall serve only 1 zone lot. If the unimproved public right-of-way is the sole means of access to more than 1 zone lot in the same block, access pursuant to this subsection shall not be approved; 
(e)  If the zone lot contains multiple parcels, they shall be combined into 1 parcel as a condition of approval; 
(f)  The access shall be maintained by the lot owner; and 
(g)  Utilities shall be located within the unimproved right-of-way and extended to the lot in accordance with City standards. The lot owner shall maintain water and sewer utility lines from the edge of the existing street right-of-way to the dwelling. Any proposed dwelling must be within 500 feet of an approved fire hydrant. 
7.  Special Purpose Lot Special purpose lots may establish access through an easement a minimum of 10 feet in width, in accordance with Section 7.1.6 B.6, Special Purpose Lots. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 17, 1-17-2017) 
5.2.3. - Cross-Access 
A.  Purpose and Intent The intent of this section is to provide for cross-access between comparable commercial and industrial land uses that front thoroughfare streets so that vehicles leaving one lot may access the adjoining lot without having to re-enter the public street system. It is not the intent of this section to reduce the number of driveways beyond what is allowed in the City's Driveway Ordinance. 
B.  Applicability The provisions of this section shall apply to commercial and industrial uses, as defined in Section 4.2, Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use types, on zone lots that front thoroughfare streets with the following, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.2.3 C, Exemptions: 
1.  New Buildings or Uses New principal buildings or new open uses of land. 
2.  Expansions Individual or collective expansions of existing principal buildings, open uses of land, or off-street parking that exceed 50 percent. 
C.  Exemptions Cross-access is not required when any of the following conditions are present: 
1.  Adjacent lots do not have common frontage along a thoroughfare; 
2.  Significant topographical differences in existing or proposed conditions are present; 
3.  Significant natural features exist in the only viable location for cross-access connections; 
4.  Vehicular safety factors including, but not limited to, unsafe turning movements or pedestrian conflicts; 
5.  Sufficient cross-access already exists; 
6.  Residential, institutional, or other incompatible land uses, as defined in Section 4.2, Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types, are present on adjacent lots; 
7.  Bed and breakfast establishments; 
8.  Existing infrastructure obstructions; or 
9.  Other safety or security factors. 
D.  Easement Recordation A cross-access easement must be recorded on the final plat for property involving a subdivision, or recorded by separate instrument when no plat is proposed. 
E.  No Obstruction of Access All cross-accessways shall be built to the lot line, to the maximum extent practicable. An accessway shall not be obstructed unless approved by the Transportation Director. 
F.  Off-street Parking Where a required cross-accessway eliminates required off-street parking spaces, replacement spaces shall not be required. 
G.  Perimeter Landscaping Where a required cross-accessway eliminates a required landscape planting area, the landscaping requirements shall be reduced to accommodate the cross-accessway and replacement landscaping shall not be required. 
H.  Connection Required Development on vacant land subject to these standards shall install cross-accessways to the shared property line. However, if the abutting landowner that does not already have a cross-accessway stub is unwilling to allow the cross-accessway to be built to the shared property line due to the impact of the grading equipment or other construction activity on their property, then the Transportation Director shall notify the unwilling property owner that they will be responsible for completing the cross-accessway when their property is developed. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017) 
5.3. - Reserved 
5.4. - Off-Street Parking and Loading 

5.4.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure the provision of safe off-street parking and loading facilities for development allowed by this Ordinance. The standards in this section are intended to avoid requiring an over-supply of parking that pose economic and environmental impacts while ensuring off-street parking is provided to mitigate impacts to streets and neighborhoods. 
5.4.2. - Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to zone lots with the following, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.4.3, Exemptions: 
A.  New Buildings or Uses New principal buildings or new open uses of land. 
B.  Changes in Use Changes in the principal use, except that if the use change results in an increase of less than 5 percent in the required number of parking spaces, or less than 5 additional parking spaces, no additional parking spaces area required. 
C.  Expansions Expansions of existing principal buildings or open uses of land. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017) 
5.4.3. - Exemptions 
A.  CB and MX Districts Development on land within the CB and MX districts shall comply with the requirements of this section, except that it is exempt from the minimum off-street parking requirements of Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards. 
B.  Historic Properties No off-street parking is required for: 
1.  Rehabilitation or reuse of a National Register site or locally designated landmark; 
2.  Rehabilitation or reuse of a contributing building within a National Register district or the LHO; and 
3.  Rehabilitation or reuse of a structure that is on the North Carolina National Register Advisory Committee's Study List. 
(Ord. No. 7363/17-106 , § 7, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 6, 5-21-2018) 
5.4.4. - Off-Street Parking Requirements 
A.  Parking Plan Required Every application for a site plan, group development plan, building permit, or zoning compliance permit, shall ensure that adequate off-street parking is provided for the uses or buildings contained in the application. Off-street parking must be provided to meet the parking demand without use of public streets, except as specifically allowed by this section. 
B.  Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for development shall be in accordance with Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-street Parking Standards. 
TABLE 5.4.4.B: MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS 
USE 
CLASSIFICATION 
USE 
CATEGORY 
USE 
TYPE 
REQUIREMENT 
Agricultural Agriculture All No minimum spaces required Residential Common Elements Recreation Common elements recreation No minimum spaces required Household Living SF detached; Family care home; Manufactured dwelling; Duplex dwelling; Live/work 2 spaces per dwelling unit; except in pocket neighborhoods (See Section 5.14.6, Pocket Neighborhood) Multi-family; SF attached, Triplex, Quadpex 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit; except 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit for elderly housing developments Group Living Dormitory, private; Fraternity or sorority house; Rooming house; SRO; Social service facility 1 space per bedroom Life Care Assisted living 0.3 spaces per room; minimum of 5 spaces provided CCRC As required by this table for specific uses (e.g. household living, assisted living, long-term/skilled nursing facilities, etc.) Long-term care/skilled nursing 0.3 spaces per room Institutional Civic Assembly & Cultural Facilities, major 1 space per 6 seats in auditoriums, theaters and similar places of assembly, and 1.5 spaces per 1000 sf GFA all other areas Assembly & Cultural Facilities, minor 1 space per 500 sf GFA; minimum of 5 spaces provided Cemetery No minimum spaces required Correctional facility 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift Governmental facility; Public safety facility As required for the most similar non-governmental use Public Recreation facility No minimum spaces required Day Care Day Care Center 1 space per 400 sf GFA Education College or university 1 space per 4 students School, minor 1 space per classroom School, major 1.5 space per classroom Other post-secondary educational facility 1 space per 400 sf GFA Truck driving school 1 space per 400 sf GFA Health Care Hospital; specialty hospital 1.5 space per bed Medical care facility, major 1 space per 500 sf GFA Medical care facility, minor 1 space per 800 sf GFA; minimum of 5 spaces provided Religious Institutions All 1 space per 6 seats in main assembly room or for institutions without seating, 1 space per 50 sf of seating area in the main assembly room Transportation Airport No minimum spaces required Park and ride facility No minimum spaces required Passenger terminal No minimum spaces required Taxi or limousine service 1 space per 400 sf GFA of office area Utilities Communication or broadcasting facilities 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift Solar array; Wireless telecommunication facility; Utility facility minor No minimum spaces required Utility facility major 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift Commercial Adult Entertainment Adult entertainment 1 space per 200 sf GFA Animal Care Animal care 1 space per 400 sf GFA of office area Eating establishments Bars or nightclub 1 space per 100 sf GFA Restaurant major & minor 1 space per 200 sf GFA Offices Major and minor 1 space per 800 sf GFA; minimum of 4 spaces provided Commercial Parking Commercial Parking No minimum spaces required Personal Services All 1 space per 500 sf GFA Recreation and Leisure Amusement & entertainment 1 space per 6 seats in theaters and similar places of assembly, and 1 space per 400 sf GFA all other areas Amusement parks 1 space per 600 sf of outdoor area and 1 per space 400 sf GFA of indoor area Sports & fitness centers 1.5 spaces per 1000 sf GFA; minimum of 5 spaces provided Retail Sales All 1 space per 400 sf GFA up to 400,000 sf and 1 space per 800 sf GFA for area over 400,000 sf; minimum of 5 spaces provided Vehicle Establishments All 1 space per 400 sf GFA of sales and office area; minimum of 5 spaces provided Visitor Accommodations Bed and Breakfast 1 space per guest room, plus 1 space for owner/operator Hotel or motel 1 space per guest room Industrial Extractive Industry Extractive industry space per 2 employees at peak shift Industrial Service All 1 space per 400 sf GFA of sales and office area Manufacturing and Production All except those listed below 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift Motion picture production 1 space per 2,000 sf GFA Warehouse and Freight Movement Freight movement; Warehouse and distribution 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift Self-storage, external and internal access 1 space per 400 sf GFA of office area Waste-Related Service All 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift Wholesale trade All except those listed below 1 space per 400 sf GFA of sales and office area; minimum of 5 spaces provided Market Showroom 1 space per 2,000 sf GFA  
C.  Uses Not Listed For uses that do not correspond to the use types listed in Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards, the Planning and Development Director shall determine the minimum parking space requirement. In such instances, the application shall provide adequate information for review, which includes, but is not limited to the type of use(s), number of employees, the occupancy of the building, square feet of sales, service and office area, parking spaces proposed and hours of operation. 
D.  Other Vehicles Located Off-street The following vehicles are not included in Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards, and shall be parked or located outside required parking spaces and any public street right-of-way in accordance with this Ordinance: 
1.  Vehicles for sale or lease; 
2.  Vehicles being stored, serviced or repaired; or 
3.  Vehicles belonging to the use, such as company vehicles. 
E.  Multiple-Use Development Development containing more than 1 principal use shall provide parking spaces in an amount equal to the total of all individual principal uses, except as allowed in Section 5.4.8, Parking Alternatives. 
F.  Driveways Used to Meet Requirements Except for multi-family dwellings, driveways may be used to meet the minimum off-street parking space requirements for all use types in the Household Living use category, provided that sufficient space is available to meet the standards of this section. 
G.  On-Street Parking Credited The use of on-street parking to meet the minimum off-street parking space requirements is permitted for nonresidential development in the Core City, subject to the following standards: 
1.  On-street parking exists within 500 linear feet of the primary entrance of the development; 
2.  The on-street parking spaces directly abut (not across the street) the lot containing the development and is served by a sidewalk; 
3.  There is not a negative impact to existing or planned traffic circulation patterns; and 
4.  The on-street spaces shall not be reserved for sole use by the development. 
H.  Administrative Adjustment The Planning and Development Director is authorized to grant an administrative adjustment to the minimum required parking spaces in accordance with Section 2.5.2, Administrative Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 2, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 3.B, 18, 12-3-2018) 
5.4.5. - Bicycle Parking Requirements 
Bicycle parking, in accordance with this section, is required in the MX, MS, and RM-26 districts for residential developments with 30 or more dwelling units and nonresidential development with 10,000 or more square feet of gross floor area. 
A.  General Standards   
1.  Bicycle parking shall be provided at the rate of 1 bicycle space for every 30 residential dwelling units or every 5,000 square feet of nonresidential gross floor area. A minimum of at least 2 bicycle parking spaces shall be provided. 
2.  A bicycle rack or other device shall be provided to enable bicycles to be secured. 
3.  Bicycle parking shall be located where it does not interfere with pedestrian traffic and is protected from conflicts with vehicular traffic. 
4.  Bicycle parking should be accessible to the primary entrances of the development and in a visible, well-lit area. 
B.  Shared Bicycle Parking Adjoining developments may share required bicycle parking spaces provided: 
1.  Each use provides or is served by an improved walkway from the bicycle parking spaces to the primary entrance. 
2.  The shared bicycle parking spaces and the improved walkway are depicted on a site plan or group development plan, whichever is appropriate. 
5.4.6. - Off-Street Loading Requirements 
A.  Loading Space Required Every application for a site plan, group development plan, building permit, or zoning compliance permit for a nonresidential use shall ensure that adequate loading space is provided so that loading vehicles do not occupy required off-street parking spaces, block vehicular access, or prevent appropriate on-site maneuvering. 
B.  Minimum Off-Street Loading Space Requirements A minimum number of loading spaces is not established; however, off-street loading space shall be provided and maintained in sufficient numbers to adequately handle the needs of a nonresidential use. 
5.4.7. - Standards for Off-Street Parking Spaces and Loading Areas 
Off-street parking, stacking, and loading spaces along with drive aisles and private drives are referred to a "vehicular use area". Vehicular use areas shall meet the standards of this section. 
A.  General   
1.  All required off-street parking, stacking, and loading spaces shall be located on the same zone lot as the principal use it serves, except as allowed in Section 5.4.8, Parking Alternatives. 
2.  All required off-street parking, stacking, and loading spaces shall not be used for any other purpose, including, but not limited to the storage or display of goods or the sale, lease, storage, or repair of vehicles. 
3.  Required off-street parking shall be maintained for the duration of the principal use and shall not be reduced unless the principal use ceases or changes. 
4.  Off-street loading spaces shall be not be located in any required parking space or protrude into any public street. 
B.  Easements A vehicular use area shall not be located within an easement without approval of the easement holder. 
C.  Parking Space Access All off-street parking spaces shall be accessed directly from drive aisles or private driveways and not directly from public streets. 
D.  Vehicle Backing   
1.  Vehicular use areas shall be designed so that a vehicle is not required to back onto a public street to enter or exit the vehicular use area, a parking space, or a stacking space. 
2.  Except in the CB district, off-street loading shall be designed so that no backing into or from a public street is necessary. 
E.  Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles Standards parking spaces and parking aisles shall comply with the minimum dimensional standards established in Table 5.4.7.E, Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles. 
TABLE 5.4.7.E: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR PARKING SPACES AND AISLES 
PARKING ANGLE 
(DEGREES) 
SPACE WIDTH 
(FEET) 
SPACE DEPTH 
(FEET) 
MINIMUM 
AISLE WIDTH 
(FEET) 
Parallel (0°) 9 20 12 Angled (30°) 9 17.3 11 Angled (45°) 9 19.8 13 Angled (60°) 9 21 18 Perpendicular (90°) 9 18 24  
F.  Handicapped Accessibility Development providing off-street parking spaces must ensure a portion of the off-street parking spaces are designated, located, and reserved for use by persons with physical disabilities in accordance with the standards of the State Building Code. 
G.  Dimensional Standards for Loading Spaces Except for loading spaces used by semi-tractor trailers, off-street loading spaces shall be at least 12 feet wide and at least 25 feet long. Off-street loading spaces used by semi-tractor trailers shall be at least 60 feet long. Overhead clearance shall be at least 14 feet. 
H.  Pedestrian Connections Pedestrian connections between the principal buildings on a development site and a public street(s) must be provided through improved walkways with a minimum unobstructed width of 4 feet. Parking spaces shall be designed to ensure vehicles do not encroach into the walkways. 
I.  Stacking Spaces   
1.  General Uses with drive-through facilities and other auto-oriented uses where vehicles queue up to access a service shall provide adequate stacking spaces on-site for the uses or buildings in accordance with this section. Such uses include but are not limited to: restaurants with drive-through, convenience store with fuel sales, and other uses with service bays or drive-throughs. 
2.  Design Stacking spaces are subject to the following design and layout standards: 
(a)  Size Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of 9 feet wide and 16 feet long. 
(b)  Traffic Movements Stacking spaces shall not impede vehicular traffic movements or movements into or out of parking spaces, whether on-site or off-site. 
(c)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Movement Stacking spaces shall not impede onsite or offsite bicycle or pedestrian traffic movements, whether on-site or off-site. 
(d)  Separation Stacking spaces shall be clearly delineated through such means as striping, landscaping, pavement design, or curbing. 
J.  Private Drives   
1.  A vehicular use area shall be connected to a public street in a manner that affords safe and convenient ingress and egress. 
2.  A one-way drive shall be at least 12 feet wide and a 2-way drive shall be at least 20 feet wide. 
3.  Off-street parking spaces shall not be directly accessible off a private drive, except as allowed for use types in the Household Living use category in Section 5.4.4 F, Driveways Used to Meet Requirements. 
4.  A private drive for vehicular use areas containing 200 or more parking spaces shall be unobstructed for at least 30 feet in length from the right-of-way line to a drive aisle or parking space to accommodate the ingress and egress of at least 2 vehicles without conflict with vehicles accessing parking spaces or drive aisles and creating an obstruction in the public street. 
5.  The design and location of private drives accessing public streets shall be subject to the City's Driveway Ordinance. 
K.  Surface Material   
1.  All required parking spaces, drives, and loading spaces in a vehicular use area shall be paved and maintained with concrete, asphalt, or similar material of sufficient thickness and consistency to support anticipated traffic volumes and weights, except as provided in this section. 
2.  The use of pervious or semi-pervious materials may be approved as an alternate means of paving provided it is demonstrated that the materials will function in a similar fashion as required materials. 
3.  Private drives accessing public streets shall be paved and maintained from the curb line or edge of pavement to a point at least 10 feet from the public street right-of-way for all vehicular use areas and at least 30 feet for all vehicular use areas with 200 or more parking spaces, whether the vehicular use area is paved or unpaved. 
4.  Except for required parking facilities for the disabled, required parking may be constructed with gravel or other approved comparable all-weather surface for: 
(a)  Parking used on an irregular basis for religious institutions, private minor assembly uses, and other similar nonprofits organizations; 
(b)  Parking for residential uses or a bed and breakfast establishment where 6 or fewer spaces are required; 
(c)  Parking for an office use converted from a single-family detached dwelling where 4 or fewer spaces are required; 
(d)  Parking for all uses in the AGR district; and 
(e)  Parking for industrial uses in the HI district, or manufacturing and production uses in the LI district. 
5.  Required parking facilities and associated access for the disabled shall be paved in accordance with the State Building Code. 
L.  Grading and Drainage The vehicular use area shall be graded, properly drained, stabilized, and maintained to minimize dust and erosion. 
M.  Curb and Gutter Where vehicular use areas are paved, curb and gutter or an equivalent drainage system shall be provided along the periphery of the area. 
N.  Markings All spaces and lanes in vehicular use areas shall be clearly delineated with paint lines, curbs, or other treatment, whether the vehicular use area is paved or unpaved. 
O.  Curbs and Wheel Stops All parking spaces provided shall have curbs or wheel stops located so that no part of the parked vehicle will extend onto a sidewalk, walkway, adjacent property or landscape area, whether the vehicular use area is paved or unpaved. 
P.  Exterior Lighting Exterior lighting in vehicular use areas shall be designed to prevent glare or illumination exceeding maximum allowable levels on adjacent land and shall comply with the standards of Section 5.10, Exterior Lighting, as appropriate. 
Q.  Landscaping Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 5.5.10, Parking Lot Landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 19, 1-17-2017) 
5.4.8. - Parking Alternatives 
The Planning and Development Director is authorized to approve an alternative parking plan for development that proposes alternatives to providing the number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards, in accordance with the standards of this sub-section. Nothing in this section shall limit the utilization of one or more of the following off-street parking alternatives by a single use. 
A.  Shared Parking   
1.  The required off-street parking for a use may be met off-site with the required off-street parking spaces of another use in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)  The shared parking is located within 1,000 feet as measured from the entrance of the use to the nearest shared parking space. 
(b)  An improved walkway is provided to the shared parking area from the use. 
(c)  If the shared parking is located across a thoroughfare, then an adequate and safe pedestrian street crossing, as determined by the Transportation Director, shall exist to safely manage pedestrian crossings. If pedestrian improvements are needed for safe crossings, then the improvements shall be installed prior to use of the shared parking. 
(d)  The uses served by the shared parking plan must have different peak parking demands, differences in hours or days of operation, or otherwise operate such that the uses have access to the required minimum parking spaces when in operation. 
2.  The Planning and Development Director may approve up to 100 percent of the minimum parking requirement of a use through a shared parking plan. 
3.  A written agreement allowing the shared use of parking shall be executed by the owners involved and filed with the Planning and Development Director prior to the use of shared parking facilities. The agreement must guarantee the long-term availability of parking. Should the agreement cease, then the use shall be considered to contain nonconforming site conditions if the required parking is not met and future expansions of the use shall be prohibited unless the use is brought into compliance with the minimum parking requirements of this section. 
B.  Off-Site Parking   
1.  The required off-street parking for a use may be met off-site in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)  The off-site parking is located within 1,000 feet as measured from the entrance of the use to the nearest shared parking space. 
(b)  An improved walkway is provided to the off-site parking area from the use. 
(c)  If the off-site parking is located across a thoroughfare, then an adequate and safe pedestrian street crossing shall exist to safely manage pedestrian crossings. If pedestrian improvements are needed for safe crossings, then the improvements shall be installed prior to use of the off-site parking. 
2.  A written agreement allowing the off-site use of parking shall be executed by the owners involved and filed with the Planning and Development Director prior to the use of off-site parking facilities. The agreement shall guarantee the long-term availability of parking. Should the agreement cease, then the use shall be considered to contain nonconforming site conditions if the required parking is not met and future expansions of the use shall be prohibited unless the use is brought into compliance with the minimum parking requirements of this section. 
C.  Compact Spaces Up to 20 percent of the required off-street parking spaces may be provided as compact car spaces in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Each compact car space shall be at least 8 feet wide and 16 feet deep. 
2.  Compact car spaces shall be clearly marked or posted for compact cars only. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 14.C, 14.D, 12-3-2018) 
5.5. - Landscaping 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 15, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, changed the title of § 5.5 from "Landscaping Standards" to "Landscaping." 

5.5.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum requirements for landscaping. These standards are intended to: 
A.  Advance the general purposes of this Ordinance; 
B.  Ensure and encourage the planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of trees, shrubs, and other plants; 
C.  Promote the conservation of existing healthy trees and vegetation, and provide for the restoration of land denuded as a result of grading and construction; 
D.  Ensure visual screening of unsightly areas; 
E.  Establish appropriate landscape yards and screening features to reduce the negative impacts of glare, noise, trash, odors, lack of privacy, and visual appearance that can occur when higher intensity land uses locate near lower intensity land uses; 
F.  Safeguard and enhance property values and aesthetic qualities, and protect public and private investment; 
G.  Encourage the use of low impact development techniques and sustainable development practices; 
H.  Protect and improve environmental functions and conditions by providing eco-system features such as shade, air purification and oxygen regeneration, filtering of stormwater runoff, and mitigation of noise, glare, and heat; and 
I.  Assure that the appearance of High Point positively contributes to its growth and economic prosperity. 
5.5.2. - Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to zone lots with the following, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.5.3, Exemptions: 
A.  New Buildings or Uses New principal buildings or new open uses of land. 
B.  Changes in Use Changes in use of one or more in land use intensity (see Table 5.5.11.C, Land Use Intensity). 
C.  Expansions In the case of an expansion of an existing building, outdoor use area, or off-street parking lot, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  For individual or collective expansions of 50 percent or less, the standards in this section shall apply only to the expanded portion; or 
2.  For individual or collective expansions that exceed 50 percent, the standards in this section shall be applied to the entire zone lot. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017) 
5.5.3. - Exemptions 
The following development is exempted from the standards in this section: 
A.  Single-family detached dwellings; 
B.  Duplex dwellings; 
C.  Development in the CB and MX districts, except for parking areas; 
D.  Repaving or restriping of an existing parking area; 
E.  Where lot lines abut the following forms of development, no landscape yard is required: 
1.  Railroad rights-of-way or easements; 
2.  Utility easements of 60 feet or more in width; and 
3.  Street right-of-way that has remained unopened for a period of at least 15 years. 
F.  Where outdoor seating is provided between a building and a street, no plant material is required in the corresponding portion of the streetyard. 
G.  No perimeter landscape yard shall be required when single-family detached and single-family attached dwelling units abut one another within the same development. 
H.  No parking lot landscaping shall be required for parking lots on the same zone lot as the principal use they serve if they have less than 5 parking spaces outside the Core City, or 20 or fewer spaces inside the Core City. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7363/17-106 , § 8, 11-20-2017) 
5.5.4. - District Standards 
Some zoning districts and overlay districts, such as the MS, MX, and the GCO districts, include additional district-specific landscaping standards (See Chapter 3: Zoning Districts). 
5.5.5. - General Requirements 
A.  Conceptual Landscape Plan   
1.  A conceptual, or generalized landscape plan is required as part of a submittal for a land disturbance permit. The purpose of the conceptual plan is to ensure that landscape yard requirements can be met, required undisturbed areas and buffers can be maintained, and slopes in required landscape yards will meet the standards of Section 5.5.12, Landscape Yards on Slopes. 
2.  Nothing shall prohibit an applicant from filing a revised landscape plan that differs from a conceptual landscape plan. 
B.  Landscape Plan Required   
1.  A landscape plan depicting how required landscaping will be planted on a development site shall be included with an application for site plan, group development, or building permit, as appropriate, to ensure compliance with this section. 
2.  The landscape plan shall be approved prior to, or concurrent with, the approval of a site plan, group development plan, or the issuance of a building permit. 
3.  A landscape plan shall contain, as a minimum, the following: 
(a)  Location of required planting material; 
(b)  Identification of trees and plants, including their scientific names; 
(c)  Minimum and maximum dimensions of all landscape yard areas (see Section 10.2, Rules of Measurement); 
(d)  Calculations determining the number of canopy trees, understory trees, and shrubs required (see Section 10.2, Rules of Measurement); 
(e)  Locations, species, and sizes of existing vegetation to be retained and counted towards minimum landscaping requirements; and 
(f)  Existing topography, or proposed topography where site grading is proposed to occur. 
C.  Stormwater Detention Pond Landscaping If landscaping is proposed around or on the embankment of a stormwater detention pond, a landscape plan must be submitted for review to determine that the safety and functionality of the device will not be compromised by the addition of trees and/or shrubs. 
D.  Landscaping in Bio-retention Cells Trees and shrubs used in bio-retention cells or rain gardens located in parking lots or within landscape yards may be counted toward tree or shrub requirements provided they meet the minimum specifications in Section 5.5.6, Plant Material Specifications. 
E.  Phased Development Development that is planned in phases may submit a landscape plan for the entire development, or separate landscape plans for each phase, which shall be approved prior to approval of the final plat. 
5.5.6. - Plant Material Specifications 
A.  Canopy Tree Size   
1.  Canopy trees shall have a minimum height at maturity of 40 feet or a minimum crown width of 30 feet. 
2.  All canopy trees shall have a minimum caliper size of 2 inches at planting. 
3.  Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of 6 feet in height at planting. 
B.  Understory Tree Size   
1.  Understory trees shall have a minimum height at maturity of 25 to 40 feet, except that trees to be placed below overhead utility lines may not exceed a mature height of 20 feet. 
2.  Drought tolerant understory trees must have a minimum caliper size of 1 inch at planting. 
3.  All other understory trees must have a minimum caliper size of 2 inches at planting. 
C.  Shrub Size and Type   
1.  Required shrubs in a Type A landscape yard or shrubs located parallel to the edge of parking lots, access drives, loading and unloading areas, and outdoor storage shall be evergreen. 
2.  Required shrubs in a Type B landscape yard shall be 50 percent or more evergreen. 
3.  Required shrubs in a Type C landscape yard shall be 25 percent or more evergreen. 
4.  Required shrubs in a streetyard or in a Type D landscape yard may be evergreen or deciduous. 
5.  All shrubs must be at least a 3-gallon size and have a minimum height or spread of 15 inches at the time of planting. Shrubs shall reach a minimum height of 36 inches and a spread of 30 inches within 3 years of planting. 
D.  Species Plant species used in required landscape yards must be native species or species of a locally adapted nature. Other species may be approved by the Planning and Development Department Director. Refer to the Development Guide for listings of acceptable plant material, which includes drought tolerant species and species suitable for planting within 20 feet of overhead utilities. 
E.  Species Diversity To curtail the spread of disease or insect infestation in a plant species, new plantings shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  When fewer than 20 trees are required on a site, at least 2 different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions. 
2.  When more than 20 but fewer than 40 trees are required to be planted on site, at least 3 different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions. 
3.  When 40 or more trees are required on a site, at least four different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions. 
4.  A larger number of different species than specified may be utilized. 
5.  In no instance shall invasive species be utilized as landscaping materials to meet the requirements of this section. 
F.  Stabilization Landscape yards shall be stabilized and maintained with ground cover, mulch, or other approved materials to prevent soil erosion and allow rainwater infiltration. Landscape yards with slopes of 15 percent or more shall be stabilized with vegetative cover to minimize erosion and mulch washout. Use of landscape fabric on slopes of 15 percent or more is discouraged. 
G.  Grouping of Plant Material   
1.  Except within a Type A landscape yard, plant material may generally be grouped or clustered within the required landscape yards, however, the overall intent of the particular landscape yard must be adequately addressed. Groupings or clusters shall be depicted on the landscape plan and be approved by the Planning and Development Director. 
2.  Perimeter landscaping materials adjacent to parking lots, access drives, loading and unloading areas, and outdoor storage may not be grouped. 
3.  Required plant material in a Type A landscape yard may not be grouped, and shall be planted according to the required on-center spacing in Table 5.5.11.B, Perimeter Landscape Yard Types. 
H.  Berms   
1.  Berms may be used independently, or in conjunction with a wall or fencing, to meet the screening intent of the Type A landscape yard. 
2.  Berms must be stabilized, have a slope not exceeding 3:1 (horizontal to vertical), have a crown width at least 1/2 the berm height, and may be no taller than 8 feet above the toe of the berm slope. 
3.  A berm may not damage the roots of existing healthy vegetation designated to be preserved. 
4.  A berm may not be designed or placed as to interfere with required sight distances. 
I.  Fences   
1.  Opaque fences, a minimum of 5 feet in height, constructed within required landscape yards, may reduce the minimum and average landscape yard width requirement in accordance with Table 5.5.11.B, Perimeter Landscape Yard Types. 
2.  If utilized, fences shall be located within the landscape yard and all required shrubs shall be planted between the fence and the lot line. Required trees may be planted behind the fence. 
J.  Planters   
1.  Planters shall be constructed of masonry, stone, or pressure treated lumber stamped for ground contact. Other materials may be approved, based upon their durability, by the Planning and Development Director, 
2.  Planters shall have a minimum height of 30 inches and have an effective planting area of 7 feet (measured in any direction) if trees are to be planted and an effective planting area of 4 feet (measured in any direction) if no trees are to be included. 
3.  The minimum height of shrubs in the planter, except for ground cover, shall be 6 inches at the time of planting. 
4.  ADA-approved grates must be used atop all tree wells. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 7, 4-3-2017) 
5.5.7. - Limitations on Landscaping Placement 
A.  Easements   
1.  Required trees and shrubs planted within a utility or a water quality conservation easement must be approved by the easement holder (whether such easement pertains to above or below ground rights). 
2.  When trees or shrubs are planted in a utility easement or a water quality conservation easement, the landowner is responsible for replacement of any required vegetation if maintenance or other utility requirements result in its removal. 
3.  When trees or shrubs are planted in a water quality conservation easement, they shall not impact the easement design or impede the flow of water through the easement. 
4.  When required landscaping is permitted to be placed in an easement, the easement width may be counted toward the minimum landscape yard width. Additional area outside the easement shall be provided to meet minimum and average required landscape yard widths. 
5.  Where an easement and a required landscape yard coincide, and there is a prohibition on planting within a portion of the easement, and the remaining width is not sufficient to properly contain required plant material, then the landscape yard width shall be expanded in an amount necessary to include all required plant material. 
B.  Fire Protection System Minimum clear separation distances required by the current adopted version of the North Carolina Fire Code shall be maintained for landscaping near a fire protection system. 
C.  Obstructions at Intersections No trees or shrubs shall be planted or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct visibility for motorists at any street intersection in accordance with the standards of Chapter 6 of the City Code, Visibility at Intersections. 
D.  Plantings in the Right-of-Way Required planting materials shall not be located within a public right-of-way unless approved in accordance with Section 5.5.13, Alternate Landscape Plan, and shall be subject to an encroachment agreement between the landowner and the City. 
E.  Permitted Encroachments The following are permitted in required landscape yards as indicated, provided the landscaping requirements are met and there is no interference with visibility at intersections. 
1.  The following features may be located entirely within landscape yards required by this section: 
(a)  Landscaping features such as, ornamental pools, planting boxes, sculpture, arbors, trellises, and birdbaths; 
(b)  Pet shelters; 
(c)  At-grade patios or decks; 
(d)  Play equipment; 
(e)  Outdoor furniture and fireplaces; 
(f)  Ornamental entry columns, gates, fences, walls, and retaining walls; 
(g)  Flagpoles of 30 feet in height or less; 
(h)  Lamp and address posts; 
(i)  HVAC equipment, well houses, and utility cabinets of 4 feet in height or less; 
(j)  Mailboxes and incidental signage; 
2.  The following features may encroach up to 21/2 feet into a required landscape yard, but no closer than 3 feet from any lot line: 
(a)  Cornices; 
(b)  Steps; 
(c)  Canopies; 
(d)  Overhanging eaves and gutters; 
(e)  Window sills, bay windows or similar architectural features; 
(f)  Chimneys; and 
(g)  Fire escapes, fire balconies, and fire towers. 
3.  Up to 15 percent of a required landscape yard may be occupied by walkways and steps that are not connected to any above-grade structure. 
4.  A stormwater facility with an approved alternate landscape plan. 
5.  Handicap ramps, but not porches or landings. 
F.  Multiple-Lot Development   
1.  A multiple-lot development, such as a shopping center, that is configured and developed as a single entity shall be treated as a single zone lot for the purposes of applying the parking lot, landscape yard, and streetyard standards. 
2.  Individual lots within a multiple-lot development shall be subject to the screening requirements in Section 5.6, Screening. 
5.5.8. - Credit for Existing Vegetation 
A.  General Standards Existing healthy, well-formed canopy and understory trees that are in or within 10 linear feet of a required landscape yard and that meet or exceed the standards of this section may be credited toward the applicable tree planting requirements of this section, in accordance with the following: 
1.  The landowner or developer has provided a plan showing the location and size of canopy and understory trees to be credited, and trees depicted on the plan have been marked or identified on the site. 
2.  The canopy and understory trees to be credited are protected before and during development by tree protection fencing in accordance with the Development Guide. 
3.  The location of the existing canopy and understory trees to be credited contribute to the screening or buffering functions of the landscaping. 
4.  Any canopy or understory trees for which credit has been received that die shall be replaced in a manner that ensures the landscaping meets the requirements of this section. 
B.  Amount   
1.  Existing trees meeting the standards in (A) above that are retained during and after development shall be credited towards the minimum landscape requirements at a rate of 1.25 times the tree's actual DBH. 
2.  Trees to be credited shall be verified prior to credit being provided. 
C.  Credit Determination   
1.  The amount of credit towards the number of required new trees is determined by dividing the total DBH of trees to be retained by the minimum caliper inch size of required plantings (see Section 5.5.6, Plant Material Specifications). Example: A development site that retains 3 8-inch DBH canopy trees will be credited for a total of 30 inches DBH of existing trees ((8x3) x 1.25 = 30 DBH), or 10 newly-planted canopy trees (30/3=10). 
2.  The Planning and Development Director shall verify and approve trees to be credited in accordance with this section. 
D.  Streetyard Requirements Regardless of the number or size of preserved trees in required streetyards, there shall be at least 1 canopy tree for every 50 linear feet of required streetyard. 
5.5.9. - Time for Installation of Required Landscaping 
A.  Timing Required landscaping (including mulching and seeding) shall be installed in accordance with this section prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy unless a financial guarantee is established to ensure installation at a later date. 
B.  Financial Guarantee A financial guarantee prepared in accordance with Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees, shall be in place whenever occupancy is desired and required landscaping has not been completed. The maximum length of time for a landscaping financial guarantee shall be 6 months, which may be extended one time for up to 90 days by the Planning and Development Director. 
C.  Multi-Phase Development Multi-family, nonresidential, and mixed-use development that is planned and developed in phases shall be required to install landscaping that is associated with the active phase or phases only, unless an alternative arrangement is otherwise agreed to by the Planning and Development Director and the developer. An active phase of a development is the one that is subject to permitted and on-going development activity. 
5.5.10. - Parking Lot Landscaping 
A.  General Standards   
1.  Two or more parking lots on the same zone lot that are physically separated by buildings and are not physically connected by internal drives shall be considered independently. 
2.  Parking lot landscaping shall include at least 1 canopy tree for every 12 parking spaces. 
3.  Placement of Canopy Trees 
(a)  Required interior and perimeter parking lot canopy trees shall be placed such that no parking space is more than 80 feet from the trunk of a canopy tree for new or redeveloped nonresidential parking areas, and 50 feet for new or redeveloped residential parking areas. 
(b)  In cases where an approved alternate landscape plan permits understory trees to be substituted for canopy trees, they shall be placed such that no parking space is more than 50 feet from the trunk of an understory tree for nonresidential parking areas, and 30 feet for residential parking areas. 
(c)  Additional trees above the minimum number required may be used to meet this standard. 
B.  Interior Landscaping Standards   
1.  General Standards   
(a)  For the purposes of parking lot landscaping, the interior of a parking lot shall be all of the area within the outer boundary of the parking lot including interior and corner landscape islands intended to fulfill the interior parking lot landscaping requirements, but not including perimeter landscape yards (see Figure 5.5.10.B, Parking Lot Landscaping Area). 
(b)  These standards shall not apply to parking structures, or vehicle display areas. 
(c)  Required interior canopy trees shall be distributed throughout parking areas and may be located in landscape islands, landscape divider medians between rows of parking, or in driveway medians. Trees used to satisfy the general rate requirement in Section 5.5.10 A.2. may not be counted toward any landscape yard requirement. 
FIGURE 5.5.10.B, PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING AREA

2.  Landscaping Islands and Strips A parking aisle with more than 12 spaces in a single row shall provide and maintain landscaping islands or strips in accordance with the following standards. 
(a)  Islands for planting canopy trees shall have a minimum dimension of 9 feet and a minimum area of 162 square feet, including the curb. 
(b)  Landscape islands that do not contain canopy trees may contain understory trees and shall contain 3 or more shrubs. Landscape islands that do not contain canopy trees shall have minimum dimension of 5 feet, including the curb. 
(c)  Landscape strips between adjoining rows of parking spaces or serving as driveway medians shall have a minimum dimension of 7 feet, including the curb, if canopy trees are included and 5 feet in all other cases, including the curb. Landscape strips that do not have canopy trees shall include shrubs planted no more than 10 feet on center. 
3.  Separation of Light Poles and Trees In order to prevent the need to excessively trim trees within landscape areas and to maintain the effectiveness of parking area lighting, light poles shall be spaced at least 10 linear feet from a canopy tree trunk, to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.  Protection of Landscape Islands Landscape islands shall be protected from vehicle damage by the installation of curbing, wheel stops or other comparable methods. The placement of plant material within landscape islands shall allow for a 2-foot vehicle overhang from the face of the curb or wheel stop. 
5.  Stormwater Management A landscape island may be designed to function as a stormwater management device. 
C.  Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping Required Where a parking lot abuts a street or other development (other than another parking lot), landscaping shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following: 
1.  Intent Parking lot perimeter landscaping shall be designed to soften the view of the parking lot from an abutting street or development and to filter spillover light from vehicle headlights. Required plant material shall be planted in such a way as to best achieve this intent. 
2.  Location   
(a)  Required plant material shall be placed adjacent to the perimeter of the parking area. 
(b)  Depending upon the geometric relationship of the parking lot to the property lines or to topographic conditions, plant material may be placed away from the edge of the parking area, if necessary, to best achieve the intent of this subsection. 
3.  Planting Rate   
(a)  Parking lot perimeter landscaping shall be provided in an amount equivalent to a Type D landscape yard except that plant material shall be uniformly distributed along the parking lot perimeter. 
(b)  Parking lot perimeter landscaping shall be credited toward the perimeter landscape yard planting requirement along the portion of the lot line parallel to the to the parking lot perimeter landscaping. 
4.  Size of Plant Material Evergreen shrubs used for parking lot perimeter landscaping shall be in accordance with Section 5.5.6 C, Shrub Size and Type. 
5.  Alternative Configuration An opaque or semi-opaque (50 percent opaque or more) decorative fence may be provided in-lieu of the shrub requirement if the fence is 48 inches above grade level, located adjacent to the perimeter of the parking lot, and is made of brick, stone, wrought iron, decorative aluminum or steel, painted or stained wood, or composite material. Upon review, the Planning and Development Director may require up to 50 percent of the required number of shrubs where a semi-opaque fence is proposed to ensure the parking lot is sufficiently screened. Chain link fencing, with or without slats, shall not be credited towards landscaping requirements, but may be incorporated between a perimeter landscape strip and the parking area. 
6.  Exemptions Where parking lots are adjacent to one another, but on different lots, a perimeter landscape yard is not required along the common boundary of the parking lots. However, the requirements of Section 5.5.10, Parking Lot Landscaping, shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017) 
5.5.11. - Perimeter Landscape Yards 
A.  General Standards   
1.  Landscape yards are required along the perimeter, extending inward from the lot line, of a zone lot or development site in accordance with Table 5.5.11.B, Perimeter Landscape Yard Types, and Table 5.5.11.C1, Land Use Intensity. They are intended to mitigate potential adverse impacts that may result when higher intensity land uses are located adjacent to lower intensity land uses. 
2.  The width of permitted driveways and permitted cross-access easements, measured at the lot line, shall be excluded from the calculation of required plant material. 
3.  A perimeter landscape yard may be located along shared access easements between parcels in nonresidential development. 
4.  A perimeter landscape yard in a multiple lot development that is configured and developed as a single entity, is only required around the outer perimeter of the development. 
5.  Stormwater management devices that incorporate vegetation (e.g., bio-retention cell, rain garden, constructed wetlands, etc.) may be placed within a perimeter landscape yard provided the screening function of the landscape yard is maintained. Any plant material meeting the minimum requirements for the landscape yard may be counted toward the requirements. 
B.  Types of Landscape Yards Table 5.5.11.B, Perimeter Landscape Yard Types, establishes standards for the following different landscape yards: 
1.  Streetyard; 
2.  Type A Opaque Landscape Yard; 
3.  Type B Semi-Opaque Landscape Yard; 
4.  Type C Intermittent Landscape Yard; and 
5.  Type D Basic Landscape Yard. 
The standards are based on whether the development is within or outside the Core City. 
TABLE 5.5.11.B: PERIMETER LANDSCAPE YARD TYPES 
LANDSCAPE YARD TYPE 
DESCRIPTION/MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 
INSIDE CORE CITY 
OUTSIDE CORE CITY 
STREETYARD Intent: This landscape yard functions to distinguish the edge of the street right-of-way and adjacent private land and to provide continuity of vegetation along public streets. Average width (feet) [1] 8 10 Minimum width (feet) [2] 5 8 Maximum width (feet) 15 15 Canopy trees per 100 linear feet 2 2 Shrubs per 100 linear feet 17 17 TYPE A: OPAQUE LANDSCAPE YARD Intent: This landscape yard functions as an opaque screen from the ground to a height of 8 feet. This type of buffer prevents visual and auditory contact between uses and creates a strong impression of total separation. 
Yard shown at maturity Average width (feet) 25 45 Minimum width (feet) [2] 20 35 Maximum width (feet) 30 70 Canopy trees per every 100 linear feet/on-center spacing (feet) 2/50 4/25 Understory trees per every 100 linear feet/on-center spacing (feet) 5/20 10/10 Evergreen shrubs per every 100 linear feet/on-center spacing (feet) 10/10 33/3 5-foot opaque fence Reduces average and minimum widths by 5 feet Reduces average and minimum widths by 10 feet TYPE B: SEMI OPAQUE LANDSCAPE YARD Intent: This landscape yard functions as a partially opaque screen from the ground to a height of 6 feet. This type of buffer prevents visual contact between uses and creates a sense of spatial separation. 
Yard shown at maturity Average width (feet) 15 25 Minimum width (feet) [2] 12 20 Maximum width (feet) 25 45 Canopy trees per every 100 linear feet 2 4 Understory trees per every 100 linear feet 4 6 Shrubs per every 100 linear feet [3] 8 25 5-foot opaque fence Reduces average width by 3 feet and minimum width by 2 feet Reduces average and minimum widths by 5 feet TYPE C: INTERMITTENT LANDSCAPE YARD Intent: This landscape yard functions as an intermittent visual screen from the ground to a height of 5 feet. It is intended to partially block visibility between different uses but not totally obstruct visual contact from one use to another. 
Yard shown at maturity Average width (feet) 10 15 Minimum width (feet) [2] 8 10 Maximum width (feet) 20 35 Canopy trees per every 100 linear feet 2 3 Understory trees per every 100 linear feet 3 4 Shrubs per every 100 linear feet [3] 6 20 5-foot opaque fence Reduces average width by 2 feet Reduces average and minimum widths by 5 feet TYPE D: BASIC LANDSCAPE YARD Intent: This landscape yard functions as a means to demarcate boundaries between different uses and provide only a slight visual obstruction between different uses. 
Yard shown at maturity Average width (feet) 5 8 Minimum width (feet) [2] 5 5 Maximum width (feet) 10 15 Canopy trees per every 100 linear feet None Understory trees per every 100 linear feet 2 2 Shrubs per every 100 linear feet [3] 12 15 5-foot opaque fence No additional reductions NOTES: [1] Within the Core City, where a required streetyard cannot be accommodated due to the location of existing development or other site related issue, an adjustment may be approved in accordance with Section 2.5.2, Administrative Adjustment [2] If the required principal building setback is less than the required landscape yard width, the principal building setback controls and the landscape yard width shall be reduced only along the length of the building wall that encroaches into the landscape yard. Regardless of reduction in streetyard width, the required planting material must be installed, though its location may be modified in accordance with Section 5.5.13, Alternate Landscape Plan. [3] A percentage of the required shrubs must be evergreen. See Section 5.5.6 C, Shrub Size and Type.  
C.  Landscape Yard Type Application   
1.  To determine the type of landscape yard required, first identify the land use intensity of the proposed (new, changed, or expanded) use, then identify the land use intensity of each existing use on adjacent sites (see Table 5.5.11.C1, Land Use Intensity). Then, using Table 5.5.11.C2, Type of Landscape Yard Required, the intersection of the row associated with the proposed use and the column associated with the adjacent use shows the type of landscape yard required. 
2.  The land use intensity is a number that corresponds to the intensity of development. 
3.  A land use is considered to "exist" on an adjacent property when a building permit is issued. 
4.  If a zone lot contains uses with different land use intensities, the higher numbered land use intensity applies unless an Administrative Adjustment is approved in accordance with Section 5.5.13, Alternate Landscape Plan. 
5.  No landscape yard shall be required where a proposed use is adjacent to an existing agricultural use. 
TABLE 5.5.11.C1: LAND USE INTENSITY 
USE 
CLASSIFICATION 
USE CATEGORY 
USE TYPE 
LAND USE 
INTENSITY 
SCORE 
Agricultural Agriculture All Crops: 1 
Livestock: 3 Residential Common Elements Recreation Common elements recreation 1 Household Living SF detached; Family care home; Manufactured dwelling; Duplex dwelling; Live/work 1 Multi-family; SF attached, Triplex; Quadplex 2 Group Living All, except SRO 2 SRO 3 Life Care All 2 Institutional Civic Assembly & Cultural Facilities, major & minor 3 Cemetery 1 Correctional facility 4 Governmental facility; Public safety facility 3 Public Recreation facility 3 Day Care Day Care Center 3 Education All, except truck driving school 3 Truck driving school 4 Health Care All 3 Religious Institutions All 3 Transportation Airport 5 Park and ride facility 3 Passenger terminal 4 Taxi or limousine service 4 Utilities Communication or broadcasting facilities 3 Solar array; Wireless telecommunication facility; Utility minor 3 Utility major 4 Commercial Adult Entertainment Adult entertainment 4 Animal Care Major 4 Minor 3 Eating establishments All 3 Offices All 3 Commercial Parking Commercial Parking 3 Personal Services All 3 Recreation and Leisure Amusement & entertainment 3 Amusement parks 5 Sports & fitness centers 3 Retail Sales All 3 Vehicle Establishments All 3 Visitor Accommodations Bed and Breakfast 1 Hotel or motel 3 Industrial Extractive Industry Extractive industry 5 Industrial Service All 4 Manufacturing and Production All, except microbrewery, microdistillery, microwinery, or motion picture production 5 Microbrewery, microdistillery, or microwinery 4 Motion picture production 3 Warehouse and Freight Movement All 4 Waste-Related Service All 4 Wholesale trade All, except market showroom 4 Market Showroom 3  
TABLE 5.5.11.C2: TYPE OF LANDSCAPE YARD REQUIRED 
A = Type A buffer  B = Type B buffer  C = Type C buffer  D = Type D buffer  n/a = no buffer required 
LAND USE INTENSITY 
OF PROPOSED USE 
LAND USE INTENSITY OF EXISTING ADJACENT USE 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
VACANT 
1 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2 C n/a C B B D 3 B B n/a C B D 4 A A C n/a C D 5 A A B C n/a n/a  
D.  Streetyard Standards   
1.  Streetyard landscaping shall be installed in accordance with Table 5.5.11.B, Perimeter Landscape Yard Types. Trees associated with streetyard landscaping shall not be located within 4 feet of the right-of-way line. 
2.  Off-street parking, storage, or display shall be prohibited within a streetyard. 
3.  No streetyard landscaping shall be required along an alley. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 7, 5-21-2018) 
5.5.12. - Landscape Yards on Slopes 
Slopes over 50 percent shall not be used to meet a landscape yard requirement. Slope areas of between 33 percent and 50 percent may be used to meet a landscape yard requirement in accordance with the following: 
A.  Existing Slope with Adequate Tree Cover If the required number of trees for the applicable landscape yard exists on the slope, then the slope area is deemed to meet the landscape yard requirements, provided that no healthy trees or other vegetation are removed and no grading or clearing of the slope occurs. 
B.  Existing Slope without Adequate Tree Cover If the slope area lacks the required number of trees for the applicable landscape yard, then additional trees and vegetation shall be provided to meet the landscape yard requirement. No existing healthy trees or vegetation may be removed and no grading or clearing of the slope may occur. 
C.  Newly-graded Slope If the slope area is newly graded, the slope area shall be replanted to provide tree cover over the entire area. Plans for replanting shall include a minimum of one canopy tree per 400 square feet of surface area and may be made up of a mixture of deciduous hardwood and evergreen trees meeting the minimum standards of Section 5.5.6, Plant Material Specifications. Replanting plans are subject to the approval of the Planning and Development Director, and upon installation will be deemed to meet the tree requirement for the applicable landscape yard. 
5.5.13. - Alternate Landscape Plan 
An alternate landscape plan may be approved by the Planning and Development Director, that allows modifications to the requirements of this section. Natural physical conditions (such as streams, wetland areas, and topography), lot configuration, utility easements, desire to retain existing vegetation, and impractical situations that would result from application of Section 5.5 Landscaping Standards, may justify approval of an alternate landscape plan. 
A.  Intent Any alternate landscape plan approved shall meet the intent of the applicable landscape yard(s) and the purpose and intent of the landscaping standards of this section. 
B.  Allowable Modifications   
1.  The following landscape standards may be modified by an alternate landscape plan. 
(a)  The location of required plant materials; 
(b)  The configuration of required plant materials; and 
(c)  The number of required plant materials. 
2.  The alternative landscape plan shall include justification for the modifications requested, based upon but not limited to the following: 
(a)  The presence or planned location of public utilities, infrastructure, or easements; 
(b)  The location of existing healthy vegetation or other beneficial site features to be retained after development; 
(c)  The size, shape, or topographic elevation of the site relative to the street(s) it abuts; and 
(d)  The need to protect solar access or avoid permanently shaded areas on the site. 
5.5.14. - Additional Landscape Yard Flexibility 
A.  Substitution   
1.  Canopy trees may be substituted for shrubs at the rate of 1 canopy tree for 8 shrubs, and understory trees may be substituted for shrubs at the rate of 1 understory tree for 5 shrubs if approved by the Planning and Development Director. 
2.  Understory trees may be substituted for canopy trees at the rate of 2 understory trees for each canopy tree when a conflict exists due to overhead utility lines. 
B.  Existing Lots of Record   
1.  On lots of record that existed prior to March 1, 1992 that are less than 55,000 square feet in area, no development is required to landscape more than 15 percent of the lot. Priority shall be placed on meeting streetyard requirements first, then on other perimeter landscape yards. 
2.  Where a required landscape yard is reduced in width by 10 feet or more than the minimum requirement, and the differential in land use intensity is 2 or more categories, a 5-foot opaque fence may be required by the Planning and Development Director. 
C.  Plantings in Shaded Areas Where a building is located less than 10 feet from a lot line, and the landscape yard would be heavily shaded by buildings on either side of the lot line, required trees and shrubs may be planted outside the shaded area to improve their chances of survival. 
5.5.15. - Landscape Yard Maintenance 
A.  General The landowner is responsible for maintaining all required plant materials and landscape yards in good health and appearance. Any dead, unhealthy, severely damaged, or missing plants (whether preserved or installed) must be replaced with new plant material equal in quantity and quality. Replacement plant material shall be installed within 180 days of the date of owner notification. The obligation for continuous maintenance is binding on any subsequent owners of the land, or any other parties having a controlling interest in the property. 
B.  Protection of Plant Material The landowner or developer shall take actions to protect trees and landscaping from unnecessary damage during all facility and site maintenance operations. When landscape yards are adjacent to parking lots or drives, plants shall be protected from damage by vehicles, lubricants, or fuels. 
C.  Maintain Shape and Function All required trees (whether canopy or understory) shall be maintained in their characteristic natural shape, be allowed to reach their mature size, and shall not be severely pruned, sheared, topped, or shaped as shrubs. Trees (including, but not limited to crepe myrtles) that have been so altered, such that they no longer serve their intended function as trees within the landscaping yard, shall be considered as damaged vegetation and shall be replaced in accordance with this section. 
D.  Trimming and Pruning Trimming and pruning of trees shall be conducted in compliance with ANSI standards and the Development Guide. Shrubs shall be maintained in a way that does not obstruct sight distances at public street intersections, obstruct traffic signs or devices, or interfere with the use of sidewalks or pedestrian trails. 
5.5.16. - Removal or Relocation of Trees and Shrubs 
A.  Authorized Removal   
1.  Once installed and inspected, required landscape material shall not be removed or relocated without approval of a revised landscape plan. 
2.  If approved, all plant material removed shall be replaced at a ratio of one-to-one. 
B.  Hazardous Trees If any required tree is determined to be in a hazardous condition such that it is an immediate danger to the public safety, or it is an immediate threat to or has caused disruption of public services, the Planning and Development Director may authorize the removal of the tree without prior alternate landscape plan approval. Following removal, the Planning and Development Director shall determine if tree replacement is necessary in accordance with section (A)(2) above. 
C.  Unauthorized Removal   
1.  Except in accordance with Section 5.5.16 B, Hazardous Trees, if any required plant material is removed without approval of an alternate landscape plan, it shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance in accordance with Chapter 9: Enforcement. 
2.  In addition to the applicable remedies in Chapter 9: Enforcement, unauthorized removal of trees and shrubs shall result in the requirement for landscape material replacement in accordance Table 5.5.16.C, Replacement of Landscape Material Following Unauthorized Removal. All replacement landscaping shall be placed in the same yard area from which it was removed, unless it is approved in accordance with Section 5.5.13, Alternate Landscape Plan. 
TABLE 5.5.16.C, REPLACEMENT OF LANDSCAPE MATERIAL 
FOLLOWING UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL 
TYPE OF REQUIRED LANDSCAPING MATERIAL REMOVED [1] 
REPLACEMENT RATIO [AMOUNT REPLACED: AMOUNT REMOVED] 
Canopy trees less than or equal to 8 inches DBH 2:1 Canopy trees between 8 inches and 23.9 inches DBH 3:1 Canopy trees of 24 inches or more DBH 4:1 Understory trees less than or equal to 8 inches DBH 2:1 Understory trees between 8 inches and 14.9 inches DBH 3:1 Understory trees of 15 inches DBH or more 4:1 Shrubs 2:1 NOTES: [1] If the size of removed trees cannot be accurately determined, all removed trees shall be replaced in a 3:1 ratio.  
D.  Replacement of Dead or Diseased Material The replacement of dead or diseased trees and shrubs in a 1:1 ratio in the same location is considered normal landscape yard maintenance and shall not require approval of an alternate landscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
5.6. - Screening 

5.6.1. - Purpose and Intent 
These screening standards are intended to reduce the impact of necessary site structures and equipment upon adjacent property and enhance the aesthetics of the public streetscape. 
5.6.2. - Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to solid waste collection facilities, loading docks and loading bays, and ground-based mechanical equipment on zone lots with the following, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.6.3, Exemptions: 
A.  New Buildings or Uses New principal buildings or new open uses of land. 
B.  Changes in Use Changes in use of one or more in land use intensity (see Table 5.5.11 C, Land Use Intensity). 
C.  Expansions Expansions of principal buildings that exceed 1,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA) or the total expansions of principal buildings, open uses of land or off-street parking that individually or collectively exceed 3,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017) 
5.6.3. - Exemptions 
The following shall be exempt from the standards in this section: 
A.  Heavy Industrial (HI) District Solid waste collection, loading facilities, and ground-based mechanical equipment in the HI district are exempt from the requirements of this section, unless the structure or equipment is within 100 feet of a lot with an existing residential use. 
B.  Loading Docks   
1.  Loading docks and loading bays in the CB and MX districts are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
2.  Loading docks and loading bays in the LI district that face an industrial street are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
C.  Areas Hidden from Off-Site View Screening is not required where site or topographic features effectively prevent off-site views of equipment and structures to be screened, as determined by the Planning and Development Director. 
D.  Single-family Attached and Multi-family Single-family-attached and multi-family developments are exempt from the screening requirements for ground-based mechanical equipment. 
(Ord. No. 7363/17-106 , § 9, 11-20-2017) 
5.6.4. - General Standards 
A.  Screening from Streets and Residential Uses Applicable structures and equipment shall be screened from view from any street, and from any adjacent residential use, as seen from any point on the lot line at a height of 6 feet. 
B.  Area and Height May Vary The area and height of required screening depend upon the location of the structure or equipment relative to any adjacent residential lot and the view from the street, as determined by the Planning and Development Director. 
5.6.5. - Specific Standards for Solid Waste Facilities 
In addition to the general standards, solid waste collection facilities: 
A.  Behind Rear Line of Principal Building Should be located behind the rear building line of the principal building; and 
B.  Enclosed Shall be enclosed when located within 50 feet of a lot containing a residential use. 
5.6.6. - Screening Methods 
Solid waste collection, loading facilities, and ground-based mechanical equipment may be screened by any of the following methods, in single use or in combination: 
A.  Vegetation Evergreen vegetation meeting the requirements of Section 5.5.6, Plant Material Specifications, so as to achieve the minimum screening height within 3 years of planting; 
B.  Berms Berms meeting the requirements of Section 5.5.6, Plant Material Specifications; 
C.  Fencing Opaque fence constructed of treated wood, rot-resistant wood (such as cypress or redwood), plastic, or vinyl; 
D.  Walls   
1.  Masonry wall constructed of brick, textured concrete masonry units, or stuccoed block; or 
2.  Walls of a principal or accessory structure. 
5.6.7. - Prohibited Screening Materials 
Chain-link fencing with woven slats of opaque materials is not an allowable method for screening compliance. 
5.7. - Signage 

5.7.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this section is to support and complement the various commercial and nonresidential uses through regulations concerning the placement, number, location, size, appearance, illumination, and animation of signs. The erection of signs is controlled and regulated in order to promote the health, safety, welfare, convenience, and enjoyment of travel on streets. The provisions of this section are more specifically intended to: 
A.  Promote the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs, displays, and devices; 
B.  Protect the public welfare as well as land values by preserving the aesthetic qualities of the city's environment; 
C.  Preserve the city's environment from excessive and obtrusive signs; 
D.  Promote the safety of persons and land by providing that signs do not create traffic hazards or hazards due to collapse, fire, collision, decay, or abandonment; 
E.  Promote the efficient transfer of general public and commercial identification or information, and maintain a viable business community throughout the year by improving the legibility and effectiveness of signs; and 
F.  Enhance the image, appearance, and economic vitality of the city. 
5.7.2. - Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to signs erected, affixed, placed, painted or otherwise established, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.7.7, Exempt Signs. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017) 
5.7.3. - Variances 
The sign height and location standards in this section may only be varied in accordance with standards and requirements of Section 2.4.16, Variance. The standards in this section pertaining to sign number, size, illumination, or minimum spacing may not be varied. 
5.7.4. - General Standards 
A.  Area Sign face area and height shall be measured in accordance with the standards in Section 10.2.10, Signage. 
B.  Removal of Signs A sign for which a sign permit has lapsed or has been revoked, or for which the time allowed for the continuance of a nonconforming sign has expired, shall be removed. 
C.  Multiple-Lot Development Signage within a multi-lot development shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  A multiple-lot development shall be considered as a single lot for the purposes of sign review and permitting; 
2.  Signage in a multiple-lot development shall be configured in accordance with Section 5.7.12, Common Signage Plan; 
3.  Signage associated with a multiple-lot development shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations governing outparcels and lease lots in the RC district; and 
4.  A development entrance or development identification sign shall be permitted in accordance with the zoning district where it is located. 
D.  Signs in Right-of-Way A sign installed or placed on public land or rights-of-way, except in compliance with this section or under an encroachment agreement with NCDOT or the City, shall be forfeited to the public and be subject to confiscation. 
E.  Obstructions at Street Intersections No sign shall be erected or maintained in a manner that obstructs visibility for motorists at any street intersection in accordance with the standards in Chapter 6: Visibility at Intersections, of the City Code of Ordinances. 
F.  Obsolete Sign A sign which advertises a business no longer conducted on the premises shall be removed within 90 days of cessation of such business. 
G.  Unsafe Sign A sign which is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public shall be removed after due notice is given by the Planning and Development Director. 
H.  Deteriorated or Abandoned Sign A sign which is abandoned or which is not properly maintained, including cleaning and painting of painted surfaces and replacement of damaged parts, shall be removed after due notice is given by the Planning and Development Director. 
I.  Sign Installed Without a Permit A sign which is installed in violation of the State Building Code or in violation of this Ordinance shall be removed after due notice is given by the Planning and Development Director. 
J.  Nonconforming Signs Nonconforming signage shall be subject to the requirements in Section 8.5, Nonconforming Signs. 
K.  Nonconforming Uses New signage for a nonconforming use shall be permitted provided the signage complies with the standards in this section. 
5.7.5. - Design, Construction, and Maintenance 
A sign shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Other Codes A sign shall comply with applicable provisions of the State Building Code and the electrical code. 
B.  Permanence Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs conforming with the requirements of this section, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure. 
C.  Maintenance A sign shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with the building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this section. 
D.  Obstruction A sign shall not be erected so as to obstruct a fire escape, required exit, window, door opening, or wall opening intended as a means of ingress or egress. 
E.  Ventilation Interference A sign shall not be erected so as to interfere with an opening required for ventilation. 
F.  Above Ground Clearance A sign shall be located in such a way that it maintains horizontal and vertical clearance from all electrical power lines and communication lines in accordance with the applicable provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC). 
G.  Ground Clearance A sign and its supporting structure shall maintain clearance from surface and underground utilities, conduits or easements for water, sewage, gas, electricity or communication equipment. In addition, the placement of a sign and its supporting structure shall not interfere with natural or artificial drainageways. 
H.  Interference to Warning or Instructional Sign A sign shall not be erected so as to interfere with any existing warning or instructional sign. 
I.  Minimum Wind Loads A sign, except a sign attached flat against the wall of a building, shall be constructed to withstand minimum wind loads as specified by the State Building Code. 
5.7.6. - Prohibited Signs 
Unless otherwise allowed under this section or this Ordinance, the following signs are prohibited: 
A.  A windblown device such as a pennant, banner, streamer, spinner, balloon, gas filled figure, and other similar device, except as temporary identification for market showrooms and as advertising for a temporary event or special promotion. 
B.  An animated sign, except video wall signs that use changing light to depict action or create special effects. 
C.  A video wall sign, except in the CB district. 
D.  An electronic changeable copy sign, except in the CB, GB, MS, LB, and RC districts. 
E.  A portable sign legible from the public right-of-way, except as allowed in Section 4.5, Temporary Uses, and in Section 5.7.8, Signs Not Requiring A Sign Permit, for temporary signs and A-frame signs. 
F.  A sign which projects over a public right-of-way, except that a wall sign may project not more than 18 inches over a public right-of-way in zoning districts which permit structures to be built at the lot line adjoining the street. 
G.  A sign on a vehicle that is parked in a location which is visible to the public, for a period of time which indicates that the principal use of the vehicle is for advertising rather than transport. 
H.  A sign which is affixed to a tree, rock, or other natural feature. 
I.  A sign of any type which imitates a traffic control device. 
J.  A sign which extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof of any structure. 
K.  A sign on a roadside appurtenance, including but not limited to a roadside bench, bus stop shelter, planter, utility pole, or refuse container. 
L.  A series of 2 or more signs placed in a line parallel to a public or private street, or a series of 2 or more parallel signs carrying a single commercial message. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 8, 4-3-2017) 
5.7.7. - Exempt Signs 
The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this section except that a lighted sign requires an electrical permit: 
A.  A governmental sign. 
B.  Lights and decorations with no commercial message that are temporarily displayed on civic, patriotic or religious holidays. 
C.  A hand carried sign. 
D.  A sign located on the interior of a building, court, lobby, athletic field, stadium, or other structure which is not intended to be seen from the exterior of the building or structure. 
E.  A sign affixed to a vehicle or trailer used on a regular basis for the normal transport of goods or persons. 
F.  A sign affixed to the window of a vehicle which does not exceed the size of the window. 
G.  A sign not legible from a public or private street. 
H.  A flag without a commercial message with an area of not more than 60 square feet. 
I.  A window sign painted on or attached to a window, covering a maximum of 25% of the window area. 
J.  A sign painted on an active public water tower. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 20, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7488/19-05 , § 2, 2-4-2019) 
5.7.8. - Signs not Requiring a Sign Permit 
Signs not requiring a sign permit are allowed only in accordance with the following general and specific standards. 
A.  General Standards for Signs Not Requiring a Permit Signs that include lighting or are illuminated shall be subject to an approved building permit for electrical service. 
B.  Specific Standards for Signs Not Requiring a Permit In addition to the standards in Section 5.7.8 A, General Standards for Signs Not Requiring a Permit, signs not requiring a sign permit shall be subject to the following specific standards. 
1.  Table of Requirements Signs subject to the standards in this section shall comply with the applicable provisions in Table 5.7.8.B, Requirements for a Signs Not Requiring a Sign Permit. 
TABLE 5.7.8.B: REQUIREMENTS FOR A SIGN NOT REQUIRING A SIGN PERMIT 
SIGN TYPE 
NUMBER PERMITTED 
AREA 
(SQ. FT.) 
SETBACK (FEET) 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT (FEET) 
ILLUMI- 
NATION 
Warning signs in residential districts n/a 4 n/a 8 Direct Warning signs in nonresidential districts n/a 6 n/a 8 Direct Historical, memorial markers in all districts 1/lot 4 R/W 6 Indirect Flags, emblems, insignia of corporate, political, professional, fraternal, civic, or educational organization in all districts 1/frontage 60 R/W 40 Indirect Temporary religious, philosophical, or educational signs in all districts 6 R/W 6 Not allowed Temporary real estate, yard sale and construction signs in AGR and R Districts 6 R/W 6 Temporary real estate and construction signs in RM districts, nonresidential districts, and major subdivisions in R districts 100 R/W 12 Temporary political signs in all districts 6 6 R/W 6 Identification signs: name and address plates, home occupations, and building markers 1/building 2/unit R/W 6 A-Frame in CB and MX districts and MS district (sub-district B) 1/building entrance 6 R/W 3 Vending machine, gas pump, ice machine, or similar device signs n/a n/a R/W n/a  
2.  Additional Specific Standards In addition to the standards in Table 5.7.8.B, Requirements for a Sign Not Requiring a Sign Permit, signs subject to the standards in this section shall also comply with the following: 
(a)  A warning sign shall not contain a commercial message, but it may contain a business logo or name. 
(b)  A temporary real estate or construction sign must be removed within 7 days of the end of the completion of construction, sale, or lease of land. 
(c)  A temporary yard sale sign shall be posted for no longer than 3 days per sale. 
(d)  A temporary political sign shall be located on private land with the landowner's permission, and be removed within 7 days after the election. 
(e)  Temporary religious, philosophical, educational, real estate, yard sale, construction, and political signs shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Be located outside the street right-of-way, or at least 6 feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement where no curb exists; 
(2)  Not be placed in public street medians or traffic islands; 
(3)  Not interfere with or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or obstruct safe sight distances at intersections; 
(4)  Not be placed on private land without the consent of the landowner or occupant. 
(f)  An A-frame sign in the CB district, MX district, and sub-district B of the MS district, if: 
(1)  It is displayed only during operational hours of the use and is removed each day at the close of business; 
(2)  There is 1 sign per building entrance that fronts on the primary street, and only 1 sign per nonresidential use; 
(3)  Windblown devices, including but not limited to balloons and streamers, are not attached or otherwise made part of the sign; 
(4)  It does not interfere with safe sight distances for motorists on the adjacent roadways, does not interfere with or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and allows a minimum of 5 feet of clear passage on the sidewalk between the street and the sign; 
(5)  It is not be anchored to the sidewalk or affixed to a pole, vending box, or other structure or appurtenance; and 
(6)  It may be placed on the public sidewalk portion of the public street right-of-way directly in front of the use. 
(g)  A vending machine, gas pump, ice machine, or similar device sign shall be: 
(1)  Painted or adhered to the device; and 
(2)  Indicate only the contents of the machine, the name or logo of the supplier, the price, or operating instructions. 
(Ord. No. 7363/17-106 , § 10, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7488/19-05 , §§ 3, 4.A, 4.B, 2-4-2019) 
5.7.9. - Freestanding Signs Requiring a Sign Permit 
A freestanding sign requiring approval of a sign permit in accordance with Section 2.5.13, Sign Permit, shall comply with the following general and specific standards: 
A.  General Standards for Freestanding Signs Requiring a Permit   
1.  Location Standards   
(a)  It shall be allowed only on a lot with an existing principal use. 
(b)  If greater than 6 feet in height, it shall not be located within 100 feet of a residential district. 
(c)  Where 2 or more establishments at the same location receive approval of directional signs, the signs shall share the same support structure. 
2.  Illumination Standards   
(a)  Residential Districts   
(1)  Indirect illumination of a freestanding sign is allowed in all residential districts. 
(2)  Direct illumination of a freestanding sign in a residential district requires a special use and is subject to the following standards: 
(i)  It must be for a permitted nonresidential use; 
(ii)  The nonresidential use and sign must front on a thoroughfare; and 
(iii)  Illumination of the sign must be needed for identification of the nonresidential use due to the use's non-daylight activities. 
(b)  Nonresidential Districts   
(1)  Indirect illumination of a freestanding sign is allowed in all nonresidential districts. 
(2)  Direct illumination of a freestanding sign is allowed in the AGR, LB, GB, RC, CB, MS, MX, LI, and HI districts. 
(3)  In the TO, OI, and EC districts, direct illumination of a freestanding sign is allowed if it is limited to cut-out letter and shielded silhouette lighting. 
(4)  Direct illumination of a freestanding sign in the I and PNR district requires a special use. Illumination of the sign must be needed for identification of the use due to the use's non-daylight activities. 
B.  Specific Standards for Freestanding Signs Requiring a Permit In addition to the standards in Section 5.7.9 A, General Standards for Freestanding Signs Requiring a Permit, freestanding signs requiring a permit shall be subject to the following specific standards: 
1.  Table of Requirements Signs subject to the standards in this section shall comply with the applicable provisions in Table 5.7.9.B, Requirements for a Freestanding Sign Requiring a Sign Permit. 
TABLE 5.7.9.B: REQUIREMENTS FOR A FREESTANDING SIGN 
REQUIRING A SIGN PERMIT 
ZONING DISTRICT 
OR SIGN TYPE 
MAXIMUM NUMBER 
PER LOT 
FRONTAGE 
AREA (SQ FT) 
SETBACK FROM ROW (FEET) 
MAX HEIGHT (FEET) 
AREA 
COMPUTATION (SQUARE FEET PER EACH LINEAR FOOT OF LOT FRONTAGE) 
MAX 
MIN [1] 
SIGN STANDARDS BY ZONING DISTRICT AGR district (nonresidential uses only) 1 50 n/a n/a 10 n/a All R and RM districts and PNR districts (nonresidential uses only) 1 50 n/a n/a 6 n/a I and TO districts 1 100 12 n/a 6 0.25 OI, LB, and EC districts 1 100 25 n/a 15 0.25 MS District A, C & D sub-districts 1 150 50 n/a 15 1.0 B sub-district 1 75 50 n/a 6 1.0 MX district 1 40 n/a n/a 6 n/a LI and HI districts 1 200 [2] 75 n/a 30 [3] 1.0 GB District outparcel & lease lot 1/parcel 50 n/a n/a 6 NA all other lots 1 200 [2] 75 n/a 30 [3] 1.0 CB district 1 100 50 n/a 6 1.0 RC District outparcel & lease lot 1/parcel 50 n/a n/a 6 n/a all other lots 1/lot 100 50 n/a 6 0.5 development identification sign 1/street frontage 200 n/a 10 30 [3] n/a playbill sign 1/theater complex 200 n/a 10 30 n/a SIGN STANDARDS BY SIGN TYPE Banners for special events (all districts) 1/500 ft frontage 25 n/a n/a 20 n/a Development entrance signs (all districts) 1 pair/ entrance 50/ entrance n/a n/a 6 n/a Identification signs (all districts) 1/building entrance 20 n/a 15 10 n/a Instructional signs (all districts) n/a 6 n/a n/a 8 n/a Portable signs for special events (all districts) 1/lot 32 n/a n/a 6 n/a Special promotion signs (all districts) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a NOTES: [1] "Minimum" sign area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of the size which would be allowed by computation [2] The maximum area may be increased by 75 feet if the sign is within 400 feet of an interstate highway ROW [3] Maximum sign height may be increased to 50 feet if the sign is within 400 feet of an interstate highway ROW provided there are no government sponsored logo signs installed  
2.  Specific Standards By District   
(a)  CB District   
(1)  Maximum height may be increased to 15 feet if the sign is a monument sign; 
(2)  A maximum of 3 signs per lot shall be permitted; 
(3)  The area and height of 1 freestanding sign may be increased provided that: 
(i)  No wall sign shall be permitted or erected on the same side of the building. This is deemed to include all sections of the building wall parallel with or within 45 degrees of parallel with the lot line or street ROW; 
(ii)  The sign face is placed parallel to the building, and is located such that it does not impair vehicular sight distance from driveways or along public streets; 
(iii)  The area of the freestanding sign does not exceed 50 percent or 150 square feet, whichever is smaller, of the area of wall signage that would be permitted on the side of the building where the freestanding sign is to be located. The wall signage calculation shall include all sections of the building wall parallel with or within 45 degrees of parallel with the property line or street right-of-way line; and 
(iv)  The height of the freestanding sign does not exceed 40 feet or the height of the building (or average height where variations in height occur), whichever is less. 
(b)  GB District Under no circumstance shall there be more than 1 freestanding sign per principal building. 
(c)  MS and MX Districts Freestanding signs must be monument type signs only. 
3.  Specific Standards By Sign Type   
(a)  Development Entrance Sign (All Districts)   
(1)  May be erected in the public right-of-way with an encroachment agreement. 
(2)  Only permitted in subdivisions, developments of over 15,000 square feet of gross floor area, multi-family developments of more than 8 units in a single building, or developments with more than 40,000 square feet in open air uses of land. 
(3)  The entrance sign may identify only the name of the development, management or developer, and/or address or location of development. 
(b)  Development Identification Sign in the RC District   
(1)  Sign may identify only the name of the shopping center and the tenants. Maximum sign height may be increased by 5 feet and maximum area may be increased by 50 square feet if a permitted freestanding playbill sign is combined with the development identification sign. 
(2)  Up to 1 additional freestanding sign may be allowed provided: 
(i)  The lot frontage exceeds 1,000 linear feet; 
(ii)  The maximum area for either sign does not exceed 200 sf; and 
(iii)  The additional sign is more than 250 feet from any other freestanding sign on the same lot or any freestanding sign on an adjoining lot. 
(3)  Sign area shall be allowed as follows: 
(i)  Up to 200 sf for centers with 2 to 15 tenants; and 
(ii)  Up to 300 sf for centers with 16 or more tenants. 
(c)  Identification Sign (All Districts)   
(1)  Includes only directory signs (listing occupants of buildings and their address) in developments with multiple occupants, individual tenant signs, and building name/address signs for buildings with multiple occupants. An individual tenant identification sign may only be erected if there is no wall mounted identification sign present. 
(2)  A directory sign or single tenant identification sign shall, at its closest point, be located within 6 feet of the entrance it is intended to identify. 
(d)  Special Promotion Sign (All Districts) Sign shall be limited in duration to a maximum of 30 continuous days and not more than 3 occurrences in a calendar year. 
(e)  Electronic Changeable Copy Sign Requiring a Permit   
(1)  General Standards   
(i)  Districts Allowed Electronic changeable copy signs shall be permitted only in the CB, GB, MS, LB, and RC districts. 
(ii)  Permit A sign permit shall be required for all new electronic changeable copy signs, and conversions from static signs to electronic changeable copy signs. 
(iii)  Location and Type Electronic changeable copy signs shall be located as a portion of and on the same support structure with a legal conforming accessory freestanding sign. Such signs shall not be added to a sign that is nonconforming, nor shall any part of an existing nonconforming sign be converted to an electronic changeable copy sign. 
(iv)  Size The area of an electronic changeable copy sign shall not exceed 33 percent of the permitted area of a freestanding sign, and shall be counted toward the maximum allowable signage. 
(v)  Height The height maximums shown in Table 5.7.9.B, Requirements for a Freestanding Sign Requiring a Sign Permit, for accessory freestanding signs in the CB, GB, MS, LB, and RC districts shall apply to electronic changeable copy signs. 
(vi)  Number Only 1 electronic changeable copy sign may be permitted per lot. 
(vii)  Brightness   
(A)  Maximum brightness levels for electronic changeable copy signs shall not exceed 5,000 nits during daylight hours and shall not exceed 500 nits between dusk and dawn, as measured from the sign face. 
(B)  Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide a written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed 5,000 nits. 
(C)  All electronic changeable copy signs shall have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness in real-time as ambient light conditions change, so that the sign does not exceed the maximum brightness levels allowed by this section. 
(2)  Personalized Messages The display of personalized "smart" messages that are triggered or initiated by license plate recognition, facial recognition or by reading or analyzing electronic signals from traffic or an individual vehicle, is prohibited unless used in a public emergency or public service capacity. 
(3)  Malfunctions Any electronic changeable copy sign which malfunctions, fails, or ceases to operate in its usual or normal programmed manner, causing therein motion, flashing, movement or an inability to read the text of the message clearly shall be turned off, or shall display a blank screen until repairs can be made. 
(4)  Additional Standards in the CB District The following standards shall apply in addition to the standards in Section 5.7.9 B.3(e)(1), General Standards, above: 
(i)  Location and Type Electronic changeable copy signs in the CB District may be located on a wall or marquee. 
(ii)  Size The area of an electronic changeable copy sign may not exceed 25 percent of the permitted signage area per wall, or 50 percent of the permitted signage area for a marquee. 
(iii)  Height The height maximum in Table 5.7.10.B, Requirements for an Attached Sign Requiring a Sign Permit, for wall and marquee signs shall apply to electronic changeable copy signs. 
(5)  Additional Standards in the GB, MS, RC, and LB Districts The following standards shall apply in addition to the standards in Section 5.7.9 B.3(e)(1), General Standards, above: 
(i)  Display The message displayed shall be static, and complete within itself, with no continuation of content to the next image or message. It shall be no more than four lines of characters or symbols and/or 10 words, to allow passing motorists to read the entire copy with minimal distraction. Changes to the message displayed must be as instantaneous as is technologically feasible, with no flashing, zooming, scrolling, fading in or out, twinkling/sparkling, or other operating mode that imitates movement. 
(ii)  Rate of Change The rate of change for each individual message shall not be faster than 8 seconds. 
(iii)  Color The use of color is not limited, however, the entire text of an individual message shall be the same color, and shall not vary in intensity during its display frame. 
(f)  Video Signs - Freestanding   
(1)  General Standards   
(i)  Districts Allowed Freestanding video signs shall be permitted only for Market showrooms in the CB district, and shall not be permitted on a zone lot that has a video wall sign. The provisions for freestanding signs in the CB district in Section 5.7.9 B.2 Specific Standards By District, and in Table 5.7.9.B. Requirements For A Freestanding Sign Requiring A Sign Permit shall not apply to video signs, which shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
(ii)  Duration of Use Video signs shall be in use only during the period beginning two weeks prior to the official opening of each semi-annual Market and ending two weeks after the official end of each Market. The video unit of such signs shall be removed from the base and stored, or shall be securely covered at other times of the year. 
(iii)  Location Video signs shall be allowed only on a lot with an existing principal use. No part of a freestanding video sign shall be closer than 25 feet from intersecting street rights-of-way. No encroachment by any part of the sign face, its base or support structure into the street right-of-way is permitted. Such signs shall not be incorporated with, or added to, any other freestanding sign, nor shall any other freestanding sign be converted to a video sign. 
(iv)  Orientation It is intended that video signs be pedestrian oriented, and positioned in a manner that minimizes direct view from approaching vehicular traffic. All video signs shall be positioned so that the sign face is parallel to a street right-of-way, except if a sign faces inward (away from the street) and is not readily visible from the street right-of-way. 
(v)  Size The area of a single video sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(vi)  Height Video signs shall be limited to 8 feet in height. 
(vii)  Number One sign per street frontage shall be permitted where street frontage along a single street is between 50 and 199 linear feet. Two signs shall be permitted where street frontage along a single street is 200 linear feet or more. No freestanding video sign shall be permitted where street frontage along a single street is less than 50 linear feet. The maximum number of video signs allowable per zone lot shall be 6, and no more than two signs shall be permitted per street frontage. 
(viii)  Brightness Maximum brightness levels for video signs shall not exceed 2500 nits during daylight hours and shall not exceed 500 nits between dusk and dawn, as measured from the sign face. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall submit the manufacturer's specifications that verify compliance with this section. All freestanding video signs shall have a light sensing device that will adjust brightness in real-time as ambient light conditions change, so that the sign does not exceed the maximum brightness levels allowed by this section. 
(2)  No Other Freestanding Signage Allowed The maximum area of a freestanding sign in the CB district in Table 5.7.9.B. Requirements For A Freestanding Sign Requiring A Sign Permit shall not apply to video signs, however, zone lots having freestanding video signs shall not be permitted to have other freestanding signage, and any existing freestanding signs must be removed. However, except for an attached video sign, other attached signage as allowed in the CB district is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 7286/17-28 , § 2, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7299/17-41 , § 1, 5-15-2017; Ord. No. 7488/19-05 , §§ 5.A-5.E, 2-4-2019) 
5.7.10. - Attached Sign Requiring a Sign Permit 
An attached sign requiring approval of a sign permit in accordance with Section 2.5.13, Sign Permit, shall comply with the following general and specific standards of this subsection: 
A.  General Standards for Attached Signs Requiring a Permit   
1.  Maximum Number of Attached Signs   
(a)  Single-tenant Buildings   
(1)  Except in the CB district, up to 1 attached sign in a single-tenant building is permitted per each building wall that faces a street or parking area. In no instance shall the total number of attached signs on a building exceed four. 
(2)  There are no limits on the total number of attached signs in the CB district. 
(b)  Multi-tenant Buildings   
(1)  Each Tenant Has Own Entrance   
(i)  In a multi-tenant building, each tenant may have 1 sign, the area of which is based on its proportionate share of the building wall facing a street or parking area. 
(ii)  The total area of all signage shall not exceed the total allowed for the building wall. 
(iii)  A common signage plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 5.7.12, Common Signage Plan. 
(2)  Tenant-Shared Entrances Single- or multi-storied buildings with a shared entrance shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  A maximum of four wall signs shall be permitted. 
(ii)  The signs may be grouped on a wall(s) oriented to a street or parking area. 
(iii)  When signs are grouped, the maximum area of each sign shall be computed using the formula in Table 5.7.10.A, Grouped Sign Area Computation: 
TABLE 5.7.10.A: GROUPED SIGN AREA COMPUTATION 
NUMBER OF GROUPED 
SIGNS ON A WALL 
MAXIMUM AREA AVAILABLE 
FOR EACH SIGN (SQUARE FEET) 
2 1.5 × (max. sign area for building wall) / 2 3 2.0 × (max. sign area for building wall) / 3 4 2.5 × (max. sign area for building wall) / 4  
(iv)  Where signs are grouped, a common signage plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 5.7.12, Common Signage Plan. 
2.  Illumination Standards   
(a)  Illuminated attached signs are prohibited in residential districts. 
(b)  In nonresidential districts all signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated. 
(c)  In the TO, OI, I, PNR and EC districts, illumination is limited to cut-out letter and shielded silhouette lighting. 
(d)  Wall signs that face an abutting single-family or duplex use shall be indirectly illuminated only. 
B.  Specific Standards for Attached Signs Requiring a Sign Permit In addition to the standards in Section 5.7.10 A, General Standards for Attached Signs Requiring a Permit, all freestanding signs requiring a permit shall be subject to the following specific standards. 
1.  Table of Requirements Signs subject to the standards in this section shall comply with the applicable provisions in Table 5.7.10.B, Requirements for an Attached Sign Requiring a Sign Permit. 
TABLE 5.7.10.B: REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ATTACHED SIGN REQUIRING A SIGN PERMIT 
SIGN TYPE 
NUMBER 
AREA 
(SQ FT) 
HEIGHT 
(FEET) 
COMPUTATION 
MAX 
MIN [1] 
WALL SIGNS TO, I & PNR districts See 5.7.10.A.1, Maximum Number of Attached Signs n/a 25 top of wall 5% of wall area [2] OI, LB, & EC districts 25 7.5% of wall area [2] GB, RC, CB, MS, MX, LI, & HI districts 50 10% of wall area [2] AWNING, CANOPY, AND MARQUEE SIGNS All nonresidential districts 1/face n/a n/a top of canopy 10% of the canopy, awning, or marquee face SUSPENDED SIGNS All nonresidential districts 1/entrance 6 n/a [2] n/a BANNERS Special events (all districts) 1/500 ft of frontage 25 n/a Top of wall n/a Temporary identification signs for market showrooms (all nonresidential districts) n/a n/a n/a top of wall 50% of wall area SPECIAL PROMOTION SIGNS All districts n/a n/a n/a top of wall n/a IDENTIFICATION SIGNS All nonresidential districts and all nonresidential uses in residential districts 1 when average wall height > 35 feet 75 > 6 feet top of wall 1% of wall area NOTES: [1] "Minimum" sign area refers to the minimum area allowed by right, regardless of the size which would be allowed by computation [2] Based on the first 30 feet in height of the wall on which the sign is attached. Buildings over 30 feet in height may have additional sign area based on 5 percent of the wall area above 30 feet in height, provided the sign is located at or near the top of the building  
2.  Awning, Canopy, and Marquee Signs (All Nonresidential Districts)   
(a)  Signs shall be located at least 9 feet above pedestrian ways and 15 feet above vehicular drives. 
(b)  The sign face shall include the entire area of the canopy, awning, or marquee structure. 
(c)  The total area of all attached signs, whether attached to a wall, canopy, awning, or marquee shall not exceed the total allowed for the building wall. 
(d)  All or any portion of this sign allocation may be affixed to the wall, awning, canopy or marquee, provided that no part of the sign projects above the top of the structure served by the signage. 
3.  Identification Signs (All Nonresidential Districts) The area of identification signs shall be subtracted from the allowable square footage of wall signs for the wall upon which it is placed. 
4.  Multiple Franchised Businesses in a Single Building   
(a)  A business which is the sole occupant (as owner or tenant) of a building and which owns or operates multiple franchised businesses at that building shall be allowed 1 overall business name sign and 1 sign for each franchise, which may be located on the same wall. 
(b)  The maximum area of business name and franchise signs located on the same wall shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Maximum square footage as determined by this Ordinance (as a percent of wall area), plus: 
(i)  Up to 15 percent where 2 franchises exist; or 
(ii)  Up to 30 percent where 3 franchises exist; or 
(iii)  Up to 40 percent where 4 or more franchises exist, provided that these increased maximum permitted areas are applicable to only 1 wall of a building. 
(c)  Other signage may be permitted on this wall but the total area of all signage shall not exceed the applicable maximum under this provision. 
(d)  Multiple signs may be permitted on other walls of the same building provided that the maximum area of such wall signage, as provided under this Ordinance without regard to this provision, is not exceeded. 
(e)  In all cases where more than 1 sign is allowed on the same wall, no single franchise sign shall exceed: 
(1)  60 square feet in area where 2 or 3 franchises exist; 
(2)  50 square feet where four franchises exist; or 
(3)  40 square feet where more than four franchises exist. 
(4)  This provision shall not apply to a multiple tenant commercial building. 
5.  Special Promotion Signs Signs shall be limited in duration to a maximum of 30 continuous days and not more than 3 occurrences in a calendar year. 
6.  Temporary Banners Serving Market Showrooms (All Nonresidential Districts) Banners shall be limited in duration to a maximum of 30 continuous days and not more than 2 occurrences in a calendar year. 
7.  Attached Video Sign   
(a)  Where Allowed Attached video signs shall be permitted only for Market showrooms in the CB district, and shall not be permitted on a zone lot that has a freestanding video sign. The provisions of Section 5.7.10 A.1, Maximum Number of Attached Signs, and Table 5.7.10.B, Requirements For An Attached Sign Requiring A Sign Permit as they relate to the CB district shall not apply to attached video signs, which shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Location It is intended that attached video signs be pedestrian oriented. An attached video sign shall be located flat against a building wall that is parallel to a street, or that faces the interior of a lot. No part of an attached video sign shall be closer than 25 feet from intersecting street rights-of-way. 
(c)  Projection and Height An attached video sign cabinet shall not project from the wall more than 18 inches, and its height shall not be more than 15 feet above ground level. Screens shall not be angled and shall be parallel to the wall. 
(d)  Size The area of an attached video sign shall be counted toward the maximum allowable wall signage, and shall not exceed 25 percent of the maximum allowable wall signage or 60 square feet, whichever is less. 
(e)  Number No more than 1 attached video sign shall be permitted per zone lot. 
(f)  Brightness   
(1)  Maximum brightness levels for attached video signs shall not exceed 2500 nits during daylight hours and shall not exceed 500 nits between dusk and dawn, as measured from the sign face. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall submit the manufacturer's specifications that verify compliance with this section. 
(3)  All attached video signs shall have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness in real-time as ambient light conditions change, so that the sign does not exceed the maximum brightness levels allowed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 21, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7286/17-28 , § 3, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 8, 11-20-2017) 
5.7.11. - Sign for Historic Structures or Properties 
Properties, buildings or other structures that have received Local Historic Landmark status from the Guilford County Historic Preservation Commission (GCHPC) or have an individual listing on the National Register of Historic Places, may be permitted to reconstruct, restore, replicate or replace historic sign structures that otherwise are not permitted by this Ordinance, in accordance with the following. 
A.  Qualification The grounds (in the case of a freestanding sign) and/or the exterior of the structure must be an historic element cited by the National Register designation, or by the Local Historic Landmark designation. Such designation may be for a portion of said grounds or structure. 
B.  Valid Designation The Local Historic Landmark or National Register designation must be currently valid. There must be no outstanding violations of process, or any proposed changes to the property or structures that would jeopardize the designation. 
C.  Guilford County Historic Preservation Commission Certificate of Appropriateness Required If the property is designated as a Local Historic Landmark, the property owner must first obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness (COA) from the GCHPC authorizing, in general, the reconstruction, restoration, replication or replacement of the historic sign, including the type of sign, materials, design and illumination. The GCHPC may make recommendations as to the size and placement of the sign. Any recommended modifications to the requirements of this Ordinance shall be approved by the High Point Historic Preservation Commission (HPHPC). 
D.  High Point Historic Preservation Commission Review and Approval Required If the property is individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and/or located in a Local Historic District and is not designated as a Local Historic Landmark, the HPHPC shall review and decide an application to reconstruct, restore, replicate or replace an historic sign. Such application shall include the following: 
1.  Evidence of the existence (past or present) of the sign, and its location on the structure or property. 
2.  Evidence that the sign was associated with the original or other early use of the structure or property, or that such sign itself has historic significance. 
3.  If being replicated or replaced, evidence showing how the new sign will imitate the former sign. Consideration shall be given to size, design or shape, coloration, lettering style, graphic art style, illumination, and type (i.e. overhanging, roof mounted, wall, freestanding, etc.). At least 5 of the above elements must be found to be comparable to the former sign. Size will be considered comparable if the new sign has the same or smaller area. 
4.  Evidence that the sign will not pose a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular movements, and that the erection of such sign will meet applicable building and electrical codes. 
E.  Conditions of Approval and Modifications Once the sign has been either issued a COA by the GCHPC, or an approval by the HPHPC, the HPHPC shall rule on the erection of the sign in accordance with the following: 
1.  Modifications may be made to height, setback and area of the sign, if it can be shown that the original sign exceeded the requirements of this Ordinance. Modifications shall not exceed the extent of nonconformity of the original sign. 
2.  Consideration may be given to locate a sign other than where the original sign was placed, including on non-designated portions of a Landmark or National Register structure. The sign must be erected or attached to the Landmark or National Register structure, or to an historically relevant structure on the same property. No sign may be located where it poses an unnecessary or unreasonable threat to public safety. 
3.  A sign type not permitted may be approved, but only one such sign shall be allowed, unless it is stipulated that approval is made in place of an otherwise permitted wall or freestanding sign. 
4.  No modifications to the number of signs, spacing or illumination provisions of this Ordinance may be approved. 
(Ord. No. 7488/19-05 , § 6, 2-4-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7488/19-05 , § 6, adopted Feb. 4, 2019, deleted former § 5.7.11 entitled "Outdoor Advertising Sign Requiring a Sign Permit," and further amended the Code by renumbering existing §§ 5.7.12-5.7.14 as §§ 5.7.11-5.7.13. 
5.7.12. - Common Signage Plan 
A.  In General   
1.  Common signage plans shall be required for developments with more than 1 business, building, or lot. 
2.  Common signage plan requirements are set out in the Development Guide. 
B.  Other Provisions   
1.  A common signage plan shall be a part of the application for a site plan, group development plan, PD master plan and may be processed simultaneously with such plan. 
2.  A common signage plan shall be approved prior to the issuance of a building permit(s). 
3.  The Planning and Development Director may approve minor changes to a common signage plan provided such changes comply with all requirements of this section. 
4.  A common signage plan may be amended by filing a new plan which complies with all requirements of this section and the application requirements in the Development Guide. 
5.  After approval of a common signage plan, no signs shall be erected, affixed, placed, painted or otherwise established except in conformance with the approved plan. The plan may be enforced in the same way as any other provision of this section. 
C.  Conflict In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a plan and any other provision of this section, this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 7488/19-05 , § 6, 2-4-2019) 
5.7.13. - Encroachment Agreement for Entrance Sign 
A development entrance sign shall be allowed to encroach into a public right-of-way provided an encroachment agreement between the sign owner and the City in a form determined appropriate by the City Attorney, is accepted. The encroachment agreement shall, at a minimum, provide that: 
A.  Not Compensated for Loss The sign owner shall not be compensated by the City for any loss of or damage to the sign from any cause; 
B.  Removal for Interference The sign owner shall remove the sign at the sign owner's expense if the City determines at any time that the sign interferes with the public use of the right-of-way; 
C.  Maintenance Required The sign owner shall maintain the sign; and 
D.  Insurance Required If the sign projects or is suspended over the public right-of-way, the sign owner agrees to provide insurance or satisfactory indemnification to the City against liability for injury to persons or property from the sign. 
(Ord. No. 7488/19-05 , § 6, 2-4-2019) 
5.7.14. - Savings Clause 
Subject to the property owner's consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted in whole or in part for the message displayed on any sign for which the sign structure or mounting device is legal, without consideration of message content. Any change to the structure or mounting device, or the refacing of a sign shall be subject to the requirements of Section 5.7. Signage, a common signage plan, and permitting, as may be applicable. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, and to prevent favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. 
(Ord. No. 7488/19-05 , § 7, 2-4-2019) 
5.8. - Reserved 
5.9. - Sidewalks 

5.9.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of these standards is to ensure greater pedestrian safety and ease of access for pedestrians in the City in accordance with the City's adopted policy guidance. More specifically the intent of these standards is to: 
A.  Establish Locations Establish the locations where new sidewalks are required to be installed as part of development; 
B.  Promote Walking Promote expanded opportunities for recreational walking and running; 
C.  Meet Daily Needs Help ensure City residents can meet their daily needs without use of an automobile; 
D.  Allow Access Allow easier access to shopping and commercial areas; 
E.  Clarify Timing Clarify the timing of sidewalk installation; and 
F.  Fee In-Lieu Establish provisions for the payment of a fee in-lieu of sidewalk installation when sidewalk installation would conflict with other infrastructure improvements. 
5.9.2. - Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to the following, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.9.3, Exemptions: 
A.  Subdivisions Subdivisions, including group developments. 
B.  New Buildings or Uses New principal buildings or new open uses of land that are subject to a site plan. 
C.  Expansions Individual or collective expansions of existing principal buildings, open uses of land, or off-street parking that are subject to a site plan and that exceed 50 percent. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017) 
5.9.3. - Exemptions 
Sidewalks shall not be required in the following instances: 
A.  Areas Where Sidewalks Do Not Exist Along local and sub-collector residential streets where the TRC finds the following conditions exist: 
1.  The proposed development is within an area consisting predominantly of existing single-family detached residential development, where no sidewalks are present; and 
2.  The character and size of the proposed development will not result in substantial additional pedestrian facility needs; and 
3.  There are no new pedestrian facilities planned that would provide a pedestrian connection to the proposed development. 
B.  Industrial Areas As determined by the Transportation Director, sidewalks are not required along new and existing local and collector streets within industrial areas where all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The proposed development is within an area consisting mostly of industrial uses where the majority of developed parcels do not have sidewalks; 
2.  The character, size, and density of the developments are such that pedestrian demand is expected to be limited; and 
3.  No transit service or greenway route exists or is planned in that location. 
C.  Cul-De-Sac and Dead End Streets Along cul-de-sac streets and permanent dead-end streets of 800 feet or less in length, except when they contain cluster mailbox units. 
D.  Controlled Access Roads Along streets that are designated North Carolina Department of Transportation controlled access facilities. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 9, 11-20-2017) 
5.9.4. - Standards 
A.  General Sidewalks required by this Ordinance shall be constructed along the full length of street(s) that have frontage within or that abut the development. 
B.  Thoroughfare Streets Sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of thoroughfare streets. 
C.  Collector and Sub-Collector Streets   
1.  Sidewalks shall be installed on 1 side of collector and sub-collector streets. 
2.  The TRC may determine, during review of a development application, that a collector or sub-collector street requires sidewalks along both sides of the street if one or more of the following conditions exists: 
(a)  The current or projected average daily traffic volume is greater than 8,000 vehicles per day. 
(b)  The posted speed limit is greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(c)  The street is identified as a pedestrian route on a City sidewalk plan. 
(d)  Other pedestrian safety, access, or circulation needs are identified. 
D.  Local Streets Sidewalks shall be installed along 1 side of local streets, unless other pedestrian safety, access, or circulation needs are identified. 
E.  Side Determination Where sidewalks are required to be installed on only 1 side of a street, the TRC shall determine which side of the street is most appropriate. 
F.  Cluster Mailbox Units Sidewalk access must be provided to all areas that contain cluster mailbox units. 
G.  Configuration The configuration of the sidewalk is subject to the approval of TRC. 
5.9.5. - Additional Zoning District Standards 
In addition to the standards in this section, development subject to these standards shall also address all applicable sidewalk standards in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts. 
5.9.6. - Timing of Installation 
The site plan, subdivision preliminary plat, or group development plan shall address the phasing and timing criteria for the installation of required sidewalks, including a maximum timeframe for completion. 
5.9.7. - Fee in-Lieu of Required Sidewalk Installation 
A.  Conflict Anticipated Where the installation of a sidewalk is required, and the Transportation Director determines that installation at the time of development would conflict with a city, state, or federal roadway project or other utility project, the applicant shall be required to submit a fee in-lieu of sidewalks in accordance with the following: 
1.  Fees shall be in an amount equal to the entire estimated cost of completing the installation, based on current contract unit prices, as approved by the Engineer Services Director. 
2.  All fees collected by the City pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the City's sidewalk revolving fund and used only for construction of sidewalks on the site, or in the street right-of-way abutting the site, for which the fee is collected. 
3.  Use of submitted funds to construct sidewalks shall be coordinated with the appropriate phase of the conflicting roadway project. 
B.  Conflict Eliminated In the event that the conflict necessitating the fee in-lieu is eliminated, one of the following shall occur: 
1.  If the scheduled project is configured with a different alignment, the in-lieu fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
2.  If the scheduled project is a widening of an existing roadway, in-lieu fees for sidewalks shall be used by the City to construct the sidewalk after the widening. 
5.10. - Exterior Lighting 

5.10.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this section is to regulate exterior lighting to ensure the safety of motorists and pedestrians and to minimize adverse effects on adjacent land uses due to excessive light intensity or due to light trespass and glare. 
5.10.2. - Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to zone lots with the following, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.10.3, Exemptions. 
A.  New Buildings or Uses New principal buildings or new open uses of land. 
B.  Expansions In the case of an expansion of an existing building, outdoor use area, or off-street parking lot, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  For individual or collective expansions of 50 percent or less, the standards in this section shall apply only to the expanded portion; or 
2.  For individual or collective expansions that exceed 50 percent, the standards in this section shall be applied to the entire zone lot. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017) 
5.10.3. - Exemptions 
The following are exempted from the standards of this section: 
A.  Special events, special promotion signage, and holiday displays; 
B.  FAA-required lighting on buildings, towers or other structures; 
C.  Security lighting controlled and activated by motion sensor devices for a duration of 15 minutes or less; 
D.  Outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene lanterns or gas lamps; 
E.  Public street lighting; 
F.  Lighting of official government flags; 
G.  Temporary lighting necessary for construction or emergencies, used by construction workers or emergency personnel; and 
H.  Single-family detached, attached, triplex, quadplex, and duplex dwellings, except that these forms of development shall be subject to Section 5.10.4, Prohibited Lighting. 
5.10.4. - Prohibited Lighting 
The following forms of exterior lighting shall be prohibited: 
A.  Traffic Control Signal   
1.  Lighting that imitates an official highway or traffic control light or sign; 
2.  Lighting in the direct line of sight with any traffic control light or sign; 
B.  Flashing or Revolving Flashing, revolving, or intermittent exterior lighting visible from any lot line or public street, except for permitted freestanding or wall signs in accordance with Section 5.7, Signage; and 
C.  High Intensity Lighting High intensity light beams, such as searchlights, laser, or strobe lights, except when used by federal, state, or local authorities, or for special events. 
5.10.5. - Lighting Plan 
A.  Elements to Include Site plans, group development plans, and building permit applications, as appropriate, must indicate the following: 
1.  Fixture type; 
2.  Pole height; and 
3.  Fixture shielding. 
B.  Certification Certification must be provided by the person preparing any plans that the proposed development complies with the exterior lighting standards of this section. 
5.10.6. - General Standards for On-Site Exterior Lighting 
A.  Maximum Illumination Value at Lot Line Exterior lighting shall be designed and located such that the maximum illumination measured in footcandles at ground level at any lot line shall not exceed the standards in Table 5.10.6.A, Maximum Illumination Levels. 
TABLE 5.10.6.A: MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION LEVELS 
ABUTTING USE [1] 
MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION VALUE AT LOT LINE (FOOTCANDLES) 
Residential use or vacant land zoned for residential development 1.0 Institutional use 1.5 Commercial use or vacant land zoned for uses other than residential[2] 2.5 Vehicular use area 2.5 NOTES: [1] See Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table [2] Includes mixed-use development  
B.  Maximum Height Except for outdoor public recreation, outdoor assembly, and similar uses, the height of exterior lighting, whether mounted on poles, walls, or by other means, shall be no greater than 35 feet above grade at the base of the fixture. 
C.  Light Trespass   
1.  All outdoor light fixtures that produce more than 4,050 lumens shall be cut-off fixtures that are located, angled, or shielded to focus light on the intended subject or area and prevent light trespass onto adjacent properties or skyward as depicted in Figure 5.8.5.C, Cut-Off Light Fixtures. The lumen output of a lighting fixture is specified by the manufacturer. 
2.  Exterior lighting devices that produce 4,050 lumens (and need not be cut-off, angled, or shielded) include, but are not limited, to: 
(a)  200 watt standard incandescent; 
(b)  150 watt tungsten-halogen (quartz); 
(c)  50 watt high pressure sodium; 
(d)  50 watt cool white fluorescent; and 
(e)  30 watt low pressure sodium. 
FIGURE 5.8.5.C, CUT-OFF LIGHT FIXTURES

3.  Wall packs shall be cut-off and floodlights shall be shielded (e.g., true cut-off type bulb or light source not visible from off-site) to direct light downward and eliminate light pollution above the facade of a structure. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
5.10.7. - Design Standards for Specific Uses and Site Features 
A.  Awnings Awnings used for building accents over doors, windows, etc., shall not be internally illuminated (e.g.., from underneath or behind the awning) unless the awning material does not allow light to transmit through it. 
B.  Canopy Lighting Lighting under a canopy shall not exceed 30 footcandles and shall be designed to not create glare off-site. This may be accomplished by one or both of the following: 
1.  Recessed fixture incorporating a lens cover that is either recessed or flush with the bottom of the ceiling of the canopy that provides a full cut-off or fully-shielded light distribution. 
2.  Surface mounted fixture incorporating a flat glass that provides a full cutoff or fully-shielded light distribution. 
C.  Outdoor Public Recreation, Outdoor Assembly and Similar Uses All outdoor public recreation, outdoor assembly, and similar lighting fixtures shall be equipped with louvers, shields, or similar devices, and aimed so that light is contained within the primary playing area or performance area and minimizes adverse impacts on traffic safety and residentially-zoned land. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 9, 4-3-2017) 
5.10.8. - Measurement 
Measurement of glare or light trespass shall be accomplished in accordance with the standards in Section 10.2.11, Exterior Lighting. 
5.10.9. - Alternate Lighting Plan 
An alternate lighting plan may be approved by the Planning and Development Director where unreasonable or impractical situations would result from the application of the lighting requirements. Such situations may result from physical constraints, from other constraints, or when federal, state or local law prevents compliance with this Ordinance. Alternate plans or fixtures must provide equal or better performance to meet the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. However, the alternate plan shall meet the requirements of Section 5.10.6 A, Maximum Illumination Value at Lot Line. 
5.11. - Fences 

5.11.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate the location, height, and appearance of fences to protect adjacent properties from the indiscriminate placement of fences, ensure the safety, security, and privacy of land, and ensure that fences are subject to timely maintenance, as needed. 
5.11.2. - Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to all construction or replacement of fences, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.11.3, Exemptions. A fence may only be erected in accordance with Section 2.5.15, Zoning Compliance Permit. 
5.11.3. - Exemptions 
The following are exempted from the standards in this section: 
A.  Temporary fences for construction sites, including but not limited to: fencing necessary for soil erosion and sedimentation control and tree protection. 
B.  The fence height limitations in this section shall not apply to fences built in conjunction with the following: 
1.  Utility Facilities, Major and Minor; 
2.  Landfills, Major and Minor; 
3.  Correctional Facilities; 
4.  Military facilities; or 
5.  Hazardous Waste Disposal Facilities. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 22, 1-17-2017) 
5.11.4. - Locational Requirements 
A.  General   
1.  Fences shall be located outside of the public right-of-way. 
2.  Fences may be located within any required yard or setback. 
B.  In Utility Easements Fences located within utility easements shall receive written authorization from the easement holder. The City shall not be responsible for damage to, or the repair or replacement of, fences that must be removed to access such easements. 
C.  Blocking Natural Drainage Flow A fence shall not be installed so it blocks or diverts a natural drainage flow onto or off of any other land. 
D.  Obstructions at Intersections No fence shall be erected or maintained in a manner that obstructs visibility for motorists at any street intersection in accordance with the standards of Chapter 6 of the City Code, Visibility at Intersections. 
E.  Within the Local Historic Overlay (LHO) A fence constructed within an LHO district shall comply with the requirements in Section 2.4.5, Certificate of Appropriateness, and all applicable LHO district standards. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 10, 4-3-2017) 
5.11.5. - Height Standards 
A.  Measurement Maximum fence height shall be determined in accordance with Section 10.2.12, Fences. 
B.  Residential Uses The maximum fence height for residential uses is as shown in Table 5.11.5.B, Fence Height for Residential Uses. 
TABLE 5.11.5.B: FENCE HEIGHT FOR RESIDENTIAL USES 
LOCATION ON A LOT 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT (FEET) 
Within 15 feet of a thoroughfare or collector street right-of-way 6 Within 15 feet of a local street right-of-way except on corner and double frontage lots 4 On corner lots within 15 feet of any street right-of-way adjacent to the side yard where rear lot lines abut one another [1] 6 On double frontage lots within 15 feet of any street right-of-way along the rear yard as long as the principal structures on both sides of the double frontage lot face the same direction as the double frontage lot principal structure 6 All other locations 8 NOTES: [1] A 6-foot fence shall not encroach into the front yard setback area.  
C.  Nonresidential and Mixed Uses No fence may be erected that exceeds 8 feet in height, unless the fence is 15 feet from a lot line, or it complies with the minimum setback requirements as applied to the principal structure, whichever is greater. 
D.  Athletic Fields Athletic fields, tennis courts, playgrounds, or similar recreational areas abutting a street may include a non-opaque fence with a maximum height of 15 feet, provided the fence is not located within a required landscape area. 
E.  Colleges or Universities College or universities may erect fences with a maximum height of 8 feet in residential districts provided: 
1.  The land is contiguous to and within 350 feet of a campus area of at least 10 acres in area; 
2.  The land is owned by the college or university, at which time the fence may be placed on any part of the lot; 
3.  If the land is not owned by the college or university, a fence easement must be obtained from the landowner. The fence may not be located between the right-of-way and the front of an existing dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , §§ 1, 10, 11-20-2017) 
5.11.6. - Materials 
A.  General The following fencing materials are permitted for fences: 
1.  Masonry or stone; 
2.  Ornamental iron, steel, or aluminum; 
3.  Wood; 
4.  Composite materials designed to appear as wood, metal, or masonry; or 
5.  Chain-link, except where prohibited by this Ordinance. 
B.  Restricted Materials   
1.  Barbed wire, razor wire, concertina wire, and similar materials may only be used in the following instances: 
(a)  Fences for correctional institutions may use barbed, razor, and concertina wire. 
(b)  Fences enclosing livestock may use barbed wire. 
(c)  Fences for other nonresidential uses may use barbed wire, razor wire, and concertina wire provided all of the following are met: 
(1)  The wire portion of the fence shall be at least six feet above the grade; and 
(2)  The wire shall be included in the overall height determination of the fence. 
2.  Fences that carry an electrical current are allowed for the purposes of enclosing livestock (nothing shall prohibit below-ground electrical fences intended for the keeping of pets). 
C.  Prohibited Materials Fences made of debris, junk, rolled plastic, sheet metal, untreated or unpainted plywood, or waste materials, unless the materials have been recycled and reprocessed, for marketing to the general public, as building materials designed to resemble new building materials (e.g., picket fencing made from recycled plastic and fiber). 
5.11.7. - Finished Side 
When a fence is primarily parallel to and within 15 feet of a public street, it shall be configured so that the finished side of the fence faces the street right-of-way other than when required by the State Building Code. For the purposes of this section, the finished side does not include any supporting members or bracing. 
5.11.8. - Maintenance 
Fences shall be maintained in a safe manner plumb (vertical) to the ground. Fences not maintained in a safe manner through neglect, lack of repair, manner of construction, method of placement, or otherwise shall be repaired, replaced, or demolished. 
5.12. - Open Space 

5.12.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this section is to: 
A.  Establish Standards Establish the standards under which development shall set aside a portion of the development area as open space; 
B.  Distinguish Characteristics Distinguish between the characteristics, requirements, and appropriate locations for open space; and 
C.  Establish Ownership Standards Establish minimum ownership and maintenance standards related to open space. 
5.12.2. - Applicability 
The provisions of this section apply to the following developments, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.12.3, Exemptions: 
A.  Outside Core City   
1.  Single-family detached residential subdivisions in the R-7 district greater than 5 acres in area; 
2.  Single-family attached residential developments greater than 5 acres in area; 
3.  Multi-family developments; and 
4.  Development in a PD-P district. 
B.  Inside Core City   
1.  Single-family attached residential developments with 30 or more dwelling units; 
2.  Multi-family developments with 30 or more dwelling units; and 
3.  Development in a PD-CC district. 
5.12.3. - Exemptions 
Open space requirements are exempted for development in the CB, MS, and MX districts. 
5.12.4. - Minimum Open Space Amount 
A.  General Table 5.12.4.A, Minimum Open Space Amount, sets out the minimum open space requirements for development subject to the standards in this section. 
TABLE 5.12.4.A: MINIMUM OPEN SPACE AMOUNT 
TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT 
MINIMUM OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENT 
Single-family detached residential subdivisions of more than 5 acres in area in the R-7 district 850 sf/dwelling unit Single-family attached residential development of more than 5 acres 435 sf/unit Multi-family development Less than 3 acres in area 250 sf/unit 3 or more acres in area 435 sf/unit Development in a PD-P district Residential area with less than 5 units per acre 20% of area Residential area units with 5 to 16 units an acre 15% of area Residential area with 16 or more units an acre 10% of area Nonresidential development 10% of gross floor area Development in a PD-CC district 5% of development area  
B.  Administrative Adjustment The Planning and Development Director is authorized to grant an administrative adjustment to the minimum required amount of open space in accordance with Section 2.5.2, Administrative Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 2, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 3.C, 12-3-2018) 
5.12.5. - Open Space Standards 
A.  Features Counted as Open Space The following features within a development shall be credited towards the open space requirements: 
1.  Environmentally-sensitive lands including water features (drainageways, lakes, streams, etc.), wetlands, floodplains, and protected stream buffers, provided no more than 50 percent of a development's total open space may be located in environmentally-sensitive lands; 
2.  Landscaping areas, including areas containing required landscaping and tree protection areas credited toward landscaping requirements; 
3.  Pedestrian amenities; 
4.  Stormwater management lands, including retention and detention ponds, and bio-retention devices that are designed and improved with pedestrian amenities; 
5.  Farm and forestry lands within the boundary of the development; 
6.  Park lands, trails, and greenways, both public and private; 
7.  Active recreation areas; 
8.  Passive recreation areas; and 
9.  Urban features including: plazas, fountains, courtyards, roof gardens, pedestrian areas, indoor atriums open to public, and public sidewalks at least 6 feet in width with pedestrian amenities. 
B.  Not Counted as Open Space The following areas shall not be counted as open space set-asides: 
1.  Private yards; 
2.  Street right-of-way or private street common area; 
3.  Vehicular use areas, including parking spaces, drive aisles, and private drives; 
4.  Land covered by buildings not designated for active recreational use; and 
5.  Outdoor storage areas. 
C.  Design Except for environmentally-sensitive lands, landscaping, farmland, forestry lands, and urban features, credited open space shall meet the following design standards: 
1.  Access Open space shall be accessible by residents and users of the development by means of a street, private drive, or an all-weather walkway within a common area or easement a minimum of 20 feet in width. 
2.  Configuration   
(a)  Open space shall be at least 24 feet in width and 1,000 square feet in area. 
(b)  Urban features credited towards the requirements in this section shall maintain a minimum width of 24 feet and a minimum area of at least 600 square feet. 
D.  Multi-family Development Multi-family developments with 30 or more dwelling units shall provide an active recreational area as a part of the total credited open space, unless an administrative adjustment is approved by the Planning and Development Director. 
E.  Multi-Phase Developments Open space shall be provided for each phase of a phased development in a cumulative amount sufficient to satisfy the open space requirements for the subject phase of development and all preceding phases of development. 
F.  Incentives for Active Recreational Features When provided by the developer, an allowable active recreational feature and the land associated with the feature may be located within an environmentally sensitive area and counted towards the requirements in Table 5.12.4.A, Minimum Open Space Amount, above and beyond the maximum amount allowed in Section 5.12.5 A.1, Features Counted as Open Space. 
G.  Ownership and Maintenance Open space areas shall be owned and maintained in accordance with Section 7.3, Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 23, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 3.D, 12-3-2018) 
5.13. - Reserved 
5.14. - Development Types 

5.14.1. - General 
A.  Purpose and Intent The standards in this section are intended to establish additional design and development standards for certain types of development that pose unique characteristics of use, configuration, or both. More specifically, these standards are intended to: 
1.  Recognize that some forms of development are unique and require additional standards not typically applied to other forms of development; 
2.  Promote a strong sense of place and pedestrian-friendly development through visual design interest and human-scale site design; 
3.  Accommodate greater housing choice and options within infill and redevelopment contexts in the Core City area; 
4.  Address the impacts and compatibility of large-scale retail developments; and 
5.  Establish requirements for appropriate retail development in street intersection contexts. 
B.  Development Types Distinguished The following development types are hereby established: 
1.  Conservation subdivision; 
2.  Corner retail; 
3.  Large retail; 
4.  Multiple lot development; 
5.  Pocket neighborhood; and 
6.  Tiny home neighborhood. 
C.  Applicability When an applicant indicates, or the Planning and Development Director finds that a proposed development is consistent with one or more of the development types in this section, the standards in this section shall be applied. 
D.  Time of Review Review of proposed development to ensure compliance with the standards of this section shall occur during review of a site plan, group development plan, preliminary plat, or building permit, as appropriate. 
E.  Compliance with This Ordinance Development types listed in this section shall comply with the appropriate standards in this section as well as all other applicable standards in this Ordinance. 
F.  Conflict In the event of a conflict between the applicable standards in this section and other standards in this Ordinance, the standards in this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 7399/18-28 , § 1, 3-19-2018) 
5.14.2. - Conservation Subdivision 
A.  Purpose and Intent The purpose and intent of this section is to provide landowners in the AGR and R-3 districts a development option that provides additional development flexibility to build on smaller lots when additional open space set-asides are provided, and the development is designed and located in a way that protects the agricultural activities or natural and historic features on the site. This is done in order to: 
1.  Conserve Open Land Conserve open land, including those areas containing productive agricultural soils, unique and sensitive natural features such as floodplains, wetlands, river and stream corridors, areas with mature hardwood trees, and watersheds; 
2.  Retain and Protect Natural Resources Retain and protect existing environmental, natural, and cultural resources; 
3.  Link Open Spaces Create a linked network of open lands; 
4.  Promote Rural Character Promote existing rural character within the AGR and R-3 districts; and 
5.  Provide Reasonable Use of Land Provide reasonable economic use of the land. 
B.  Applicability This conservation subdivision option shall be used for single-family detached subdivisions of 4 or more lots in the AGR and R-3 districts. 
C.  Procedure Development utilizing the conservation subdivision option shall be approved as a preliminary plat in accordance with the procedures and standards in Section 2.5.11, Preliminary Plat, after approval of a conservation and development plan in accordance with this section. 
1.  Conservation and Development Plan Prior to review of an application for preliminary plat for a conservation subdivision, an applicant shall have a conservation and development plan for the land reviewed and approved, or approved with conditions by the Planning and Development Director in accordance with this section and the standards of Section 5.14.2 D, Conservation Subdivision Standards, and Section 5.14.2 E, Delineation of Conservation Areas and Development Areas. 
2.  Conservation and Development Plan Requirements   
(a)  Step 1-Site Analysis Map The applicant shall prepare a site analysis map that provides information about existing site conditions and context, and that comprehensively analyzes existing conditions both on the land proposed for the development site and on land within 500 feet of the site, and submit the site analysis map to the Planning and Development Director. It is the intent of this section that the information required to be presented in the site analysis map be produced primarily from existing sources, maps, and data. 
(b)  Step 2-Site Inspection After receipt of the site analysis map, the Planning and Development Director shall schedule a site inspection of the land with the applicant. The applicant or the applicant's representative shall attend the site inspection with a Planning and Development Department staff member. The purpose of this site visit is to: 
(1)  Familiarize the staff with the existing site conditions and natural and historic features of the site; 
(2)  Identify potential site development issues; and 
(3)  Provide an opportunity to discuss site development concepts, including the general layout of conservation areas and potential locations for proposed structures, utilities, streets, and other development features. Comments made by the staff during the site inspection shall be interpreted as being only suggestive. No official decision on the conservation and development plan shall be made during the site inspection. 
(c)  Step 3-Conservation and Development Areas Map Based on the site analysis map and the information obtained during the site inspection, the applicant shall prepare a conservation and development areas map that depicts proposed primary conservation areas, secondary conservation areas, and development areas, in accordance with Section 5.14.2 E, Delineation of Conservation Areas and Development Areas. 
(d)  Step 4-Conservation and Development Plan Based on the site analysis map, the information obtained during the site inspection, and the conservation and development areas map, the applicant shall prepare and submit to the Planning and Development Director a conservation and development plan. The conservation and development plan shall include the following: 
(1)  A site analysis map; 
(2)  A conservation and development areas map; and 
(3)  A preliminary site improvements plan, showing proposed site development, including utilities, streets, other development features, buffers (if applicable), and lot lines located in the proposed development area(s). 
3.  Review of Conservation and Development Plan The Planning and Development Director shall review the conservation and development plan in accordance with the procedures and requirements of Section 5.14.2 D, Conservation Subdivision Standards, and Section 5.14.2 E, Delineation of Conservation Areas and Development Areas. 
4.  Review and Approval of Conservation Subdivision Following review and approval or approval with conditions of the conservation and development plan by the Planning and Development Director, the application for a preliminary plat of the conservation subdivision shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with Section 2.5.11, Preliminary Plat. 
D.  Conservation Subdivision Standards A conservation subdivision shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Location Conservation subdivisions shall be limited to the AGR and R-3 districts. 
2.  Minimum Project Size Conservations subdivisions shall be at least 10 acres in area. 
3.  Required Conservation Area The amount of the conservation area may vary in the AGR or R-3 districts in accordance with the dimensional standards in Section 3.5.2, Agricultural/Rural (AGR), and Section 3.3.2, Residential Single Family - 3 (R-3) as appropriate, but in no instance shall the conservation area occupy less than 50 percent of the total acreage of the conservation subdivision site. 
4.  Maximum Residential Density A conservation subdivision shall be limited to the maximum density for a conservation subdivision in the district in which it is located. 
5.  Dimensional Requirements Lots within a conservation subdivision are not required to meet the minimum dimensional requirements for the zoning district where located, but the conservation subdivision, as a whole, shall comply with the requirements in this section. 
6.  Setbacks Lots in a conservation subdivision shall not be subject to minimum yard setback standards, except as required from streets, wetlands/surface waters, or other protected natural areas. 
7.  Maximum Lot Coverage Conservation subdivisions shall ensure that development on a lot does not exceed a maximum lot coverage of 60 percent. 
8.  Low Impact Design Conservation subdivisions shall incorporate low impact design features, in accordance with Section 6.2.10, Low Impact Design, where practicable. 
E.  Delineation of Conservation Areas and Development Areas The conservation area and development area on the conservation and development areas map shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Primary Conservation Areas   
(a)  Features to be Preserved The following features shall be located and delineated on the conservation and development areas map, and shall be preserved in the following priority order as primary conservation areas: 
(1)  Wetlands and wetland buffers; 
(2)  Protected critical watershed areas; 
(3)  Rivers and streams; 
(4)  Riparian buffers; 
(5)  Habitat utilized by endangered or threatened species; and 
(6)  Steep slopes (slopes greater than 25 percent). 
(b)  Amount to be Preserved All areas occupied by features comprising a primary conservation area shall be set aside and reserved for conservation purposes in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Primary Conservation Area is Less than Minimum Required In cases where the geographic area occupied by all features comprising the primary conservation area is less than the minimum required conservation area, then all lands comprising the primary conservation area shall be set aside. 
(2)  Primary Conservation Area Exceeds the Minimum Required   
(i)  In the event the geographic area of all features identified and prioritized as the primary conservation area results in a primary conservation area exceeding the conservation area requirement (for example, conservation of the first type of prioritized features constitute 47 percent of a site, and the next prioritized feature consists of 5 percent and the minimum required conservation area is 50 percent of the site area, the applicant may identify which portions of the features exceeding the 50 percent conservation area requirement will be designated for conversion to development area). To the maximum extent practicable, priority for retention shall be given to the highest quality portion of the features to be conserved. 
(ii)  Development on lands made available for conversion to development area shall be in accordance with the standards in this Ordinance. 
(c)  Allowable Uses Uses located within a primary conservation area shall be limited to: 
(1)  Unpaved pedestrian trails, walkways, and boardwalks; 
(2)  Above ground and below ground public utilities and associated easements, provided no feasible alternative exists; 
(3)  Street or driveway crossings, provided such crossings do not violate this Ordinance, or other State or Federal laws; and 
(4)  Stormwater management systems, where no practicable alternative exists. 
2.  Secondary Conservation Areas   
(a)  Features to be Preserved In addition to primary conservation areas, the conservation and development areas map shall also identify secondary conservation areas, which shall be preserved in the following priority order: 
(1)  Historic, archeological, and cultural resources; 
(2)  Prime agricultural lands, including existing pastures (whether in use or otherwise); 
(3)  Existing and mature woodland forests, natural fields, and meadows (especially those greater than 5 acres); 
(4)  Scenic corridors and views; and 
(5)  Areas that could serve to extend existing greenways, trails, parks, or recreation areas. 
(b)  Amount to be Preserved All areas occupied by features comprising a secondary conservation area shall be set aside and reserved as a part of the conservation area in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Primary Conservation Area Occupies More than that Required In the event that the geographic area set aside as the primary conservation area is more of the required conservation area, no additional lands occupied by secondary conservation features shall be required to be included in the conservation area. 
(2)  Primary Conservation Area Occupies Less than that Required In the event the geographic area set aside as the primary conservation area is less than the required conservation area, then lands containing secondary conservation features shall also be set aside as part of the conservation area in priority order. 
(c)  Allowable Uses Uses located within a secondary conservation area shall be limited to: 
(1)  All uses allowed in a primary conservation area; 
(2)  Uses allowed in the Agricultural Use classification in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table; 
(3)  Individual or community water supply and septic systems; 
(4)  Stormwater management systems; 
(5)  Required drainage or other utility easements; 
(6)  Mitigation of development activities, including restoration of disturbed or degraded areas to enhance habitat and scenic value. 
3.  Ownership   
(a)  Landowner or Association A conservation area shall be owned jointly or in common by the owners of the development or through a recognized homeowners or property owners association, which shall be established in accordance with Section 7.3, Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
(b)  Nonprofit Organization The landowners may decide to convey a conservation area to a nonprofit organization such as a land trust or land conservancy for management and maintenance if the City is provided adequate assurance the area will be properly managed and maintained. 
(c)  Dedicated to City or Other Public Agency In some cases, certain lands designated as conservation areas, such as greenways, may be dedicated to the City, a nonprofit organization, or other public agency during the development review process, at the landowner's discretion. If offered by the landowner, the City Council shall determine whether that land is appropriate for dedication to the City or other public agency. 
4.  Development Areas After identifying the primary and secondary conservation areas, the development area shall be identified. It is the area within which development may occur, and shall include the area within the site where: 
(a)  Any clearing or grading activities will take place; 
(b)  Ingress and egress will be located; 
(c)  Individual or community wells and septic systems may be located (if not located within the secondary conservation area); 
(d)  Streets, utilities, and other similar structures will be located; and 
(e)  All allowable uses may be located. 
5.14.3. - Corner Retail 
A.  Purpose and Intent The corner retail development type is proposed to establish standards to facilitate the placement of small-scale, low-intensity, neighborhood serving retail sales, eating establishments, and personal services uses on corner lots within and adjacent to higher density residential and transitional areas. 
B.  Applicability Minor restaurants, minor personal service, and minor retail sales are only permitted in the RM-26 and TO districts as a corner retail development type, provided the proposed development complies with the standards of this section. 
C.  Standards   
1.  Corner Lot Required A corner retail use may only be established on a lot that abuts 2 or more streets, not including alleys. 
2.  Maximum Building Size The building housing the corner retail use shall have a maximum gross ground floor area of 5,000 square feet. 
3.  Maximum Building Height The corner retail use shall be limited to a maximum of 50 feet in height. 
4.  Maximum Street Setbacks   
(a)  The corner retail use shall be configured so that structure is located within 5 feet of the street right-of-way abutting the front lot line. 
(b)  Street setbacks may be increased up to a maximum of 25 feet when the area between a building facade and the adjacent street is used for outdoor seating or outdoor dining. 
5.  Site Standards   
(a)  Drive-Throughs Drive-through lanes and windows are prohibited. 
(b)  Off-Street Parking In cases where off-street parking areas directly abut a single-family detached dwelling, an opaque fence or wall with a minimum height of 6 feet shall be located between the parking area and the adjacent dwelling. 
(c)  Bicycle Parking The corner retail use shall provide a minimum of 2 dedicated bicycle spaces configured in accordance with the requirements in Section 5.4.5, Bicycle Parking Requirements. 
(d)  Outdoor Storage and Display   
(1)  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
(2)  Outdoor display of goods for sale is permitted in accordance with Section 4.4.5 K, Outdoor Display, except that products displayed must be removed from the outdoor display area at the close of business. 
(e)  Outdoor Seating Areas Outdoor seating areas are encouraged to be located between a building facade and an abutting street. They shall not be located along lot lines that are adjacent to a single-family detached dwelling. 
(f)  Signage   
(1)  Signs shall comply with the signage standards in Section 5.7, Signage, for the Transitional Office (TO) district. 
(2)  Free-standing shall comply with the following: 
(i)  Free-standing signs may only be used if the street setback is more than 5 feet; 
(ii)  The sign shall be a monument type sign; 
(iii)  The sign shall be limited to a maximum area of 75 square feet; and 
(iv)  The sign shall be limited to a maximum height of 6 feet. 
6.  Building Standards   
(a)  Facade Transparency   
(1)  The ground floor front facade shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 50 percent of the façade area between 2 and 8 feet above average grade. 
(2)  Ground floor side facades facing a street shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 40 percent of the façade area between 2 and 8 feet of the floor. 
(3)  Upper stories on front and side facades facing a street shall maintain non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 20 percent of the upper story facade area per floor as measured between 2 and 8 feet. 
(b)  Awnings or Overhangs The corner retail use shall incorporate awnings, overhangs, or other forms of suitable weather protection for pedestrians along the front facade of the building. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 24, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 5, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 2.C, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 10.D, 12-3-2018) 
5.14.4. - Large Retail 
A.  Applicability These standards shall apply outside the Core City to all new commercial uses in the Commercial Use classification in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table that have: 
1.  A gross ground floor area of more than 50,000 square feet for a single tenant; or 
2.  A gross ground floor area of more than 150,000 square feet serving multiple tenants, including outparcels. 
B.  Development Standards Development subject to the requirements of this section shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  General   
(a)  Facades that face a street, parking lots on the interior of the site, or other areas that are interior to the site shall have articulation along at least 60 percent of the ground floor facade, in accordance with Section 5.14.4 B.3(a), Facade Articulation. This requirement includes the facade of the building that functions as the rear, yet faces a street (see Figure 5.14.4.B, Facade Facing a Street). 
FIGURE 5.14.4.B, FACADE FACING A STREET

(b)  The building facade containing the primary entrance shall be considered the primary facade. 
(c)  Minimum street setbacks may be reduced to 10 feet if the development meets all required and recommended standards of this section. 
(d)  Within developments with multiple buildings, building heights shall be varied to avoid the appearance of an elongated building mass. This can be achieved by stair-stepping building heights or by varying roof forms. 
2.  Site Standards   
(a)  Compliance with Multiple Lot Development Standards Large retail development configured as a multiple building development shall comply with the standards in Section 5.14.5, Multiple Lot Development, in addition to the standards for a large retail development type. 
(b)  Building Location and Orientation   
(1)  Street Corner Location Buildings placed at a street corner should be designed to address both street frontages in an "L" configuration. 
(2)  Multi-building Development   
(i)  Buildings should be located and configured so as to enclose parking areas. 
(ii)  Buildings should include a consistent level of architectural styling and facade articulation on facades facing streets, internal drives, parking lots, or pedestrian amenities. 
(c)  Pedestrian Areas A portion of the spaces between or along the frontages of the buildings should include pedestrian areas such as small plazas, patios, or central gathering spaces with pedestrian amenities. The pedestrian amenities include but are not limited to: seating, outdoor play areas, bicycle racks, kiosks, water features, public art, freestanding structures such as a clock tower, or similar amenities. 
(d)  Loading Docks and Loading Bays Loading docks and loading bays shall: 
(1)  Be located towards the rear of buildings, or located internally within multi-building developments; 
(2)  Not face or be adjacent to streets, to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(3)  Meet the minimum requirements of Section 5.6, Screening. 
(e)  Accessory Buildings Accessory buildings shall comply with the standards in Section 4.4, Accessory Structures and Uses, and use the same materials and architectural styling as the principal building they serve. 
3.  Building Standards   
(a)  Facade Articulation Walls requiring articulation must use 2 or more of the following features: 
(1)  Recessed entryways; 
(2)  Display windows; 
(3)  Window indentations (such as but not limited to double-hung, stationary, or casement windows) that are regularly spaced and that incorporate a differing building material, texture, color, awnings, window hoods, or canopies. This shall not include a glass curtain wall or flush mounted glass; 
(4)  Offset surfaces, niches, insets, projections, or bas-relief with a minimum depth of 4 inches; 
(5)  Columns, pilasters, piers, architectural boxing, or other technique to break the facade into different volumes; 
(6)  Textured materials (such as but not limited to brick or stone); 
(7)  Roofline changes, coupled with correspondingly aligned wall offset or facade material changes, changes in the roof planes, or changes in the height of a parapet wall; or 
(8)  Changes in wall plane (such as projections or recesses) with an offset or depth of at least 1 foot and a width of at least 10 feet, located a minimum of every 30 feet. 
(b)  Facade Materials   
(1)  Where 2 or more materials are proposed to be combined on a facade, the heavier and more massive elements should be located below the lighter elements (e.g., brick shall be located below stucco). Heavier materials may also be placed as a detail on the corner of a building or along cornices or windows. 
(2)  Primary facade materials should not change at outside corners, and should continue around the corner to a logical point of conclusion such as a window or change in facade plane. 
(3)  Exterior building materials shall be continued to the finished grade on any elevation. 
(4)  Building facades utilizing smooth-faced concrete block, or unfinished or untreated tilt-up concrete panels, shall be limited to building facades not visible from public streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(5)  The use of vinyl siding or corrugated and other vertical metal siding as the sole or primary facade material is prohibited. 
(c)  Façade Transparency When provided, ground floor windows shall maintain non-reflective, transparent glass between 3 feet and 8 feet of the floor. 
(d)  Primary Entrances The primary entrance shall be clearly defined and incorporate the following features: 
(1)  Multi-Tenant Buildings   
(i)  Overhangs, awnings, canopies, or other projections of at least 8 feet, from the building wall; 
(ii)  Windows within or beside entry doors that allow entrants to see into the building. 
(2)  Single Tenant Buildings Distinctive roof forms, towers, gables, roof ridges, peaks, or other features that differ in height by 3 feet or more from the balance of the roof. Outparcels are exempt from this standard. 
(e)  Roof-Mounted Equipment   
(1)  Flat roofs shall incorporate parapet walls designed to screen the roof and roof-mounted equipment from view from the primary street fronting the building and any abutting side street as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. The parapet wall should be finished in the same or similar material and color as the building. 
(2)  For sloped roofs, roof-mounted equipment and other roof penetrations should be located and screened to have a minimal visual impact as seen from the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet. 
(3)  In cases where complete screening is not practicable, all roof- mounted equipment and other roof penetrations shall be camouflaged through the use of paint or architectural techniques to minimize its appearance. 
(4)  Green roofs, which use vegetation to improve stormwater quality and reduce runoff, are exempt from the screening requirements described in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 2.D, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 10.E, 12-3-2018) 
5.14.5. - Multiple Lot Development 
The purpose of this section is to allow a unified designed and functioning development with multiple lots, pursuant to a preliminary plat approved in accordance with Section 2.5.11, Preliminary Plat, and a final plat in accordance with Section 2.5.7, Final Plat, provided the development complies with the standards of this section. 
A.  Applicability To qualify as a multiple lot development, the development must: 
1.  Contain 2 or more nonresidential uses designed to function as a unified development; and 
2.  Contain all of the following: 
(a)  Common private streets or drives; 
(b)  Common off-street parking; 
(c)  A common signage plan; and 
(d)  A common landscape plan. 
B.  Common Features   
1.  An approved multiple lot development shall be treated as a single zone lot for the purposes of providing required off-street parking, required landscape yards, required street access, compliance with zoning district dimensional standards, and compliance with signage standards. 
2.  Compliance with the off-street parking and street access requirements are met by considering the development as a whole and not on an individual lot basis. 
3.  Compliance with the landscaping standards are met if the required perimeter landscape yards are provided along the multiple lot development perimeter and all parking lot landscaping requirements are met. 
C.  Establishment The establishment of a multiple lot development occurs through the approval of a preliminary plat and a final plat. 
1.  The preliminary plat shall illustrate that the development will have common private streets or drives and common parking. 
2.  Prior to the approval of a final plat, the proposed development must have approved common signage and common landscape plans. 
3.  The final plat must be recorded displaying a prominent note identifying it as a multiple lot development and explaining that the property must be developed with common private streets or drives and off-street parking and be subject to a common signage plan and common landscaping plan. The note shall further state that should the property cease to conform to the definition of a multiple lot development, the property will then be in violation of this Ordinance and shall be retrofitted with conventional parking and landscaping, even if doing so requires the removal of previously installed improvements. 
5.14.6. - Pocket Neighborhood 
A.  Purpose and Intent The pocket neighborhood development type is proposed to establish standards to facilitate the voluntary development of a group of smaller single-family detached dwellings built in close proximity to one another around a small green or open space with off-street parking areas to the rear or in common areas. This approach is well-suited to small, vacant, infill sites in established neighborhoods. 
B.  Applicability The pocket neighborhood development option is applicable only within the Core City area, in zoning districts that permit single-family detached dwellings. 
C.  Site Configuration   
1.  Development Size It shall be located on a parcel of land at least one-third (?) of an acre and no greater than 4 acres in area, with at least 50 feet of frontage along a public street. 
2.  Allowable Uses Only the following uses shall be allowed: single-family detached dwellings and incidental and subordinate accessory uses, along with a building for the purposes of common storage or recreation, and other common elements. 
3.  Number of Dwellings It shall include at least 4 dwellings but no more than 12 dwellings. In no instance shall the gross density of the development exceed a 10 percent increase in the density of the underlying base zoning district. 
4.  Common Elements   
(a)  It shall include common elements that comprise at least 40 percent of the total site and include open space, improved pedestrian walkways that provide pedestrian access to each dwelling and connect to the public sidewalk network, a shared parking area(s), and a perimeter buffer area that incorporates landscaping materials, existing vegetation, or other features to buffer the pocket neighborhood from adjacent development. 
(b)  The common open space shall include a central green, lawn, or garden area fronting the dwellings, containing at least 375 square feet of area for each dwelling in the development. 
(c)  If a common building is provided, it shall not be larger than 1,500 square feet and shall not be used as a permanent dwelling unit. 
5.  Perimeter Landscape Yard   
(a)  A pocket neighborhood shall incorporate a Type C perimeter landscape yard, in accordance with Section 5.5, Landscaping Standards, where the neighborhood abuts lots with existing single-family detached dwellings. The perimeter landscape yard shall be considered part of the common elements. 
(b)  No individual lot or dwelling unit shall encroach into the perimeter landscape yard. 
6.  Lot Frontage   
(a)  The lots in pocket neighborhoods are exempt from the minimum street frontage requirement for platted lots in Section 7.1.6 B.9, Minimum Street Frontage. 
(b)  At least 60 percent of the individual building lots shall front the common open space area, not a street or alley. 
7.  Off-Street Parking   
(a)  Pocket neighborhoods are exempt from the parking standards in Table 5.4.4.B, Table of Minimum Parking Standards. 
(b)  The pocket neighborhood shall include a shared parking area that accommodates resident and guest parking. 
(c)  Off-street parking areas shall include at least 1 parking space for each dwelling unit plus 1 designated guest parking space for every four dwelling units. 
(d)  Provision of resident parking spaces within a shared parking area is not required in cases where resident parking is provided through individual driveways or by parking spaces along alleys. 
(e)  In no instance shall a parking space be more than 300 linear feet from the dwelling it serves. 
8.  Private Drives Vehicular entryways into pocket neighborhoods and accessways serving off-street parking areas and individual dwelling lots shall be configured as private drives. 
9.  Detached Shared Garages If provided, detached garages serving more than 1 dwelling shall be accessed via a private drive or alley. A garage shall not exceed 5 car bays or include individual garage doors wider than 12 feet each. 
10.  Storage Space Each individual dwelling shall have at least 40 square feet of covered storage space outside the heated floor area. Storage space may be located on an individual lot or on common land adjacent to a common building. 
D.  Individual Lot Configuration   
1.  Each individual lot in a pocket neighborhood shall contain only 1 dwelling unit. Table 5.14.6.D, Pocket Neighborhood Lots, sets out the dimensional requirements for individual lots. 
TABLE 5.14.6.D: POCKET NEIGHBORHOOD LOTS 
FEATURE 
REQUIREMENT 
Minimum lot size (sq ft) None Minimum lot width (ft) 20 Minimum front setback (ft) 10 from common elements; zoning district 
requirement from street [1] Minimum side setback (ft) 3 one side; 15 other side [1] Minimum rear setback (ft) None [2] NOTES: [1] Porch steps, ramps, fences, and walkways may encroach into the front setback in accordance with Section 10.2, Rules of Measurement, but no other structures shall be permitted to encroach into the required setback. [2] When an individual lot includes a driveway, the minimum rear setback shall be 20 feet.  
2.  Use Easement Any lot abutting another lot used for residential purposes in a pocket neighborhood shall be subject to a use easement on one side that extends from the lot line to the exterior wall of the dwelling (see Figure 5.14.6.D1, Use Easement). The purpose for the use easement is to ensure each dwelling has a private outdoor space. 
FIGURE 5.14.6.D, USE EASEMENT

E.  Dwelling Unit Configuration   
1.  Maximum Height A dwelling unit shall not exceed 24 feet above grade. 
2.  Dwelling Size   
(a)  A pocket neighborhood dwelling unit shall have at least 600 square feet of gross floor area, but not more than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  At least 2 dwellings in a pocket neighborhood shall maintain a total square footage that differs by at least 200 square feet in floor area from the average square footage of all other dwellings. Nothing shall prohibit a configuration where all dwellings are different sizes. 
3.  Fences   
(a)  Pocket neighborhoods are exempted from the standards in Section 5.11, Fences. 
(b)  Fences within front yards or side yards forward of the front facade plane shall not exceed 3 feet in height. Fences in rear yards or side yards behind the front facade plane shall not exceed 6 feet in height. 
(c)  In no instance shall a fence be placed within a use or access easement. 
FIGURE 5.14.6.E EXAMPLES OF DWELLING UNIT CONFIGURATION

F.  Homeowner's Association A pocket neighborhood shall have a homeowner's or property owner's association that maintains control of all common elements and is responsible for the maintenance of such elements within the neighborhood. Association documents shall be reviewed by the City prior to approval of the development, and recorded with the development. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 11, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7399/18-28 , §§ 4.A-4.C, 3-19-2018) 
5.14.7. - Tiny Home Neighborhood 
A.  Purpose and Intent The tiny home neighborhood development type is proposed to establish standards to facilitate the voluntary development of a group of very small single-family detached dwellings built in close proximity to one another on minimally sized lots and including common open space. This approach is well-suited to small, vacant, infill sites in established neighborhoods. 
B.  Applicability The tiny home neighborhood development option is applicable only within the Core City area, in zoning districts that permit single-family detached dwellings. 
C.  Site Configuration   
1.  Development Size It shall be located on a parcel of land at least one-fourth (1/4) of an acre and no greater than 2 acres in area, with at least 50 feet of frontage along a public street. 
2.  Allowable Uses Only the following uses shall be allowed: single-family detached dwellings and incidental and subordinate accessory uses, along with a building for the purposes of common storage or recreation, and other common elements. 
3.  Number of Dwellings It shall include at least 4 dwellings but no more than 12 dwellings. 
4.  Common Elements   
(a)  It shall include common elements that comprise at least 40 percent of the total site area that include open space, improved pedestrian walkways that access each dwelling and connect to the public sidewalk network, and a perimeter landscape yard that incorporates landscaping materials, existing vegetation or other features to buffer the tiny home neighborhood from adjacent development. 
(b)  It may include a shared parking area, a common building used for recreation and/or storage, a picnic area, community garden space, or other common amenity. 
(c)  If a common building is provided, it shall not be larger than 1,000 square feet and shall not be used as a permanent dwelling unit. 
5.  Perimeter Landscape Yard   
(a)  A tiny home neighborhood shall incorporate a Type C perimeter landscape yard, in accordance with Section 5.5, Landscaping Standards, where the neighborhood abuts lots with existing single-family detached dwellings. The perimeter landscape yard area shall be considered part of the common elements. 
(b)  No individual lot or dwelling unit shall encroach into the perimeter landscape yard. 
6.  Lot Frontage The lots in tiny home neighborhoods are exempt from the minimum street frontage requirement for platted lots in Section 7.1.6 B.9, Minimum Street Frontage. 
7.  Off-Street Parking   
(a)  Tiny home neighborhoods are exempt from the parking standards in Table 5.4.4.B, Table of Minimum Parking Standards. 
(b)  If provided, off-street parking areas shall meet the standards in Table 5.4.7.E, Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles, and shall meet the paving and maintenance requirement for a private drive accessing a public street (Section 5.4.7 K.3). 
8.  Private Drives Vehicular entryways into a tiny home neighborhood and accessways serving off-street parking areas shall be configured as private drives. 
9.  Fences Fences are permitted only within the perimeter landscape yard and to protect community garden areas, and shall meet the standards of Section 5.11, Fences, except that fences around community garden areas shall be 4 feet or less in height. 
D.  Individual Lot Configuration Each individual lot in a tiny home neighborhood shall contain only 1 dwelling unit. Table 5.14.7.D, Tiny Home Neighborhood Lots sets out the dimensional requirements for individual lots. 
TABLE 5.14.7.D: TINY HOME NEIGHBORHOOD LOTS 
FEATURE 
REQUIREMENT 
Minimum lot area (sq. ft.) None Minimum lot width (ft) None Minimum front setback (ft) 5 from common elements; or zoning district minimum street setback [1] Minimum side & rear setback (ft) 3 Minimum separation between dwelling units (ft) 10 NOTES: [1] Porch steps, ramps, fences and walkways may encroach into the front setback in accordance with Section 10.2, Rules of Measurement, but no other structures shall be permitted to encroach into the required setback.  
E.  Dwelling Unit Configuration   
1.  Maximum Height A tiny home dwelling unit shall not exceed 18 feet above grade. 
2.  Dwelling Size A tiny home dwelling unit shall have less than 600 square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  Dwelling Orientation A tiny home dwelling shall face interior common open space or a street. No dwelling shall face a perimeter landscape yard. 
F.  Homeowner's Association A tiny home neighborhood shall have a homeowner's or property owner's association that maintains control of all common elements and is responsible for the maintenance of such elements within the neighborhood. Association documents shall be reviewed by the City prior to approval of the development, and recorded with the development. 
(Ord. No. 7399/18-28 , § 3, 3-19-2018) 
  
5.15. - Sustainability Incentives 

5.15.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this section is to promote sustainable development practices as a means of protecting and conserving natural resources and ensuring a high quality of life for residents. More specifically, they are intended to provide incentives for new development to incorporate measures that conserve energy, conserves water, and promotes a healthy landscape. 
5.15.2. - Applicability 
The incentives included in this section are available to all new development in the City. 
5.15.3. - Procedure 
A.  Written Request Development seeking to use incentives shall include a written request with the development application that demonstrates how compliance with these standards will be achieved. 
B.  Incentive Amount Development may include a sufficient number of sustainable development practices to take advantage of more than one type of incentive, but in no instance shall the amount of an incentive be increased or decreased (as appropriate) beyond the maximum listed in this section. 
C.  Time of Review Review for compliance with this section, and granting of requests in accordance with this section shall occur during review of a site plan, group development plan, preliminary plat, PD master plan, use permit, or building permit, as appropriate. The decision-making body responsible for review of the development application shall also be responsible for the review of sustainable development incentive request. 
D.  Earning Incentives The incentive shall be based on the number of sustainable development practices provided, in accordance with Table 5.15.3.E, Sustainable Development Incentives, and Section 5.15.4, Sustainable Development Features. To earn a particular incentive, development must provide the minimum number of associated sustainable development features from Schedule A and Schedule B in Table 5.15.3.E. An applicant may select the kinds of sustainable development features provided to comply with Table 5.15.3.E. 
E.  Provide Features from Both Schedules The ability to take advantage of a sustainable development incentive requires new development to include sustainability features from both Schedule A and Schedule B in Table 5.15.4, Sustainable Development Features. The applicant may choose which features to include as long as the minimum number of features from each of the schedules is provided. Generally, items in Schedule A are typically more expensive than items in Schedule B, though this will depend upon the proposed development, site conditions, type of uses proposed, and many other features. 
TABLE 5.15.3.E: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES 
TYPE OF INCENTIVE 
MINIMUM NUMBER OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT FEATURES TO BE PROVIDED 
FROM 
SCHEDULE 
A 
FROM 
SCHEDULE 
B 
A density bonus of up to 2 additional dwelling units per acre beyond the maximum allowed in the base zoning district in the Core City or 1 additional dwelling unit per acre outside the Core City 3 4 An increase in the maximum allowable height by up to 30 feet beyond the maximum allowed in the zoning district in the Core City 2 3 An increase in the maximum allowable height by up to 15 feet beyond the maximum allowed in the zoning district outside the Core City 2 3 A reduction from the minimum parking space requirements by 10 percent 2 2 An increase in the maximum allowable sign area or maximum height for wall or freestanding signs by 10 percent 1 3  
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 25, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
5.15.4. - Sustainable Development Features 
One or more of the sustainable development features in Table 5.15.4, Sustainable Development Features, may be offered by an applicant for proposed development in accordance with Table 5.15.3.E, Sustainable Development Incentives. 
TABLE 5.15.4: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT FEATURES 
SCHEDULE 
TYPE OF FEATURE 
DOCUMENTATION OF 
COMPLIANCE 
ENERGY CONSERVATION A Use of solar photovoltaic panels, geothermal, or small wind energy facilities to provide up to 50 percent of the development's energy needs Indication on site plan and proof from the local energy provider AA [1] Use of solar photovoltaic panels, geothermal, or small wind energy facilities to provide up to 75 percent of the development's energy needs AAA [2] Use of solar photovoltaic panels, geothermal, or small wind energy facilities to provide up to 100 percent of the development's energy needs A Use of only solar or tankless water heating systems throughout the structure Inclusion on construction drawings A Use of a white roof or roofing materials with minimum reflectivity rating of 60 percent or more Provision of materials sample and product specification (statement not required for white roofs) BB [1] Use of central air conditioners that are Energy Star qualified Provision of product specification B Provision of skylights in an amount necessary to ensure natural lighting is provided to at least 15 percent of the habitable rooms in the structure Indication on site plans B Roof eaves or overhangs of 3 feet or more on southern or western elevations B Structure design that can accommodate the installation and operation of solar photovoltaic panels or solar thermal heating devices (including appropriate wiring and water transport systems) Inclusion on construction drawings B Inclusion of shade features (e.g., awnings, louvers, shutters, etc.) to shade all windows and doors on the southern building facade Indication on site plans B Configuration of new buildings with 1 axis at least 1.5 times longer than the other, and the long axis oriented in an east-west configuration for solar access B 30 percent of the building lots on a plat are oriented for unobstructed solar access LEED CERTIFICATION AAA [2] Construction of the principal structure to meet or exceed LEED Platinum certification standards Provision of Green Building Certification Institute's verification of project compliance (may be provided within 1 year following occupancy) AA [1] Construction of the principal structure to meet or exceed LEED Gold certification standards BBB [2] Construction of the principal structure to meet or exceed LEED Silver certification standards BB [1] Construction of the principal structure to meet or exceed LEED Bronze certification standards WATER CONSERVATION AND QUALITY PROTECTION AAA [2] Configuration of the principal structure's roof so that at least 75 percent of the roof is a "green" roof intended to capture and hold rain water Indication on site plan AA [1] Configuration of the principal structure's roof so that at least 50 percent of the roof is a "green" roof intended to capture and hold rain water A Inclusion of rain water capture and re-use devices such as cisterns, rain filters, and underground storage basins with a minimum storage capacity of 500 gallons Inclusion on construction drawings A Provision of rain gardens or other appropriate stormwater infiltration system(s) of at least 500 square feet in area Indication on site plan A Provision of open space set-asides at a rate 200 percent or more beyond the minimum required B Provision of rain gardens or other appropriate stormwater infiltration BMP systems of at least 100 square feet in area B Removal of all lawn or turf in favor of living ground cover or mulch B Use of xeriscape landscaping techniques without irrigation B Provision of 150-foot undisturbed buffers adjacent to/surrounding all wetlands or surface waters B Use of permeable surfacing on 50 percent or more of the vehicular use area BUILDING CONFIGURATION A Construction of principle structure in accordance with Barrier Free Design Standards (ANSI A1171.1) Inclusion on construction drawings A Up to 50 percent of the residential units are constructed in accordance with universal design principles AA [1] All residential units are constructed in accordance with universal design principles A Construction of the principal structure to a design wind speed standard of 150 mph Signed attestation from a qualified NC licensed engineer A Inclusion of underground parking or parking structures sufficient to accommodate 51 percent or more of the off-street parking requirements Indication on site plan B Provision of on-site transit facilities (e.g., designated park-and-ride parking spaces, bus shelters, or similar features) B Inclusion of showering and dressing facilities in nonresidential developments for employees using alternative forms of transportation Inclusion on construction drawings B Provision of at least 1 enclosed recycling station per building suitable for storage and collection of recyclables generated on-site Indication on site plan B Provision of an indoor atrium with plantings and seating areas that is open to the general public SITE CONFIGURATION A Providing double the amount of required open space Indication on site plan A Dedicating the land necessary to provide a greenway link across the development AA [1] Dedicating land and constructing a greenway across the development B Providing space and facilities for a community garden B Providing a public gathering area with a plaza, fountain, and shaded outdoor seating NOTES: [1] Credited as provision of 2 schedule features [2] Credited as provision of 3 schedule features  
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
5.15.5. - Failure to Install or Maintain Sustainable Development Practices 
The failure to install or maintain approved sustainable development features is a violation of this Ordinance, shall render the subject development nonconforming, and may result in revocation of the development permit or approvals. 
CHAPTER 6: - ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS 
6.1. - Public Tree Protection 

6.1.1. - Applicability 
A.  General The requirements of this section shall apply only to City-owned or controlled land (land leased by the City, or land the City controls through public rights-of-way and easements for public purposes such as streets, the construction and maintenance of public utilities, the provision of pedestrian access across private land, the development and maintenance of greenways and open space, or the protection of water quality). 
B.  Rights of City The City and the Urban Forestry Committee (UFC), as an agent of the City, is authorized to plant, prune, maintain and remove any tree, plant, or shrub on City-owned or controlled land if it is determined necessary to ensure the public health and safety, to preserve and enhance the symmetry and beauty of public land, or to protect public improvements and utilities. 
6.1.2. - Tree Maintenance and Protection 
A.  Removal or Damage to Tree Without Prior Authorization   
1.  General It is a violation of this Ordinance for a person to take any of the following actions to a tree on City-owned or controlled land without prior authorization from the UFC: 
(a)  Remove, prune, or plant a tree; 
(b)  Attach a rope, wire, nail, or sign to a tree; 
(c)  Apply a liquid or solid substance to a tree that is harmful and could damage or destroy the tree; or 
(d)  Deposit, place, store or maintain a stone, brick, sand, concrete or other impervious materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, or fertilizer to the roots of a tree. 
2.  Tree Topping   
(a)  It is a violation of this Ordinance for any person or City department (including a utility), to top a tree on City-owned or controlled land without a Public Tree Certificate in accordance with Section 2.5.12, Public Tree Certificate. For the purposes of this section, topping is defined as the severe pruning of tree limbs larger than 3 inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree it removes the normal canopy of or disfigures the tree. 
(b)  The topping of trees shall be approved only in cases where the tree is severely damaged by storm or other natural cause or where the UFC determines other pruning practices impractical (such as the pruning of trees directly under overhead utility lines). 
B.  Removal of Damaged or Infested Trees The UFC may cause to be removed a tree or part of a tree that is in an unsafe condition, significantly damaged due to severe weather or other natural conditions, or is infested with disease, injurious fungus, insects, or other pests. 
C.  Protection During Construction A tree on City-owned or controlled land shall be protected during any construction or excavation consistent with the City's Guidelines and Standard Practices for Trees . 
6.1.3. - Tree Planting, Pruning and Removal 
A.  Public Tree Certificate Required Unless exempted in accordance with subsection (B) below, a person or City department seeking to plant, prune, or remove trees on City owned or controlled land shall receive approval of a public tree certificate in accordance with Section 2.5.12, Public Tree Certificate. In reviewing the application the UFC shall ensure that the intended activities meet the expectations of the urban forestry program and are consistent with the City's adopted Guidelines and Standard Practices for Trees . 
B.  Exemptions The following development is exempt from the requirement to receive a public tree certificate, as long as the tree pruning and removal is consistent with the City's Guidelines and Standard Practices for Trees . 
1.  Public and private utilities (water, sewer, electrical, gas, telecommunications, cable, etc.) in public rights-of-way, or in dedicated utility easements on land owned or controlled by the City. 
2.  City departments that prune trees to maintain traffic visibility, pedestrian activity, and other similar public safety matters. 
3.  Trimming or removal when a tree represents an immediate safety hazard to structures, people, or automobiles traveling along a road. 
4.  Removal of nuisance or diseased trees likely to spread disease or pests to neighboring trees 
5.  Emergency tree removal resulting from severe weather, fire, or other emergency conditions where removal of such tree(s) is necessary to protect the health and safety of the public, restore order, or remove obstructions blocking access to streets or land. 
6.  Exemptions specified in the City's Guidelines and Standard Practices for Trees , and exemptions that are deemed by the UFC to be necessary and practical for ensuring the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 26, 1-17-2017) 
6.1.4. - Guidelines and Standards for Tree Planting, Pruning and Removal 
To implement the requirements of this section, the UFC shall develop, adopt and maintain guidelines and specifications for tree plantings, and standards and practices for tree conservation and maintenance. The guidelines and standards shall, at a minimum, include provisions concerning certificates, plantings, spacing, care, maintenance, and removal. All tree planting, pruning and removal on City-owned or controlled land shall be consistent with the City's standards. 
6.2. - Watershed Protection 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, renumbered the former subsections 6.2.3 B.-D. as §§ 6.2.4-6.2.6 and the former §§ 6.2.4-6.2.14 of § 6.2 as §§ 6.2.7-6.2.17 as set out herein. 

6.2.1. - Purpose and Intent 
These watershed protection standards are established in accordance with the requirements in the North Carolina General Statutes Sections 143-214.5 through 143-214.7 related to water supply watershed protection. They are intended to regulate residential density and impervious surface cover in water supply watershed drainage areas to control non-point source water pollution and protect drinking water quality. 
6.2.2. - Applicability 
A.  Authority The City Council is authorized to adopt these provisions in accordance with North Carolina General Statutes Sections 143-214.5, 143-214.6 and 143-214.7, Section 160-A-314, the rules promulgated by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission, and all other relevant laws of the State of North Carolina. 
B.  Location   
1.  The standards in this section apply to all land within the City of High Point's zoning jurisdiction, including both water supply watersheds and non-water supply watersheds. 
2.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II stormwater regulations also apply jurisdiction-wide and are overlaid by districts that regulate development in water supply watersheds, including the separate General Watershed Areas (GWA) and Watershed Critical Areas (WCA) of Oak Hollow Lake, City Lake, Oakdale Reservoir, Randleman Lake, and the Uwharrie (Lake Reese) and Lake Thom-A-Lex watersheds. 
C.  Activities Covered   
1.  Except for the activities in Section 6.2.3, Exemptions, the standards in this section apply to all land disturbance, paving, gravel placement, and construction of buildings or other structures in the City's planning jurisdiction. 
2.  All activities subject to these provisions shall comply with the procedural, design, and construction requirements of this section. 
6.2.3. - Exemptions 
The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this section; however, this exemption shall not be construed to permit uses prohibited in the underlying zoning district, or uses prohibited by this section. 
A.  Development on a lot of record less than 20,000 square feet in area existing on July 1, 1993 in all water supply watersheds except in the Randleman Lake Watershed. 
B.  Development on a lot of record less than 20,000 square feet in area existing on January 1, 2000 in the Randleman Lake Watershed. 
C.  Development on a lot of record less than 40,000 square feet in area existing on January 1, 2000 in the Downtown Area, which is shown on the High Point Watershed Map. 
D.  Development of 1 single-family detached dwelling and its accessory structure(s) on: 
1.  A lot located outside (WCA) Tier 1 within the Oak Hollow Lake, City Lake, and Oakdale Reservoir Watersheds; or 
2.  A lot located outside (WCA) Tiers 1 and 2 within the Randleman Lake Watershed. 
E.  Development of a duplex dwelling and its accessory structure(s) on a lot in the Oak Hollow Lake, City Lake, and Oakdale Reservoir Watersheds provided a sedimentation and erosion control plan is not required and it is located outside (WCA) Tiers 1 and 2. 
F.  Development on a lot in a non-water supply watershed that disturbs less than an acre. 
G.  Replacement of an existing built-upon area on a lot developed with a like or lesser amount of new built-upon area at the same location, or at a different location on the same lot if the TRC determines that equal or improved water quality will result. 
H.  Development with a vested right, in accordance with Section 1.10, Vested Rights, on July 1, 1993 in all water supply watersheds except Randleman Lake Watershed where the effective date is January 1, 2000. 
I.  Development with a vested right, in accordance with Section 1.10, Vested Rights, as of July 1, 2007 in all non-water supply watersheds. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 12, 4-3-2017) 
6.2.4. - Exemption to the Plan Submission Requirements of This Section 
The development of a small accessory building, structure, or small amount of other built-upon area on a lot is exempt from the plan submission requirements of this section, provided: 
A.  The development is nonresidential or multi-family; 
B.  The total built-upon area is no greater than 600 square feet; 
C.  Less than 1 acre of land is disturbed; 
D.  The built-upon area or land disturbance is not within a required surface water buffer; 
E.  The exemption is not proposed on a lot subject to a watershed development plan on file with the Planning and Development Department; and 
F.  The exemption is applied to a lot no more than once after July 1, 1993, in all watersheds except Randleman Lake Watershed, or after January 1, 2000 in the Randleman Lake Watershed. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.5. - Compliance with Previously Approved Plans 
Any restrictions upon building location, drainageways, pavement, or other built-upon area, percentage of impervious surface area, location of built-upon area, or any other matter appearing on any previously approved watershed development plan covering the subject land shall be complied with unless and until replaced by an approved revised watershed development plan meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.6. - Activities Regulated by Other Governmental Agencies 
A.  Transportation The NCDOT shall comply with the practices outlined in its document entitled "Best Management Practices for the Protection of Surface Waters," which is incorporated herein by reference. 
B.  Hazardous Materials   
1.  The City of High Point Fire Marshal and the Guilford County Local Emergency Planning Committee are the designated management agencies responsible for implementing the provisions of this section pertaining to hazardous materials. 
2.  An inventory of all hazardous materials used and stored in the watershed shall be maintained. 
3.  A spill/failure containment plan and appropriate safeguards against contamination are required. 
4.  Waste minimization and appropriate recycling of materials is encouraged. 
5.  Land in the WSO where oil or other hazardous substances are stored shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  The Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) Section 302 Extremely Hazardous Substances (42 USC 11000 et seq.); and 
(b)  Section 311 of the Clean Water Act (CWA), as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.7. - How to Use This Section 
The following general steps should be followed to determine the applicability of the watershed protection requirements to a specific parcel of land: 
A.  Identify the location of the land on the Watershed Map; 
B.  Determine if the land, development, or activity is exempted (see Section 6.2.3, Exemptions); 
C.  Identify fragile areas or development limitations (i.e., surface waters, steep slopes, etc.) on the land; 
D.  Classify the development as high or low density as established in Table 6.2.9.C, Minimum Surface Water Buffer Width Requirements; 
E.  Based on the development density or built-upon area, determine the method of stormwater control required and surface water buffers; and 
F.  Comply with the requirements of the High Point Stormwater Best Management Practices Design Manual . 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.8. - Incorporation of Watershed Map 
A.  Incorporation of Watershed Map   
1.  This subsection incorporates by reference the High Point Watershed Map, dated July 1, 1993, and any amendments, showing the WSO, Downtown Area, the Randleman Lake Credit Area, the Richland Creek Sub-basin and the Business 85/Riverdale Sub-basin within the City's existing and future jurisdiction (planning jurisdiction) of the following water supply watersheds: 
(a)  Oak Hollow Lake, City Lake, Randleman Lake, and Oakdale Reservoir (Jamestown), which are classified as WS-IV Critical Water Supply Watersheds by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission (EMC); 
(b)  Uwharrie (Lake Reese) and Lake-Thom-A-Lex, which are classified as WS-III Water Supply Watersheds by the EMC. 
2.  The remaining part of the jurisdiction is the non-water supply watershed that is subject to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Phase II requirements, which apply jurisdiction-wide. 
B.  Incorporation of the WSO District on the Official Zoning Map The boundaries of the WSO are adopted on the Official Zoning Map and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.9. - Protection of Fragile Areas 
A.  Land Disturbance Minimization   
1.  Sedimentation and Erosion Control Asedimentation and erosion control plan shall be required in accordance with Section 6.3 of this Ordinance. 
2.  Development on the Best Soils and Terrain Development on the best soils and terrain of a site is encouraged. Hydric soils and those soils that are highly erodible should be avoided. 
3.  Low Impact Design Low Impact Design in accordance with Section 6.2.10, Low Impact Design, is encouraged. 
4.  Conservation Subdivision Development The location of development on soils and terrain most suited to protecting water quality is greatly encouraged by conservation subdivision (see Section 5.14.2, Conservation Subdivision). 
5.  Density Shifting The location of development on soils and terrain most suited to protecting the water quality of water supply reservoirs is encouraged (see Section 6.2.14 G, Density Shifting). 
B.  Floodplain Protection Development in special flood hazard areas shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention. 
C.  Surface Water Buffers   
1.  Applicability   
(a)  This subsection applies to all development and activities with the exception of activities conducted under the authority of North Carolina, the United States, multiple jurisdictions or local units of government, and forest harvesting and agricultural activities. 
(b)  The NC Division of Water Resources shall administer the requirements of Rule 15A NCAC 02B .0250 and .0295 (Randleman Lake Water Supply Watershed: Protection and Maintenance of Existing Riparian Buffers and Mitigation Program Requirements for Protection and Maintenance of Riparian Buffers, respectively) for these jurisdictions and activities. 
2.  Perennial and Intermittent Surface Water Buffers Required   
(a)  A surface water buffer shall be maintained with a minimum width as specified in Table 6.2.9.C, Minimum Surface Water Buffer Width Requirements, measured landward from the normal water level for lakes and ponds and from the top of the bank of each side for perennial and intermittent streams. 
(b)  Wetlands adjacent to surface waters or within 50 feet of surface waters shall be considered as part of the surface water buffer but are regulated pursuant to 15A NCAC 02H .0506. 
(c)  These surface waters are indicated on any of the following maps or if there is site-specific evidence that indicates the presence of waters not shown on any of these maps: 
(1)  The most recent version of either the United States Geological Survey 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute quadrangle) topographic maps; or 
(2)  The hard copy Soil Survey maps developed by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service; or 
(3)  A map approved by the Geographic Information Coordinating Council and by the NC Environmental Management Commission. 
(d)  Where the specific origination point of a perennial or an intermittent stream is in question, parties subject to this section shall request the Engineering Services Director to make a determination in accordance with Rule 15A NCAC 2B 0250(4)(b). 
6.2.9.C: MINIMUM SURFACE WATER BUFFER WIDTH REQUIREMENTS 
WATER 
CLASSIFICATION 
MINIMUM BUFFER WIDTH 
LOW DENSITY 
DEVELOPMENT [1] 
HIGH DENSITY 
DEVELOPMENT [2] 
ZONE 1 
(FEET) 
ZONE 2 
(FEET) 
ZONE 1 
(FEET) 
ZONE 2 
(FEET) 
ZONE 3 
(FEET) 
Perennial Surface Waters 
(Streams, Lakes 
and Ponds) 50 100 30 20 [3] 30 20 [3] 50 Intermittent Surface 
Waters (Streams, 
Lakes and Ponds) 50 50 30 20 [3] 30 20 [3] n/a NOTES: [1] Low Density Development is development that is equal to or less than 2 dwelling units per acre or 24 percent built-upon area in all watersheds except Randleman Lake. Low Density Development in the Randleman Lake watershed is development that is equal to or less than 1 dwelling unit per acre or 12 percent built-upon area [2] High Density Development is development that is greater than 2 dwelling units per acre or 24 percent built-upon area in all watersheds except Randleman Lake. High density development in the Randleman Lake watershed is development that is greater than 1 dwelling unit per acre or 12 percent built-upon area [3] Additional buffer requirements apply where surface waters abut moderate to steep slopes in accordance with Section 6.2.9 D, Slope and Buffer Protection  
3.  Exemption Based on On-site Determination   
(a)  When a landowner or other affected party believes that the maps have inaccurately depicted surface waters, the landowner or affected party may submit a stream determination request to the Engineering Services Director. 
(b)  Upon request, the Engineering Services Director shall make an on-site determination. 
(c)  The Engineering Services Director may also accept the results of site assessments made by other qualified parties. 
(d)  Any disputes over on-site determinations shall be referred to the Director of the N.C. Division of Water Resources (DWR), in writing. 
(e)  A determination by the Director of the DWR as to the accuracy or application of the maps is subject to review as provided in Articles 3 and 4 of N.C.G.S. 150B. Surface waters that appear on the maps shall not be subject to these buffer requirements if a site evaluation reveals any of the following cases: 
(1)  Ditches and manmade conveyances, to include manmade stormwater conveyances, other than modified natural streams, unless the ditch or manmade conveyance delivers untreated stormwater runoff from an adjacent source directly to an intermittent or perennial stream; 
(2)  Areas mapped as intermittent streams, perennial streams, lakes, ponds or estuaries on the most recent versions of the United States Geological Survey 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute quadrangle) topographic maps, hard-copy soil survey maps, or other EMC approved stream maps where no perennial water body, intermittent water body, lake, pond or estuary actually exists on the ground; 
(3)  Ephemeral streams; or 
(4)  Ponds and lakes created for animal watering, irrigation or other agricultural uses that are not part of a natural drainage way that is classified in accordance with 15A NCAC 02B .0100. Ponds are part of the natural drainage way when they are hydrologically connected (i.e., the pond is fed by an intermittent or perennial stream) or when they have a direct discharge point to an intermittent or perennial stream. 
4.  Exemptions for Existing Development and Activities Existing development that was present within a surface water buffer on the effective date the surface water buffer requirements were established is allowed to continue and is exempt from the requirements of Section 6.2.9 C, Surface Water Buffers, to the extent specified below: 
(a)  The exemption of existing development and uses includes but is not limited to existing agriculture, buildings, facilities, ground mounted equipment, utility lines, on-site sanitary sewage systems, maintained lawns and uses any of which involve either specific, periodic management of vegetation or displacement of vegetation by structures or regular activity. 
(b)  Only the portion of the buffer that contains the footprint of the existing development is exempt. 
(c)  Activities necessary to maintain existing development are allowed provided the site remains similarly vegetated, no impervious surface is added within Zone 1 or 2 of the surface water buffer where it did not previously exist, and diffuse flow is maintained. 
(d)  Grading and revegetating of Zone 2 is allowed for existing development upon review and approval of the TRC provided the health of the vegetation in Zone 1 is not compromised, the ground is stabilized, and the existing diffuse flow is maintained. 
(e)  In addition, projects or development specified in 15A NCAC 02B .250 (6)(b) may be determined to be exempted in accordance with the requirements of that section. 
(f)  The exemption to the buffer requirements shall cease when the existing development or use changes to another permissible or non-exempt use. Any new development or use shall be subject to the surface water requirements. 
5.  New Development and Activities N.C. Administrative Code Section 15A NCAC 02B .0250(9) lists potential new development and activities within the buffer and categorizes them as exempt, allowable, or allowable with mitigation. All development and activities not categorized as exempt, allowable or allowable with mitigation are considered prohibited and may not proceed within the surface water buffer or outside the buffer if the development or activity would impact the buffer, unless a variance is granted in accordance with Section 2.4.19, Watershed Variance. Watershed development plan approval, as provided for in Section 6.2.9 C.9, Watershed Plan Approval, is required for all new development and activity that is not prohibited. Such an approved plan shall constitute written authorization for uses that are allowable or allowable with mitigation and a statement to that effect shall be included on the approved plan. The requirements for each category are as follows: 
(a)  Exempt Development Development and activities designated as exempt are permissible without authorization by the TRC provided that they adhere to the limitations of the activity as defined in NC Administrative Code Section 15A NCAC 02B .0250(9). In addition, exempt development and activities shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize soil disturbance and to provide the maximum water quality protection practicable, including construction, monitoring and maintenance activities. 
(b)  Allowable Development Development and activities designated as allowable may proceed provided that there are no practical alternatives to the requested development or activity in accordance with Section 6.2.9 C.10, Determination of No Practical Alternatives. This includes construction, monitoring, and maintenance activities. 
(c)  Development Allowable with Mitigation Development and activities designated as allowable with mitigation may proceed provided that there are no practical alternatives to the requested development or activity in accordance with Section 6.2.9 C.10, Determination of No Practical Alternatives, and an appropriate mitigation strategy is approved in accordance with Section 6.2.9 C.11, Mitigation. 
6.  Surface Water Buffer Zones   
(a)  Location Required surface water buffers consist of 2 or 3 zones depending on the density of development and stream classification, as shown in Table 6.2.9.C, Minimum Surface Water Buffer Width Requirements. 
(1)  Zone 1 Zone 1 shall be the first 30 feet landward from the top of the stream bank normal water level of other water bodies on all sides of the surface water measured horizontally on a line perpendicular to a vertical line marking the top of the bank. 
(2)  Zone 2 Zone 2 shall begin at the outer edge of Zone 1 and extend landward a minimum of 20 feet as measured horizontally on a line perpendicular to the surface water. The combined width of Zones 1 and 2 shall be 50 feet on all sides of the surface water. 
(3)  Zone 3 Zone 3 shall begin at the outer edge of Zone 2 and extend landward 50 feet as measured horizontally on a line perpendicular to the surface water. 
(4)  Additional Buffers   
(i)  Refer to Section 6.2.9 D, Slope and Buffer Protection, for additional surface water buffers to protect steep slopes bordering streams. 
(ii)  Such additional buffers would be added to Zone 2. 
(b)  Standards Zones 1 and 2 shall be undisturbed except as allowed in this section. Zone 3 can be disturbed but must remain vegetated in accordance with these standards. 
(1)  Development in Zones 1 and 2   
(i)  New development or land disturbing activities shall not be allowed in Zones 1 or 2 of the surface water buffer, except as allowed in NC Administrative Code Section 15A NCAC 02B .0250(9). 
(ii)  Activities that cross the stream shall be constructed as close to 90 degrees relative to the stream as practicable. 
(iii)  Allowed activities shall minimize built-upon surface area, divert runoff away from surface waters and protect water quality to the maximum extent practical through the use of Best Management Practices. 
(iv)  Grading and revegetating for activities in Zone 2 is allowed providing that the health of the vegetation in Zone 1 is not compromised. 
(2)  Diffuse Flow Requirements in Zones 1 and 2 The following diffuse flow requirements must be met: 
(i)  Diffuse flow must be maintained to the maximum extent practical through dispersing concentrated flow and re-establishment of vegetation to maintain the effectiveness of the surface water buffer. 
(ii)  Concentrated runoff from the new ditches or manmade conveyances must be dispersed into diffuse flow before the runoff enters Zone 2 of the surface water buffer. Existing ditches and manmade conveyances are exempt from this requirement; however, care shall be taken to minimize pollutant loading through these existing ditches and manmade conveyances from fertilizer application or erosion. 
(iii)  Periodic corrective action to restore diffuse flow shall be taken by the landowner if necessary to impede the formation of erosion gullies that allow concentrated flow to bypass treatment in the surface water buffer. 
(iv)  Diffuse flow of runoff shall be maintained in the riparian buffer by dispersing concentrated flow and reestablishing vegetation in new ditches. 
(v)  Concentrated runoff from new ditches or manmade conveyances shall be converted to diffuse flow at non-erosive velocities before the runoff enters Zone 2 of the riparian buffer. 
(vi)  Periodic corrective action to restore diffuse flow in new ditches or manmade conveyances shall be taken if necessary to impede the formation of erosion gullies; and 
(vii)  No new stormwater conveyances are allowed through the buffers except for those specified in NC Administrative Code Section 15A NCAC 02B .0250(9), addressing stormwater management ponds, drainage ditches, roadside ditches and stormwater conveyances. 
(3)  Zone 3   
(i)  Zone 3 is required for all high density development. 
(ii)  Zone 3 may be disturbed, but it must remain vegetated. 
(iii)  New development shall not be allowed in Zone 3 of the surface water buffer, except those developments and activities allowed in Zones 1 and 2 where the TRC makes a no practical alternatives determination. 
(iv)  Allowed activities shall minimize built-upon surface area, divert runoff away from surface waters and protect water quality to the maximum extent practical through the use of best management practices. 
7.  Channelization Channelization of perennial or intermittent streams may be authorized by DWR or the Army Corps of Engineers. However, TRC may authorize access or crossings only in accordance with this Ordinance. 
8.  New Lots in the Surface Water Buffer To the extent practical, no new single-family detached or duplex residential lots shall be created which are entirely or partly contained within the surface water buffer. 
9.  Watershed Plan Approval The TRC shall approve a watershed development plan only if the plan proposes to avoid impacts to surface water buffers defined in Section 6.2.9 C, Surface Water Buffers, or where the plan proposes to impact such buffers, it demonstrates that the applicant has done the following, as applicable: 
(a)  Determined the activity is exempt from requirements of this section; 
(b)  Received a determination of no practical alternatives for activities in Zone 3 on the approved watershed development plan from the TRC pursuant to Section 6.2.9 C.10, Determination of No Practical Alternatives; 
(c)  Received approval of a mitigation plan pursuant to Section 6.2.9 C.11, Mitigation, of this Ordinance; or 
(d)  Received a variance pursuant to Section 2.4.19, Watershed Variance. 
10.  Determination of No Practical Alternatives   
(a)  Applicants undertaking development or activities designated as allowable or allowable with mitigation shall submit a watershed development plan with a request for a no practical alternatives determination to the TRC. The applicant shall certify that the project meets all the following criteria for a determination of no practical alternatives: 
(1)  The basic project purpose cannot be practically accomplished in a manner that would better minimize disturbance, preserve aquatic life and habitat and protect water quality; 
(2)  The use cannot practically be reduced in a size or density, reconfigured or redesigned to better minimize disturbance, preserve aquatic life and habitat and protect water quality; and 
(3)  Best management practices shall be used if necessary to minimize disturbance, preserve aquatic life and habitat and protect water quality. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit a watershed development plan containing at least the following information on a form supplied by the Planning and Development Department in support of their assertion of no practical alternatives determination: 
(1)  An explanation of why this plan for the development or activity cannot be practically accomplished, reduced or reconfigured to better minimize disturbance to the riparian buffer, preserve aquatic life and habitat and protect water quality; and 
(2)  Plans for any best management practices proposed to be used to control the impacts associated with the development or activity. 
(c)  Within 60 days of a submission that addresses subsection (b) above, the TRC shall review the entire project and make a finding of fact as to whether the criteria in subsection (a) of this section have been met. A determination of no practical alternatives shall result in issuance of a certification of the approved watershed development plan. Failure to act within 60 days shall be construed as a finding of no practical alternatives and a certification on the watershed development plan shall be issued to the applicant unless one of the following occurs: 
(1)  The applicant agrees, in writing, to a longer period; 
(2)  The TRC determines that the applicant has failed to furnish requested information necessary to make a decision; 
(3)  The final decision is to be made pursuant to a public hearing; or 
(4)  The applicant refuses access to its records or premises for the purpose of gathering information necessary for the TRC to make a decision. 
(d)  The TRC may attach conditions to the determination of no practical alternatives that support the purpose, spirit and intent of this Ordinance. 
11.  Mitigation Mitigation in accordance with the requirements of 15A NCAC 02B .0295 shall apply to persons who wish to impact a surface water buffer when one of the following applies: 
(a)  A person has received authorization pursuant to Section 6.2.9 C.10, Determination of No Practical Alternatives, of this section for a proposed development or activity that is designed as allowable with mitigation; or 
(b)  A person has received a variance pursuant to Section 2.4.19, Watershed Variance, of this Ordinance and is required to perform mitigation as a condition of a variance approval. 
12.  Surface Water Buffer Variances Variances pertain to prohibited uses or activities in the surface water buffer. There are 2 types of variances from the surface water buffer requirements of this section. They are: 
(a)  A major variance, which is a variance that pertains to activities that impact any portion of Zone 1. 
(b)  A minor variance, which is a variance that pertains to activities that impact any portion of Zone 2 of a surface water buffer. 
13.  Appeals An appeal of determinations of no practical alternatives by the TRC shall comply with Section 2.4.19, Watershed Variance. An appeal pursuant to the requirements of Section 6.2.9 C, Surface Water Buffers, which applies to activities conducted under the authority of the State, the United States, multiple jurisdictions or local units of government, forest harvesting and agricultural activities, shall be referred to the Director of the NCDWR for review, as provided for in North Carolina General Statutes Chapter 150B Articles 3 and 4. 
D.  Slope and Buffer Protection   
1.  Purpose The purpose of this provision is to limit the loss of soil, reduce soil erosion, minimize excess stormwater runoff, lessen the degradation of surface waters, and protect the buffers so established to protect surface waters. To this end, an addition to the surface water buffer requirements of Section 6.2.9 C, Surface Water Buffers, shall be required when intermittent and perennial surface waters abut moderate to steep slopes. 
2.  Application   
(a)  Such addition to the surface water buffer requirements shall only apply where that portion of the surface water is adjacent to moderate to steep slope areas. 
(b)  For slopes with a value of 15 percent or less, no additional buffering is required. 
(c)  For slopes of greater than 15 percent up to 25 percent, an additional 15-foot wide undisturbed buffer shall be required. 
(d)  For slopes greater than 25 percent, an additional 30 feet of undisturbed buffer shall be required. 
(e)  These calculations shall be made from each side of the surface water bank. 
(f)  Such additional buffer required by this section shall extend Zone 2 of the surface water buffer. 
(g)  In the case where Zone 3 is required, the extension of the Zone 2 surface water buffer may be offset by an identical decrease in width in Zone 3. 
3.  Determination   
(a)  The determination of whether such moderate to steep slope areas exist adjacent to a surface water shall be made by making 100 foot long perpendicular measurements at intervals, not greater than 50 feet in length, or at intervals as otherwise determined by the TRC, along the entire length of the surface water as measured from the top of bank. 
(b)  These measurements shall be based on the most recent topographic survey of land that utilizes the smallest contour interval. 
(c)  Applicants should consult the Development Guide for specific calculations, instructions, and illustrations. 
E.  Additional Protection in Watershed Critical Areas Due to the proximity of watershed critical area (WCA)s to water supply reservoirs, fragile areas including steep slopes near perennial and intermittent streams, wetlands and drainage areas merit additional protection as prescribed in Section 3.8.12, Watershed Overlay (WSO) District. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 12, 4-3-2017) 
6.2.10. - Low Impact Design 
A.  Goals The primary goals of low impact design are to lower the impact of development on receiving waters, to encourage environmentally sensitive development, to help build communities based on environmental stewardship, and to reduce construction and maintenance costs of the stormwater infrastructure. The use of low impact design shall address these goals through the objectives found in subsection (B) below. 
B.  Objectives   
1.  Preserve Fragile Areas and Open Space Preserve fragile areas through the following: 
(a)  Avoiding riparian areas, wetlands, steep slopes, high infiltration and hydric soils; 
(b)  Maximizing open space and common area through cluster development where appropriate; and 
(c)  Maintaining open space in a natural condition by reforestation where clearing has occurred. 
2.  Minimize Land Disturbance and Built-Upon Area Design development to provide the following: 
(a)  Efficient layout to reduce overall length of streets; 
(b)  Shared parking and drives where possible to further reduce built-upon area; and 
(c)  Use of multiple best management practices such as bio-retention cells and infiltration areas to minimize impact. 
(d)  Step floor elevations to fit terrain and avoid slab-on-grade construction to minimize land disturbance. 
3.  Protect Water Resources Use site design techniques to replicate pre-existing hydrologic site conditions by placing water quality control devices close to the source. Techniques may include the following: 
(a)  Designing driveways and parking areas with vegetated swales and/or sheet flow into infiltration areas; and 
(b)  Using grass swales instead of curb and gutter to increase water filtration. 
C.  Process The low impact design process is established in the City of High Point Stormwater Best Management Practices Design Manual . 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.11. - General Standards and Restrictions 
A.  Density and Intensity   
1.  Low Density Development Calculation   
(a)  For low density development, density is measured in dwelling units per acre for single-family detached and duplex residential developments. 
(b)  For recreational facilities, such as golf courses and tennis and swim clubs lying within a residential development, impacts shall be determined by measuring the built-upon area on the lot or common area and dividing by 3,000 square feet to obtain a dwelling unit equivalency number. 
(c)  Upon approval of a modification by the TRC, low density developments may utilize either the density standard, built-upon area standard, or combination thereof pursuant to Table 6.2.11.A1, Minimum Stormwater Controls Required in the General Watershed Area and in Non-water Supply Watersheds. 
(d)  For all other residential and nonresidential development, the built-upon area measure shall apply. 
2.  High Density Development Calculation For all high density development the built-upon area measure shall apply. 
3.  Density and Built-Upon Area Calculations   
(a)  For the purpose of calculating density, acres shall be gross acres. 
Minimum lot size is 5 acres
(b)  As an alternative, single-family detached or duplex residential developments dividing 4 or fewer lots and not constructing streets may use 20,000 square-foot lots where the maximum density is 2 dwelling units per acre and 40,000 square-foot lots where the maximum density is 1 dwelling unit per acre. 
(c)  If single-family detached or duplex dwellings are intermingled within a development with other uses, then the built-upon area measurement shall apply. 
(d)  When sections of the same development are devoted to single-family detached or duplex residential development and other sections are devoted to other uses, then the developer may apply the appropriate measurement to the different sections or may use the built-upon area measurement for the entire development. 
(e)  Single-family detached or duplex residential development using the built-upon area measurement shall assume 3,000 square feet of built-upon area per lot. 
(f)  The built-upon area maximum shall apply to the entire development, including streets, buildings, drives, and other impervious surfaces. 
(g)  The maximum built-upon area allowed shall be allocated throughout the development. 
(h)  In single-family detached and duplex residential developments, the allocation to each lot shall be uniform. 
(i)  In all other developments, the allocation may vary among lots. 
(j)  In all cases, the recorded plat shall clearly state each lot's allocation and restrictive covenants shall record these allocations. 
TABLE 6.2.11.A1: MINIMUM STORMWATER CONTROLS REQUIRED IN THE 
GENERAL WATERSHED AREA AND IN NON-WATER SUPPLY WATERSHEDS 
WATERSHED 
DENSITY/BUILT-UPON AREA [1] 
MINIMUM 
STORMWATER 
CONTROL 
REQUIRED 
RESIDENTIAL 
MULTIFAMILY AND 
NONRESIDENTIAL 
All watersheds EXCEPT Randleman Lake = 1 du/2 acre = 6% built-upon area None = 2 du/acre [2] = 24% built-upon area 2 Alternate measures [3] > 2 du/acre > 24% built-upon area Engineered stormwater controls [4] Randleman Lake = 1 du/2 acre = 6% built-upon area None = 1 du/acre = 12% built-upon area Alternate measures [3] > 1 du/acre > 12% built-upon area Engineered stormwater controls [4] NOTES: [1] Single-family detached and duplex development utilizing the low density option shall use the density standards except as approved by modification pursuant to Section 6.2.11 A.1, Low Density Development Calculation. Single-family detached and duplex development exceeding the density limits shall use the built-upon area standards. All other residential and nonresidential development shall use the built-upon area standards. [2] May be increased to 3 dwelling units per gross acre or 36 percent built-upon area for developments without a curb and gutter street system. [3] Alternate measures shall be in accordance with Section 6.2.11 B.2, Alternate Measures. Low Density Development is development that is equal to or less than 2 dwelling units per acre or 24 percent built-upon area (bua) in all watersheds except Randleman Lake. Low Density Development in the Randleman Lake watershed is development that is equal to or less than 1 dwelling unit per acre or 12 percent built-upon area. [4] Engineered Stormwater Control in accordance with high density development is development that is greater than 2 dwelling units per acre or 24 percent bua in all watersheds except Randleman Lake. High Density Development in the Randleman Lake watershed is development that is greater than 1 dwelling unit per acre or 12 percent bua.  
TABLE 6.2.11.A2: MINIMUM STORMWATER CONTROLS REQUIRED IN THE 
WATERSHED CRITICAL AREA 
WATERSHED 
DENSITY/BUILT-UPON AREA [1] 
MINIMUM 
STORMWATER 
CONTROL 
REQUIRED 
RESIDENTIAL 
MULTIFAMILY AND 
NONRESIDENTIAL 
ALL water supply 
watersheds EXCEPT 
Randleman Lake = 1 du/2 acre = 6% built-upon area None = 2 du/acre = 24% built-upon area Alternate measures [1] n/a > 24% built-upon area Engineered stormwater controls [2] Randleman Lake = 1 du/2 acre = 6% built-upon area None > 1 du/2 acre [3] > 6% built-upon area [3] Engineered stormwater controls [2] NOTES: [1] Alternate measures in accordance with Section 6.2.11 B.2, Alternate Measures. [2] Engineered stormwater controls in accordance with Section 6.2.11 B.3, Engineered Stormwater Controls for High Density Development. [3] In Tier 4, residential development > 1du/2 acres and < 1du/acre may use alternate measures in accordance with Section 6.2.11 B.2, Alternate Measures, in lieu of engineered stormwater controls. Multifamily and nonresidential development > 6 percent and < 12 percent built-upon area may do the same.  
4.  Density Averaging Two non-contiguous lots may be considered as one lot for the purposes of development density and intensity, provided the following requirements are met: 
(a)  The two lots must be within the same water supply watershed, irrespective of jurisdictional boundaries. 
(b)  Neither of the lots can be publicly held land, which include but are not limited to dedicated drainageway, open space, parkland, or other lands obtained for watershed protection. 
(c)  One lot shall reduce its allowable density or built-upon area, while the other lot shall increase its allowable density or built-upon area by the same amount. 
(d)  If one of the lots is located in the Watershed Critical Area, the critical area lot shall not be developed beyond the applicable density limit of the individual water supply watershed listed in Section 6.2.15, Individual Water Supply Watersheds. 
(e)  The overall density for both lots shall meet applicable density requirements of Section 6.2.15, Individual Water Supply Watersheds, and both lots shall meet the stormwater control requirements for the individual water supply watershed. 
(f)  If the development meets applicable low density requirements, the stormwater runoff shall be transported by vegetated conveyances to the maximum extent practicable. 
(g)  Both lots shall comply with the applicable surface water buffer requirements of Section 6.2.9 C, Surface Water Buffers. 
(h)  Built-upon areas shall be designed and located such that the Technical Review Committee finds that the design of each site is such that all of the following are achieved: 
(1)  Minimized stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters; 
(2)  Minimized concentrated stormwater flow; 
(3)  Maximized use of sheet flow through vegetated areas; and 
(4)  Maximized flow length through vegetated areas. 
(i)  Areas of concentrated density development shall be located in upland areas and, to the maximum extent practicable, away from surface waters and drainageways. 
(j)  The lot or portions of the lots that are not developed shall remain in a vegetated or natural state, be placed in an easement in accordance with subsection (m) below, and be managed through one of the following means: 
(1)  Conveyance to an owners' association as common elements; 
(2)  Conveyance to a local government as a park, open space or greenway; or 
(3)  Placement under a permanent conservation or farmland preservation easement. 
(k)  Metes and bounds descriptions of the areas to remain vegetated and limits on use shall be recorded as follows: 
(1)  On a plat; 
(2)  If located within Common Elements, in the property's declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions; 
(3)  If not located within Common Elements, in the individual deeds for each of the lots; and 
(4)  With language making them irrevocable unless amended under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(l)  Density averaging for a development will be reviewed and approved as part of the watershed development plan for the lot or lots within the City's watershed jurisdiction. If one of the lots is located outside the City's jurisdiction and that lot is transferring its density allocation to a lot within the City's jurisdiction, then the density averaging approval for the development may not be granted until any required development approvals are provided by the other watershed jurisdiction. 
(m)  Easements shall be platted over those areas that are not developed and they must remain in a vegetated or natural state. Within such easements, principal and accessory buildings and structures are not permitted and the natural ground cover and the natural tree canopy must be preserved, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Utilities and associated erosion control structures may be constructed and maintained; 
(2)  Normal maintenance by mechanical means is allowed for the removal of dead, diseased, deformed, poisonous, or noxious vegetation and pests harmful to health; 
(3)  Mechanical mowing of utility areas is allowed to control growth; 
(4)  The removal of dead trees and logs is permitted, provided the stumps remain; 
(5)  The removal of briars and vines is permitted, provided the underbrush remains in its natural state; and 
(6)  The removal of hazardous trees is permitted, provided the stumps remain. 
B.  Methods of Stormwater Control   
1.  Vegetated Conveyances for Low Density Development Stormwater runoff shall be transported from the development by vegetated conveyances to the maximum extent practical, as determined by the TRC. 
2.  Alternate Measures As required by Table 6.2.11.A1 and Table 6.2.11.A2, the following stormwater management facilities are considered alternate measures that may be allowed provided that they meet the standards of the City of High Point Stormwater Best Management Practices Design Manual : 
(a)  Extended dry pond; 
(b)  Infiltration trench; 
(c)  Natural infiltration area; 
(d)  Participation in a public or private regional runoff control program, in compliance with Section 6.2.11 C, Participation in a Regional Stormwater Control Program; 
(e)  Low impact design; and 
(f)  Any best management practices approved by the Engineering Services Director that complies with the performance standards of control of the first 1/2 inch of rainfall. 
3.  Engineered Stormwater Controls for High Density Development In accordance with Table 6.2.11.A1 and Table 6.2.11.A2, stormwater management facilities, such as wet detention ponds, meeting the performance standards of control of the first 1 inch of rainfall and removal of 85 percent of total suspended solids (TSS) shall be used to control stormwater runoff in compliance with the City of High Point Stormwater Best Management Practices Design Manual . In-lieu of an on-site engineered stormwater control, developments may participate in a regional stormwater control program in compliance with the requirements of Section 6.2.11 C, Participation in a Regional Stormwater Control Program. 
C.  Participation in a Regional Stormwater Control Program   
1.  Public Regional Stormwater Control Program   
(a)  Where Permitted   
(1)  Where a regional stormwater control program has been established by one or more local governments, or by an authority operating on behalf of one or more local governments, a development may participate in the program in-lieu of any certification of stormwater control required by this section, provided that: 
(i)  The development is within an area covered by a public regional stormwater control program; 
(ii)  Stormwater from the development drains to an existing or funded public regional engineered stormwater control structure which is proposed to be built and is part of the program; 
(iii)  Participation is in the form of contribution of funds, contribution of land, contribution of engineered stormwater control structure construction work, or a combination of these, the total value of which shall be in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the City or in accordance with an intergovernmental agreement; and 
(iv)  The TRC finds that the watershed development plan is in compliance with all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Developments participating in a public regional stormwater control program are encouraged to maintain pre-development hydrology at the project site. 
(b)  Use of Contributions Each contribution from a development participating in a public regional engineered stormwater control structure program shall be used for acquisition, engineering, construction and/or maintenance of 1 or more such structures in the same watershed in which development lies. The use of contributions for these purposes does not preclude the use or imposition of other revenue sources for these purposes. 
2.  Private Regional Stormwater Control Program   
(a)  Where Permitted   
(1)  Participation in a private regional engineered stormwater control program is permitted where a private off-site stormwater control program has been established by one or more property owners and approved by the TRC. A development may participate in the program in-lieu of any certification of runoff control required by this section, provided that: 
(i)  The development is within an area covered by an off-site engineered stormwater control structure; 
(ii)  Runoff from the development drains to an existing engineered stormwater control structure; 
(iii)  The parties agree to share the cost of any required maintenance and/or construction; 
(iv)  The agreement runs with the property; 
(v)  The agreement is recorded with the appropriate county Register of Deeds in accordance with Section 6.2.11 D.3, Recordation of Improvements; 
(vi)  The Engineering Services Director finds that the watershed development plan is in compliance with all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Developments participating in a private regional stormwater control program are encouraged to maintain pre-development hydrology at the project site. 
D.  Improvements   
1.  Design of Improvements   
(a)  The design of all stormwater management facilities shall be performed by a North Carolina registered professional engineer, approved by the TRC, and meet or exceed the standards of the City of High Point Stormwater Best Management Practices Design Manual . 
(b)  The TRC shall require that a stormwater management facility be positioned on a site such that water quality protection is improved. 
2.  Construction of Improvements   
(a)  The construction of all stormwater management facilities as shown on an approved watershed development plan shall be completed and have received final approval prior to any plat recordation, or said improvements shall be guaranteed by a surety in accordance with Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees. 
(b)  The construction of all stormwater management facilities as shown on an approved watershed development plan shall be completed and have received final approval prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  If a building permit is not required for a site, then any required stormwater management facility shall be completed prior to installation of any built-upon area on the site. 
3.  Recordation of Improvements All stormwater management facilities and associated access/maintenance easement(s) shall be recorded on a plat, and a mechanism to ensure their maintenance shall be established and recorded concurrent with or prior to plat recordation. 
4.  Engineer's Certificate of Completion Required An engineer's Certification of Completion for stormwater management facilities as set out in the City's Development Guide shall be submitted prior to issuance of any building certificate of occupancy. 
5.  Operation and Maintenance Agreement   
(a)  Maintenance responsibility for stormwater management facilities and their access shall be vested with a responsible party by means of a legally binding and enforceable operation and maintenance agreement that is executed as a condition of plan approval, as provided for in Section 6.2.11 D.3, Recordation of Improvements. 
(b)  The agreement must be approved by the Planning and Development Director and shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site, portions of the site, and lots or parcels served by the stormwater management facilities. 
(c)  In the case of participation in a regional runoff control program in accordance with Section 6.2.11, General Standards and Restrictions, a binding contract or agreement shall be required for participation. 
(d)  The operation and maintenance agreement shall be referenced on the final plat and shall be recorded with the appropriate county Register of Deeds upon final plat approval. 
(e)  If no subdivision plat is recorded for the site, then the operation and maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the appropriate county Register of Deeds so as to appear in the chain of title of all subsequent purchasers under generally accepted searching principles. 
(f)  The operation and maintenance agreement shall require the owner or owners' association to maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the stormwater management facilities, and shall state the terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance for such. 
(g)  The owner of each stormwater management facility installed pursuant to this Ordinance shall maintain and operate it so as to preserve and continue its function in controlling water quality and quantity in accordance with the function for which it was designed. 
(h)  The operation and maintenance agreement shall refer the property owner or owners' association to the City of High Point for specific maintenance requirements of stormwater management facilities. In addition, it shall grant to the City a right of entry in the event that the Public Services Director has reason to believe it has become necessary to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair, or reconstruct the stormwater management facilities. In no case shall the right of entry, of itself, confer an obligation on the City to assume responsibility for maintenance of the stormwater management facilities. 
(i)  The Public Services Director shall have the responsibility to inspect the engineered stormwater control structures annually, as required by NC Environmental Management Commission, to record the results on forms approved or supplied by the NCDWR, to inspect any other stormwater management facilities as deemed necessary, and to notify the responsible property owner or owners' association when maintenance or repairs are required. 
(j)  All required repairs and maintenance shall be performed within 90 days after such notice. In case of failure by the responsible party to perform the required maintenance or repairs within the stated period, the City may perform such maintenance or repairs and recover all costs attendant thereto from the landowner or owners' association. 
(k)  For all stormwater management facilities required pursuant to this Ordinance that are owned by a private property owner or an owners' association, the required operation and maintenance agreement shall include all of the following provisions: 
(1)  Acknowledgment that the owner or owners' association shall continuously operate and maintain the stormwater management facilities. 
(2)  Establishment of an escrow account, which can be spent solely for sediment removal, structural, biological, or vegetative replacement, major repair, or reconstruction of the stormwater management facilities. If stormwater management facilities are not performing adequately or as intended or are not properly maintained, the City, in its sole discretion, may remedy the situation, and in such instances the City shall be fully reimbursed from the escrow account. 
(3)  Escrowed funds may be spent by the landowner or owners' association for sediment removal, structural, biological or vegetative replacement, major repair, and reconstruction of the stormwater management facilities. 
(4)  Granting to the City a right of entry to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair, and reconstruct stormwater management facilities. 
(5)  Allowing the City to recover from the landowner or owners' association and its members any and all costs the City expends to maintain or repair the stormwater management facilities or to correct any operational deficiencies. 
(6)  Failure to pay the City all of its expended costs, after 45 days written notice, shall constitute a breach of the agreement. 
(7)  In case of a deficiency, the City shall thereafter be entitled to bring an action against the owner or owners' association and its members to pay, or foreclose upon the lien hereby authorized by the agreement against the property, or both. Interest, collection costs, and attorney fees shall be added to the recovery. 
(8)  A statement that this agreement shall not obligate the City to maintain or repair any stormwater management facility, and the City shall not be liable to any person for the condition or operation of stormwater management facilities. 
(9)  A statement that this agreement shall not in any way diminish, limit, or restrict the right of the City to enforce any of its ordinances as authorized by law. 
(10)  A provision indemnifying and holding harmless the City for any costs and injuries arising from or related to the stormwater management facilities, unless the City has agreed in writing to assume the maintenance responsibility and has accepted dedication of any and all rights necessary to carry out that maintenance. 
6.  Inspection Program   
(a)  Inspections and inspection programs by the City may be conducted or established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. 
(b)  Inspections may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Reviewing maintenance and repair records; 
(2)  Sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and 
(3)  Evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities. 
(c)  If the owner or occupant of any land refuses to permit such inspection, the Public Services Director shall proceed to obtain an administrative search warrant pursuant to North Carolina General Statutes Section 15-27.2, as amended. 
(d)  No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with the Public Services Director while carrying out their official duties. 
E.  Watershed Development Plan   
1.  Plan Required A watershed development plan prepared by a North Carolina registered professional engineer in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be submitted to the Planning and Development Director for all development. 
2.  Construction Plans a Part of Watershed Development Plan The construction plans for required runoff control structure(s) shall be approved as part of the watershed development plan, and prior to issuance of any building or land disturbance permit on a site. For subdivisions, construction plans shall be submitted in accordance with Section 2.5.11, Preliminary Plat. 
3.  Master Watershed Development Plan   
(a)  Where authorized by the TRC, a master watershed development plan may be approved for certain large-scale nonresidential and multi-family developments, in-lieu of a watershed development plan with the required construction plans. 
(b)  Where authorized, the master watershed development plan shall be approved by the TRC prior to the recordation of any plat, or issuance of any grading or building permits for the total site. 
(c)  Prior to the approval of any site plans or group development plans, grading permit, or building permit for any development site included on a given master watershed development plan, a site-specific watershed development plan shall be approved subject to the requirements of this section. 
4.  Plan Approval The TRC shall approve any watershed development plan that is in conformance with the requirements of this section. 
5.  Approved Plan a Prerequisite A watershed development plan shall be approved prior to the recordation of any plat, or issuance of any grading permit or building permit for the site. The Planning and Development and the Engineering Services Director are not authorized to issue any permits for development on any land unless a watershed development plan is approved, if one is required. 
6.  Engineered Stormwater Controls and Alternate Measures When a permanent engineered stormwater control structure or alternate measure, including participation in a regional stormwater control program, is required for a development to comply with the requirements of this section, a North Carolina registered professional engineer shall prepare the plan with the Engineer's Certification of Runoff Control as set out in the City's Development Guide affixed, signed, sealed, and dated. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , §§ 12, 13, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
6.2.12. - General Watershed Area and Watershed Critical Area Established 
The standards in this section shall apply to lands within an individual WSO district in addition to the standards in Section 6.2.11, General Standards and Restrictions. 
A.  District Components Each WSO district is divided into 2 sub districts: the General Watershed Area (GWA), and the Watershed Critical Area (WCA). 
1.  General Watershed Area (GWA) The General Watershed Area (GWA) component includes all land draining into a designated water supply reservoir within the City's jurisdiction, but outside the Watershed Critical Area (WCA) Overlay component. For the purposes of this section, the following constitute the designated water supply reservoirs: 
(a)  Oak Hollow Lake; 
(b)  City Lake; 
(c)  Oakdale Reservoir (Jamestown); 
(d)  Randleman Lake; 
(e)  Uwharrie (Lake Reese); and 
(f)  Lake Thom-A-Lex. 
2.  Watershed Critical Area (WCA)   
(a)  Location   
(1)  The Watershed Critical Area (WCA) component covers the portion of the WSO subarea adjacent to a designated water supply intake or reservoir where risk associated with pollution is greater than from the remaining portions of the watershed. 
(2)  The WCA component boundary extends either a minimum of 2,750 feet outward from the normal pool elevation of the reservoir in which the intake is located or to the ridgeline of designated water supply reservoir basins, whichever is closer to the normal pool elevation. 
(3)  In the case of major streams feeding the water supply reservoir (i.e., East and West Forks of the Deep River and Hiatt Branch), the WCA subarea boundary extends to the nearest identifiable major feature which crosses the stream, and which is at least 2,750 feet upstream of the reservoir measured horizontally, except for the West Fork of the Deep River upstream from Oak Hollow Lake, where the major identifiable feature shall be defined as Sandy Ridge Road. The identifiable major feature may be a street, railroad, easement, or other means of travel, which can be used by emergency personnel to respond to spills. 
(b)  Tiers Each WCA is comprised of 4 separate tiers, which are designated as follows: 
(1)  Tier 1 Tier 1 consists of those lands within 200 feet measured horizontally from the pool elevation of the designated reservoir, which is 803 feet above mean sea level for Oak Hollow Lake, 756 feet above mean sea level for City Lake, 716 feet above mean sea level for Oakdale Reservoir, and 682 feet above mean sea level for Randleman Lake. 
(2)  Tier 2 Tier 2 consists of those lands lying within an area bounded by Tier 1 and a line parallel to and 750 feet in distance from the normal pool elevation. 
(3)  Tier 3 Tier 3 consists of those lands lying within an area bounded by Tier 2 and a line parallel to and 2,750 feet, measured horizontally from the normal pool elevation, or to the boundary of the WCA, whichever comes first, for all WCAs except the Randleman Lake WCA. Randleman Lake's WCA consists of those lands lying within an area bounded by Tier 2 and a line parallel to and 3,000 feet measured horizontally from the normal pool elevation, or to the boundary of the WCA, whichever comes first, except that Tier 3 along Richland Creek consists of those lands lying within an area bounded by Tier 2 and a line parallel to and 2,640 feet (1/2 mile) measured horizontally from the normal pool elevation or to the boundary of the WCA, whichever comes first. 
(4)  Tier 4 Tier 4 consists of those lands lying in the area between the boundary of Tier 3 and the WCA boundary. 
B.  District Boundaries The district boundaries for each WSO are shown on the City of High Point Watershed Map, which is incorporated herein by reference. WSO boundaries shall be determined in accordance with Section 3.1.5, Official Zoning Map, and Section 2.5.4, Determination. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.13. - Standards Applicable in the GWA 
A.  Prohibited Uses The following uses and activities are prohibited in a GWA: 
1.  All hazardous or toxic substance generators or handlers as defined in this Ordinance; and 
2.  Establishment of a new public or private major landfill or expansion of an existing private major landfill. 
B.  Built-Upon Area Limitations   
1.  Limits in Oak Hollow Lake, City Lake, and Oakdale Reservoir Watersheds Oak Hollow Lake, City Lake, and Oakdale Reservoir are classified as WS IV CW water supply watersheds, and development in the GWA shall not exceed 70 percent built-upon area. 
2.  Limits in Randleman Lake Watershed Randleman Lake is classified as a WS IV CW water supply watershed, and development in the Randleman Lake GWA shall not exceed 50 percent built-upon area, except as provided below: 
(a)  In the Randleman Lake Downtown Area, as shown on the City of High Point Watershed Map, development shall not exceed 90 percent built-upon area. 
(b)  In the Randleman Lake Credit Area, which is in the Deep River 1 sub-basin as shown on the City of High Point Watershed Map, nonresidential development shall not exceed 70 percent on parcels totaling a maximum of 2,357 acres. 
(c)  Allocation shall be made on a first come, first served basis. An allocation shall be assigned when a building permit for the site is issued, site plan is approved, or the preliminary subdivision plat for a development is approved. Expiration of a building permit, site plan approval, or preliminary plat approval shall terminate the allocation identified in this subsection. 
3.  Limits in the Uwharrie (Lake Reese) and Lake Thom-A-Lex Watersheds Uwharrie (Lake Reece) and Lake Thom-A-Lex are classified as WS III water supply watersheds, and development in the GWA shall not exceed 50 percent built-upon area, except as otherwise as provided below: 
(a)  10 percent of the City's portion of the Uwharrie (Lake Reese) Watershed and the Lake Thom-A-Lex Watershed may be developed with new nonresidential development at up to 70 percent built-upon area. 
(b)  Allocation shall be made on a first come, first served basis. An allocation shall be assigned when a building permit for the site is issued, site plan is approved, or the preliminary subdivision plat for a development is approved. Expiration of a building permit, site plan approval, or preliminary plat approval shall terminate the allocation identified in this Subsection. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.14. - Standards Applicable in the WCA 
A.  Prohibited Uses In addition to the limitations in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, the following uses are prohibited in a WCA: 
1.  Any use that employs, sells, or relates to petroleum, petroleum-based products, or equipment that uses petroleum; 
2.  Any use that involves or relates to chemicals, fertilizer, pesticides, explosives, or phosphorous; 
3.  Any use that involves or relates to the manufacture of paper, rubber, concrete, metals, or textiles; 
4.  Any use that relates to the collection, processing, or storage of refuse or waste products; 
5.  Any use that relates to or involves livestock or animal-related products or services; and 
6.  Any use that involves or relates to commercial, physical, or biological research. 
B.  Containment Structures Storage tanks for fuels and chemicals and associated pumping and piping allowed in the WCA shall have a spill containment system approved by the Planning and Development Director and the Fire Marshal and shall comply with the following: 
1.  Containment systems shall be of sufficient volume to contain 100 percent of all the tank(s) contents stored in the area and shall have a leak detection system. 
2.  Tanks and containment structures shall not be placed closer than 1,000 feet to the normal pool elevation of the applicable reservoir. 
3.  Except when abutting an LI or HI zoning district, a containment system shall be a minimum of 50 feet from the lot line. 
4.  Provisions shall be made to remove stormwater without removal of the product except for mistable materials. 
5.  Contaminated water may not be discharged to the sewer system without a permit or to a water body or to a water-course. 
C.  Underground Storage Tanks Except for the replacement of existing tanks, underground storage tanks for fuels and chemicals are prohibited in the WCA. 
D.  Point Source Discharges   
1.  No new wastewater treatment plants of any kind or expansion of any existing private wastewater facilities shall be permitted in the WCA. 
2.  Industrial pre-treatment facilities that prepare wastewater for discharge into a public sewer system shall be permitted in the WCA. 
E.  Slopes Greater than 15 Percent and Wetlands   
1.  Slopes greater than 15 percent lying adjacent to natural drainageways, intermittent streams, perennial streams, and wetlands shall remain in a natural and undisturbed condition except for road crossings, utilities, erosion control devices, and runoff control devices. 
2.  Dedication of these areas to the City as drainageway and open space may be required when authorized by Section 7.1.6 F, Drainage, or any other provision in this Ordinance. 
3.  Where dedication is not required, a water quality conservation easement shall be recorded over wetlands and slopes greater than 15 percent. 
4.  Where a water quality conservation easement serves to bring 2 or more lots into compliance with WCA requirements, the TRC may require that the wetlands and slopes covered by such easements be held as common area by an owners' association. 
5.  The natural ground cover and natural tree canopy within a water quality conservation easement shall be preserved except when removal is authorized by the Public Services Department as part of the following: 
(a)  Construction or maintenance of a public utility by the City or a designee; 
(b)  Construction or maintenance of soil erosion and sedimentation control structures by the developer of the land, in accordance with Section 2.5.10, Land Disturbance Permit. After these structures are no longer needed, they shall be removed and the water quality conservation easement restored to a natural state; 
(c)  Normal maintenance by mechanical means for the removal of dead, diseased, deformed, poisonous, or noxious vegetation and pests harmful to health; and 
(d)  Mowing of utility areas. 
6.  Nothing in this subsection shall supersede the surface water buffer requirements of Section 6.2.9 C, Surface Water Buffers. 
F.  Drainage   
1.  Drainage within the WCA shall be provided by means of open channels, unless it is determined by the TRC that better water quality protection is provided by alternative means. 
2.  Drainageways shall have protected channels or remain in a natural, undisturbed state, except for road crossings, utilities, erosion control devices, runoff control devices, and desirable artificial stream bank stabilization. 
3.  No new development shall be allowed in a drainageway except that water dependent structures and public projects such as greenways may be allowed where no practicable alternative exists. Where these activities are allowed, they shall minimize built-upon surface area and maximize the utilization of Best Management Practices (BMP's). 
4.  Perennial and intermittent streams, lakes and ponds shall be protected as specified in Section 6.2.9 C, Surface Water Buffers. 
G.  Density Shifting   
1.  The location of development on soils and terrain most suited to protecting the water quality of water supply reservoirs is encouraged in the WCA by density shifting. The overall density of a development utilizing density shifting shall meet the applicable WCA density and stormwater control requirements, except as modified by this sub-section. Built-upon areas within such developments shall be designed and sited to minimize stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters, and the remainder of the tract should remain in an undisturbed or natural state. 
2.  Density shifting is utilized in developments having lot sizes in accordance with the minimum area permitted by the underlying zoning district or in approved conservation subdivisions. Through density shifting, developments may increase the maximum permitted residential densities otherwise established in this Ordinance if the development rights attached to acreage located within a tier are transferred within the same tract to an adjacent tier located farther from the water supply reservoir. Such transfer shall permit an additional number of dwelling units in the receiving tier. This addition is calculated by adding the density or dwelling units transferred from the adjacent tier to the density or dwelling units permitted in the receiving tier. The dwelling units permitted by acreage transfer from an adjacent tier shall be in addition to the number of dwelling units otherwise permitted in the receiving tier, but in no case shall the density allowed by the underlying zoning district be exceeded. 
H.  Public Sanitary Sewer Required Except for development in the Randleman Lake WCA constructed under the low density option, all new development in a WCA shall be served by public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.15. - Individual Water Supply Watersheds 
A.  Oak Hollow Lake   
1.  GWA Built-Upon Area Limits Development in Oak Hollow Lake GWA shall not exceed 70 percent built-upon area. 
2.  WCA Density and Built-Upon Area Limits Density and built-upon area in the Oak Hollow Lake WCA shall be as follows: 
(a)  Tier 1: None, except for public water dependent structures. 
(b)  Tier 2: 1 dwelling unit per acre. 
(c)  Tier 3: 2 dwelling units per acre or 35 percent built-upon area. 
(d)  Tier 4: 2 dwelling units per acre or 50 percent built-upon area. 
B.  City Lake   
1.  GWA Built-Upon Area Limits Development in City Lake GWA shall not exceed 70 percent built-upon area. 
2.  WCA Density and Built-Upon Area Limits Density and built-upon area in the City Lake WCA shall be as follows: 
(a)  Tier 1: None, except for public water dependent structures. 
(b)  Tier 2: 1 dwelling unit per acre. 
(c)  Tier 3: 2 dwelling units per acre or 35 percent built-upon area. 
(d)  Tier 4: 2 dwelling units per acre or 50 percent built-upon area. 
C.  Oakdale Reservoir   
1.  GWA Built-Upon Area Limits Development in Oakdale Reservoir GWA shall not exceed 70 percent built-upon area. 
2.  WCA Density and Built-Upon Area Limits Density and Built-Upon Area in Oakdale Reservoir WCA shall be as follows: 
(a)  Tier 1: None, except for public water dependent structures. 
(b)  Tier 2: 1 dwelling unit per acre. 
(c)  Tier 3: 2 dwelling units per acre or 35 percent built-upon area. 
(d)  Tier 4: Oakdale Reservoir does not have a Tier 4. 
D.  Randleman Lake   
1.  GWA Built-Upon Area Limits Development in the Randleman Lake GWA shall not exceed 50 percent built-upon area, except as otherwise provided below: 
(a)  In the Randleman Lake Downtown Area, as shown on the High Point Watershed Map, development shall not exceed 90 percent built-upon area. 
(b)  In the Randleman Lake Credit Area, as shown on the High Point Watershed Map, nonresidential development shall not exceed 70 percent on parcels totaling a maximum of 2,357 acres. 
(c)  Allocation shall be made on a first come, first served basis. An allocation shall be assigned when a building permit for the site is issued, site plan is approved, or the preliminary subdivision plat for a development is approved. Expiration of a building permit, site plan approval, or preliminary plat approval shall terminate the allocation. 
2.  WCA Density and Built-Upon Area Limits Density and built-upon area in the Randleman Lake WCA shall be as follows: 
(a)  Tier 1: None, except for public water dependent structures. 
(b)  Tier 2: 1 dwelling unit per 5 acres or 2.5 percent built-upon area. 
(c)  Tier 3: 1 dwelling unit per 3 acres or 4 percent built-upon area, except that up to 30 percent built-upon area shall be permitted in accordance with Section 6.2.15 D.3, WCA High Density Option. 
(d)  Tier 4: 1 dwelling unit per acre or 12 percent built-upon area, except that up to 40 percent built-upon area shall be permitted in accordance with Section 6.2.15 D.3, WCA High Density Option. 
3.  WCA High Density Option Built-upon area in the Randleman Lake WCA may be increased in the following sub-basins using the high density option, provided: 
(a)  In Tier 3 of the Richland Creek sub-basin, a total of 255 acres may be developed with nonresidential development under the high density option at 30 percent built-upon area. 
(b)  In the Business 85/Riverdale Road sub-basin, a total of 482 acres may be developed with nonresidential development under the high density option at 30 percent built-upon area in Tier 3 and 40 percent built-upon area in Tier 4. However, of that total 482 acres in the Business 85/Riverdale Road sub-basin, only a maximum of 284 acres shall be developed in Tier 3. 
(c)  Allocation shall be made on a first come, first served basis. An allocation shall be assigned when a building permit for the site is issued, site plan is approved, or the preliminary subdivision plat for a development is approved. Expiration of a building permit, site plan approval, or preliminary plat approval shall terminate the allocation. 
E.  Uwharrie (Lake Reece) Development in a WS-III GWA shall not exceed 50 percent built-upon area, except as otherwise provided below: 
1.  10 percent of the City's portion of the Uwharrie (Lake Reese) Watershed, as delineated on July 1, 1993, may be developed with new nonresidential development at up to 70 percent built-upon area. 
2.  Allocation shall be made on a first come, first served basis. An allocation shall be assigned when a building permit for the site is issued, site plan is approved, or the preliminary subdivision plat for a development is approved. Expiration of a building permit, site plan approval, or preliminary plat approval shall terminate the allocation. 
F.  Lake Thom-A-Lex Development in a WS-III GWA shall not exceed 50 percent built-upon area, except as otherwise provided below: 
1.  10 percent of the City's portion of the Lake Thom-A-Lex Watershed, may be developed with new nonresidential development at up to 70 percent built-upon area. 
2.  Allocation shall be made on a first come, first served basis. An allocation shall be assigned when a building permit for the site is issued, site plan is approved, or the preliminary subdivision plat for a development is approved. Expiration of a building permit, site plan approval, or preliminary plat approval shall terminate the allocation. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.16. - Watershed Modifications 
A.  General   
1.  The TRC is authorized to modify this section and accept an alternate means of accomplishing the purposes of this Ordinance for those watershed requirements that are more stringent than the State minimum watershed requirements. 
2.  Where such watershed requirements are State minimum requirements, then a departure from those requirements shall only be considered in accordance with Section 2.4.19, Watershed Variance. 
B.  Grounds for Modification In considering a watershed modification, the TRC shall determine that the modification request meets one or more of the following findings: 
1.  Equal or Better Performance   
(a)  A finding by the TRC that equal or better performance in furtherance of the purposes of this Ordinance will result from the alternate standards portrayed on the plan constitutes grounds for approval of a modification. The evaluation of performance shall be made with regard to overall performance in furtherance of the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(b)  If an alternate standard as portrayed on the plan reduces performance with regard to one or more Ordinance purposes but produces a concomitant and counterbalancing superiority of performance with regard to one or more other purposes, a modification may be approved. 
2.  Physical Constraints A finding by the TRC that the size, topography, or existing development of the property or of adjoining areas prevents conformance with a standard constitutes grounds for approval of a modification. 
3.  Other Constraints A finding by the TRC that a federal, state or local law or regulation prevents conformance with a standard constitutes grounds for approval of a modification. 
4.  Conditions   
(a)  In approving a modification, the TRC may prescribe such reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards as will assure that the use of the land will: 
(1)  Be compatible with surrounding lands; 
(2)  Not alter the essential character of the neighborhood; and 
(3)  Support the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Violations of conditions and safeguards that are part of the terms of modification approval shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. 
(c)  An approved modification is part of an approved watershed plan and shall have the same duration as the plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.2.17. - Watershed Accounting 
A.  Randleman Lake GWA Built-Upon Area Limits The Planning and Development Director shall keep records on the City's use of the provision allowing land in the Randleman Lake GWA to be developed with a maximum of 70 percent built-upon area. Records for the watershed shall include the total area of the GWA, total acres eligible to be developed under this provision, total acres approved for development under this provision, and individual records for each project with the following information: location, number of developed acres, type of land use and stormwater management plan. 
B.  Randleman Lake WCA Built-Upon Area Limits   
1.  The Planning and Development Director shall keep records on the City's use of the provision allowing land in the Richland Creek sub-basin and the Business 85 Riverdale Road sub-basin of the Randleman Lake WCA to be developed with a maximum of 30 percent built-upon area in Tier 3 and 40 percent built-upon area in Tier 4. High density nonresidential development shall be limited in the WCA to these 2 sub-basins of the Randleman Lake Watershed, as shown on the High Point Watershed Map. 
2.  Records for the watershed shall include the total area of the WCA, total area of Tiers 3 and 4 of the WCA within the 2 sub-basins, total acres eligible to be developed in Tiers 3 and 4 under this provision, total acres approved for development under this provision, and individual records for each project with the following information: location, number of developed acres, type of land use and stormwater management plan. 
C.  10/70 Provision   
1.  The Planning and Development Director shall keep records on the City's use of the provision allowing a maximum of 10 percent of the GWA of the Uwharrie (Lake Reese) Watershed and the Lake Thom-A-Lex Watershed to be developed with a maximum of 70 percent built-upon area. Records for the watershed shall include the total area of the watershed's GWA, total acres eligible to be developed under this provision, total acres approved for development under this provision, and individual records for each project with the following information: location, number of developed acres, type of land use and stormwater management plan. 
2.  Development under this provision requires engineered stormwater controls. 
D.  Record Keeping The Planning and Development Director shall keep a record of all watershed variances, stream determinations and determinations of no practical alternatives. This record shall be submitted for each calendar year to the North Carolina Division of Water Resources on or before January 1 of the following year and shall provide a description of each project receiving a variance, stream determination or determination of no practical alternatives and the reasons for granting them. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 27, 1-17-2017) 
6.3. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation 

6.3.1. - Applicability 
A.  General   
1.  Unless exempted by this section, no person shall initiate any land-disturbing activity without a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and a land disturbance permit in accordance with Section 2.5.10, Land Disturbance Permit, if the land-disturbing activity: 
(a)  Exceeds 1 acre (lands under one ownership or diverse lands being developed as a unit shall be aggregated); 
(b)  Is located on highly erodible soils with a "k" factor greater than 0.36; 
(c)  Includes a water quality pond or retention structure in a watershed, or drains into a water quality pond or retention structure in any part of a watershed; 
(d)  Is located in a Tier 1 or Tier 2 portion of a WCA; 
(e)  Is located in an existing uncovered area requiring extensive soil erosion control measures in accordance with Subsection 6.3.13, Existing Uncovered Areas; or 
(f)  Requires extensive erosion control measures. 
B.  Protection of Property A person conducting land-disturbing activity shall take all reasonable measures to protect all public and private property from damage caused by such activity. 
6.3.2. - Exemptions 
The following activities are exempted from the requirements of Section 2.5.10, Land Disturbance Permit, and the standards in this section: 
A.  A land-disturbing activity which is essential to protect human life during an emergency; 
B.  A land-disturbing activity undertaken in areas that do not comply with Section 6.3.1 A.1(b)-(f) above; 
C.  The stockpiling of raw or processed sand, stone, or gravel in material processing plants and storage yards, provided sediment control measures are utilized to protect against off-site damage; 
D.  A land-disturbing activity undertaken on agricultural land for the raising of plants or animals useful to man, including but not limited to: 
1.  Forage and sod crops, grain and feed crops, tobacco, cotton and peanuts; 
2.  Dairy animals and dairy products; 
3.  Poultry and poultry products; 
4.  Livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats, including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals; 
5.  Bees and aviary products; and 
6.  Fur animals. 
E.  A land-disturbing activity undertaken on forest land for the production and harvesting of timber and timber products, which are conducted in accordance with Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality ( Best Management Practices ) as adopted by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). The landowner shall provide the Office of Erosion Control a copy of the Reforestation/Regeneration Plan and the Forest Stewardship Program Plan for review of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. A Forest Stewardship Plan submitted under the guise of any reason other than that of a true Forest Stewardship Plan (subdivision or commercial development) shall be void. The plan shall be treated as a subdivision or commercial development and shall be governed under the approximate standard within this Ordinance. If land-disturbing activity undertaken on forestland for the production and harvesting of timber and timber products is not conducted in accordance with Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality , the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to such activity and any related land-disturbing activity on the tract; 
F.  A land-disturbing activity undertaken by persons as defined in North Carolina General Statutes Section 113A-52(8) who are otherwise regulated by the provisions of The Mining Act of 1971, North Carolina General Statutes Section 74-46 through 74-68; and 
G.  A land-disturbing activity undertaken on lands over which the State has exclusive regulatory jurisdiction as provided in North Carolina General Statutes Section 113A-56(a). 
6.3.3. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan 
Land-disturbing activities subject to the standards in this section shall require prior approval of a soil erosion and sediment control plan prepared in accordance with the following standards. 
A.  Preparation of Plan   
1.  The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared by, and shall bear the seal and signature of a licensed professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified professional in erosion and sedimentation control (CPESC), or a registered surveyor to the extent permitted by North Carolina law, at a scale not less than 1 inch equals 100 feet. 
2.  The plan shall be filed with the Planning and Development Director, and the applicable Soil and Water Conservation District, 30 days prior to the commencement of the proposed activity. 
3.  Plans submitted for sites less than 1 acre do not require a seal and signature of a licensed professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified professional in erosion and sedimentation control (CPESC), or registered surveyor. 
B.  Submission of Plan   
1.  A person conducting land-disturbing activity that proposes to disturb or uncover 1 or more acres shall submit an erosion control plan with the Engineering Services Director, at least 30 days prior to beginning such activity and shall keep another copy of the plan on file at the job site. 
2.  If the Engineering Services Director, either upon review of such plan or on inspection of the job site, determines that a significant risk of accelerated erosion or off-site sedimentation exists, the Engineering Services Director shall require a revised plan. 
3.  Pending the preparation of the revised plan, work shall cease or shall continue under conditions outlined by the appropriate authority. 
C.  Financial Responsibility Statement   
1.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be disapproved unless accompanied by an authorized statement of financial responsibility and ownership. 
2.  This statement shall be signed by the person financially responsible for the land-disturbing activity or his attorney in fact. 
3.  The statement shall include the mailing and street addresses of the principal place of business of the person financially responsible and landowner, or their registered agents. 
4.  If the person financially responsible is not a resident of North Carolina, a North Carolina agent must be designated in the statement for the purpose of receiving notice of compliance or non-compliance with the plan, the North Carolina Environmental Policy Act, this Ordinance, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this Ordinance. 
D.  Plan Requirements The plan required by this section shall contain architectural and engineering drawings, maps, assumptions, calculations, and narrative statements as needed to adequately describe the proposed development of the land and the measures proposed to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. Plan content may vary to meet the needs of specific site requirements. Detailed guidelines for plan preparation can be found in the Development Guide . 
E.  North Carolina Division of Water Resources Approval Required The landowner or developer shall forward to the Director of the North Carolina Division of Water Resources, a plan for any land-disturbing activity that involves the utilization of ditches for the purpose of de-watering or lowering the water table of a tract. Written documentation of this plan submittal shall be provided to the Engineering Services Director prior to approval of an erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
F.  Conservation District Review Within 20 days of receipt of any plan, the applicable Soil and Water Conservation District shall review it and submit its comments and recommendations to the Engineering Services Director. Failure of the Soil and Water Conservation District to submit its comments and recommendations within 20 days shall not delay final action on the plan. 
G.  Engineering Services Director Review   
1.  The Engineering Services Director shall review each complete plan submitted within 30 days of the date it is determined complete and notify the person submitting the plan that it is approved, approved with conditions, approved with performance reservations, or disapproved. 
2.  Failure to approve or disapprove a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan within 30 days of the date it is determined to be complete shall result in its being approved. 
3.  If the plan is disapproved, the reasons for the denial shall be stated in writing. 
4.  The Engineering Services Director shall approve or deny a revised soil erosion and sedimentation control plan within 15 days of receipt, or it shall be deemed approved. 
5.  If, following commencement of a land-disturbing activity pursuant to an approved plan, the Engineering Services Director determines that the plan is inadequate to meet the requirements of this Ordinance, the Engineering Services Director may require revisions as necessary for compliance. 
6.  A plan submitted for a land-disturbing activity for which an environmental document is required by the North Carolina Environmental Policy Act (North Carolina General Statutes Section 113A-1, et seq.) shall be deemed incomplete until a complete environmental document is available for review. The Engineering Services Director shall promptly notify the person submitting the plan that the 30 day time limit for review of the plan pursuant to this section shall not begin until a complete environmental document is available for review. 
H.  Grounds for Plan Denial A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be disapproved if: 
1.  It fails to adequately meet the basic control objectives or detail provisions of this Ordinance; 
2.  Implementation of the plan would result in a violation of rules adopted by the Environmental Management Commission to protect riparian buffers along surface waters; or 
3.  If its content is inadequate. 
I.  Other Denials   
1.  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be disapproved if there is a finding that an applicant, a parent, subsidiary, or other affiliate of the applicant: 
(a)  Is conducting or has conducted land-disturbing activity without an approved plan, or has received notice of violation of a plan previously approved by the North Carolina Sedimentation Control Commission or the Engineering Services Director and has not complied with the notice within the time specified in the notice; 
(b)  Has failed to pay a civil penalty assessed pursuant to the Environmental Policy Act or this Ordinance which is due and for which no appeal is pending; 
(c)  Has been convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to North Carolina General Statutes Section 113A-64(b) or any criminal provision of this Ordinance; or 
(d)  Has failed to substantially comply with State rules adopted pursuant to the Act or regulations of this Ordinance. 
2.  For purposes of this subsection, an applicant's record may be considered for only the 2 years prior to the application date. 
J.  Application Amendments An amendment to a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan may be submitted in written and/or graphic form and shall be reviewed in the same manner as the original application. Until such time as the amendment is approved, the land-disturbing activity shall not proceed except in accordance with the plan as originally approved. 
K.  Work Conducted from Approved Plan A person engaged in land-disturbing activity who fails to file a plan in accordance with this Ordinance, or who conducts a land-disturbing activity except in accordance with provisions of an approved plan shall be deemed in violation of this Ordinance. 
L.  Plan Approval Required for Permit If land-disturbing activity is subject to the requirements of this section, a building permit shall not be issued unless a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is submitted to the Engineering Services Director, a land disturbance permit issued in accordance with Section 2.5.10, Land Disturbance Permit (if required), and initial soil erosion and sedimentation control devices are installed and are functioning properly. 
M.  Work Completed Before Final Subdivision Approval A final plat approval or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless work at the site is completed in accordance with a valid land disturbance permit, or financial guarantee is approved and accepted as required by this Ordinance. 
N.  Financial Guarantee The applicant for a land disturbance permit to grade more than 1 acre may be required to file with the Engineering Services Director a financial guarantee to cover all the costs of protection of the site, which shall be established in accordance with Section 7.2.2 C, Form of Performance Guarantee, and Section 7.2.2 E, Amount of Performance Guarantee. The guarantee shall remain in force until the work is completed in accordance with the land disturbance permit and the work is approved by the Engineering Services Director. Upon violation of this Ordinance, the Engineering Services Director may draw on the financial guarantee in accordance with Section 7.2.2 G, Default and Forfeiture of Performance Guarantees, to establish protective cover on the site, to control the velocity of runoff, and/or prevent off-site sedimentation. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 14, 4-3-2017) 
6.3.4. - Basic Control Objectives 
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan may be disapproved pursuant to Section 6.3.3 H, Grounds for Plan Denial, if the plan fails to address the following control objectives: 
A.  Identify Critical Areas On-site areas which are subject to severe erosion, and off-site areas which are especially vulnerable to damage from erosion and/or sedimentation, are to be identified and receive special attention; 
B.  Limit Time of Exposure All land-disturbing activity is to be planned and conducted to limit exposure to the shortest feasible time; 
C.  Limit Exposed Areas All land-disturbing activity is to be planned and conducted to minimize the size of the area to be exposed at any one time; 
D.  Control Surface Water Surface water runoff originating upgrade of exposed areas should be controlled to reduce erosion and sediment loss during the period of exposure; 
E.  Control Sedimentation All land-disturbing activity is to be planned and conducted so as to prevent off-site sedimentation damage; and 
F.  Manage Stormwater Runoff When the increase in the velocity of stormwater runoff resulting from a land-disturbing activity is sufficient to cause accelerated erosion of the receiving watercourse, plans are to include measures to control the velocity at the point of discharge so as to minimize accelerated erosion of the site and increased sedimentation of the stream. 
6.3.5. - Mandatory Standards for Land-Disturbing Activity 
Land-disturbing activity shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Undisturbed Buffer Zone Required   
1.  Land-disturbing activity shall not be permitted in proximity to a lake or natural watercourse unless an undisturbed buffer zone 25 feet wide is provided, or a buffer zone is provided along the margin of the watercourse of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within the 25 percent of the buffer zone nearer the land-disturbing activity, provided that these standards shall not apply to a land-disturbing activity in connection with the construction of facilities to be located on, over, or under a lake or natural watercourse. 
2.  Unless otherwise provided, the width of a buffer-zone is measured from the edge of the water to the nearest edge of the disturbed area, with the 25 percent of the strip nearer the land-disturbing activity containing natural or artificial means of confining visible siltation. 
3.  Waters that have been classified as trout waters by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission shall have an undisturbed buffer zone 25 feet wide, or of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within the 25 percent of the buffer zone nearest the land-disturbing activity, whichever is greater. Provided, however, that the Engineering services Director may approve plans which include land-disturbing activity along trout waters when the duration of the disturbance is temporary and the extent of the disturbance is minimal. 
4.  The 25 foot minimum width factor for an undisturbed buffer zone adjacent to designated trout waters shall be measured horizontally from the top of the bank. 
5.  Where a temporary and minimal disturbance is permitted, land-disturbing activities in the buffer zone adjacent to designated trout waters shall be limited to a maximum of 10 percent of the total length of the buffer zone within the tract so that there is not more than 100 linear feet of disturbance in each 1000 linear feet of buffer zone. Larger areas may be disturbed with the written approval of DENR. 
6.  Land-disturbing activity shall not be undertaken within a buffer zone adjacent to designated trout waters that will cause adverse temperature fluctuations in these waters, as established in 15 NCAC 2B.0211 " Fresh Surface Water Classification and Standards ". 
B.  Fill Material Unless a permit from the Public Services Director to operate a landfill is on file for the official site, acceptable fill material shall be free of organic or other degradable materials, masonry, concrete and brick in sizes exceeding 12 inches, and any materials which would cause the site to be regulated as a landfill by the State of North Carolina. 
C.  Graded Slopes and Fills   
1.  The angle for graded slopes and fills shall be no greater than a 2-to-1 slope (horizontal to vertical) if they are to be stabilized with vegetative cover. 
2.  Slopes or fills steeper than 2-to-1 must be protected by structures. 
3.  In any event, slopes left exposed will, within 7 days of completion of any phase of grading, be planted or otherwise provided with temporary or permanent ground cover, devices, or structures sufficient to restrain erosion. 
D.  Ground Cover Whenever land-disturbing activity is undertaken on a tract, the person conducting the land-disturbing activity shall install such sedimentation and erosion control devices and practices as are sufficient to retain the sediment generated by the land-disturbing activity within the boundaries of the tract during construction upon and development of said tract, and shall plant or otherwise provide a permanent ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion after completion of construction or development. Except as provided in Section 6.3.6 B, High Quality Water Zones, of this Ordinance, provisions for a ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion must be accomplished within 14 days. 
6.3.6. - Design and Performance Standards 
A.  Design for 10-Year Storm Except as provided in Section 6.3.6 B, High Quality Water Zones, erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures, and devices shall be so planned, designed, and constructed to provide protection from the calculated maximum peak rate of runoff from the 10-year storm. Runoff rates shall be calculated using the procedures in the USDA, Soil Conservation Service's " National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices ," or other acceptable calculation procedures. 
B.  High Quality Water Zones In high quality water (HQW) zones, the following design standards shall apply: 
1.  Uncovered areas in HQW zones shall be limited at any time to a maximum total area within the boundaries of the tract of 20 acres. Only the portion of the land-disturbing activity within a HQW zone shall be governed by this section. Larger areas may be uncovered within the boundaries of the tract with the written approval of DENR. 
2.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures, and devices within HQW zones shall be planned, designed, and constructed to provide protection from the runoff of the 25-year storm which produces the maximum peak rate of runoff as calculated according to procedures in the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's " National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices " or according to procedures adopted by any other agency of this State or the United States or any generally recognized organization or association. 
3.  Sediment basins within HQW zones shall be designed and constructed so the basin will have a settling efficiency of at least 70 percent for the 40 micron (0.04 mm) size soil particle transported into the basin by the runoff of that 2-year storm which produces the maximum peak rate of runoff as calculated according to procedures in the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's " National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices " or according to procedures adopted by any other agency of this State or the United States or any generally recognized organization or association. 
4.  Newly constructed open channels in HQW zones shall be designed and constructed with side slopes no steeper than 2 horizontal to 1 vertical if a vegetative cover is used for stabilization unless soil conditions permit a steeper slope or where the slopes are stabilized by using mechanical devices, structural devices, or other acceptable ditch liners. In any event, the angle for side slopes shall be sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion. 
5.  Ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion must be provided for any portion of a land-disturbing activity in a HQW zone within 7 days of completion of any phase of grading. 
C.  Sedimentation Basins Except as provided for in Section 6.3.6 B, High Quality Water Zones, above, all sedimentation basins shall be designed and constructed to have a settling efficiency of at least 70 percent for the 40 micron (0.04 mm) size soil particle. 
6.3.7. - Stormwater Outlet Protection 
A.  Intent Stream banks and channels downstream from any land-disturbing activity shall be protected from increased degradation by accelerated erosion caused by increased velocity of runoff from the land-disturbing activity. 
B.  Performance Standard   
1.  Land-disturbing activity shall be conducted so that the post-construction velocity of the 10-year storm runoff in the receiving natural watercourse to the discharge point does not exceed the greater of: 
(a)  The velocity established in Table 6.3.7.B, Maximum Permissible Velocity for Stormwater Discharges; or 
(b)  The velocity of the 10-year storm runoff in the receiving natural watercourse prior to development. 
2.  If condition B.1 above cannot be met, the receiving watercourse (and discharge point) shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected velocity anywhere the velocity exceeds the "prior to development" velocity by 10 percent. 
TABLE 6.3.7.B: MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE VELOCITY FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES [1] 
MATERIAL 
MAXIMUM 
PERMISSIBLE VELOCITIES 
FEET 
PER SECOND 
METERS 
PER SECOND 
Fine sand (noncolloidal) 2.5 0.8 Sandy loam (noncolloidal) 2.5 0.8 Silt loam (noncolloidal) 3.0 0.9 Ordinary firm loam 3.5 1.1 Fine gravel 5.0 1.5 Stiff clay (very colloidal) 5.0 1.5 Graded, loam to cobbles (noncolloidal) 5.0 1.5 Graded, silt to cobbles 5.5 1.7 Alluvial silts (noncolloidal) 3.5 1.1 Alluvial silts (colloidal) 5.0 1.5 Coarse gravel (noncolloidal) 6.0 1.8 Cobbles and shingles 5.5 1.7 Shales and hard pans 6.0 1.8 NOTES: [1] These standards are adapted from recommendations by Special Committee on Irrigation Research, American Society of Civil Engineers, 1926, for channels with straight alignment. For sinuous channels, multiply allowable velocity by 0.95 for slightly sinuous, by 0.9 for moderately sinuous channels, and by 0.8 for highly sinuous channels  
C.  Acceptable Management Measures   
1.  General Measures applied alone or in combination to satisfy the intent of this section are acceptable if there are no objectionable secondary consequences. The N.C. Sedimentation Commission and the City recognize that the management of stormwater runoff to minimize or control downstream channel and bank erosion is a developing technology. Innovative techniques and ideas will be considered and may be used when shown to have the potential to produce successful results. 
2.  Stormwater Runoff Management Alternatives Some alternatives are to: 
(a)  Avoid increases to surface runoff volume and velocity by including measures to promote infiltration to compensate for increased runoff from areas rendered impervious; 
(b)  Avoid increases in stormwater discharge velocities by using detention devices, vegetated or roughened swales, and waterways in-lieu of closed drains and high velocity paved sections; 
(c)  Provide energy dissipaters at outlets of storm drainage facilities to reduce flow velocities to the point of discharge. These may range from simple rip-rapped sections to complex structures; 
(d)  Protect watercourses subject to accelerated erosion by improving cross sections and/or providing erosion-resistant lining; or 
(e)  Upgrade or replace the receiving device structure, or watercourse such that it will receive and conduct the flow to a point where it is no longer subject to degradation from the increased rate of flow or increased velocity. 
D.  Exceptions This rule shall not apply where it can be demonstrated that stormwater discharge velocities will not create an erosion problem in the receiving watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
6.3.8. - Borrow and Waste Areas 
When the person conducting the land-disturbing activity is also the person conducting the borrow or waste disposal activity, areas from which borrow is obtained and which are not regulated by the provisions of the Mining Act of 1971, and waste areas for surplus materials other than landfills regulated by the Public Service Department, shall be considered as part of the land-disturbing activity where the borrow material is being used or from which the waste material originated. When the person conducting land-disturbing activity is not the person obtaining the borrow and/or disposing of the waste, these areas shall be considered a separate land-disturbing activity. 
6.3.9. - Access and Haul Roads 
Temporary access and haul roads, other than existing public roads, constructed or used in connection with any land-disturbing activity shall be considered a part of such activity. 
6.3.10. - Operations in Lakes or Natural Watercourses 
A.  Land-disturbing activity in connection with construction in, on, over, or under a lake or natural watercourse shall be planned and conducted in such a manner as to minimize the extent and duration of disturbance of the stream channel. 
B.  The relocation of a stream, where relocation is an essential part of the proposed activity, shall be planned and executed so as to minimize changes in the stream flow characteristics, except when justification for significant alteration to flow characteristic is provided. 
C.  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall be notified by the developer of any planned operation in lakes or natural watercourses for possible issuance of Section 404 or other permits. 
6.3.11. - Responsibility for Maintenance 
During the development of a site, the person conducting the land-disturbing activity shall install and maintain all temporary and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by the approved plan, by any provision of this Ordinance, the Act, or by any order adopted pursuant to this Ordinance or the North Carolina Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973 (see Section 113A-50 of the North Carolina General Statutes). After site development, the landowner or person in possession or control of the land shall install and/or maintain all necessary permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, except those measures installed within a road or street right-of way or easement accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency. 
6.3.12. - Additional Measures 
Whenever the Engineering Services Director determines that significant sedimentation is occurring as a result of land-disturbing activity, despite application and maintenance of protective practices, the person conducting the land-distributing activity will be required to and shall take additional protective action. 
6.3.13. - Existing Uncovered Areas 
A.  Applicability All uncovered areas existing on the effective date of this Ordinance which are the result of land-disturbing activity, which exceed 1 acre, which are subject to continued accelerated erosion, and which are causing off-site damage from sedimentation, shall be provided with a ground cover or other protective measures, structures, or devices sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion and control off-site sedimentation. 
B.  Notice of Violation The Engineering Services Director will serve upon the landowner or other person in possession or control of the land, a written notice of violation in accordance with Section 9.6.1, Notice of Violation. In determining the corrective measures required and the time allowed for compliance, the Engineering Services Director shall take into consideration the economic feasibility, technology, and quantity of work required and shall set reasonable attainable time limits for compliance. 
C.  Requiring Erosion Control Plan The Engineering Services Director reserves the right to require preparation and approval of a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan in any instance where extensive control measures are required. 
D.  Exemption This rule shall not require ground cover on cleared land forming the future basin of a planned reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 14, 4-3-2017) 
6.3.14. - Restoration after Non-Compliance 
The Engineering Services Director may require a person who engaged in a land-disturbing activity and failed to retain sediment generated by the activity, as required by North Carolina General Statutes Section 113A-57 (3), to restore the waters and land affected by the failure to minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting pollution by sedimentation. This authority is in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty or injunctive relief authorized under this Ordinance. 
6.4. - Flood Damage Prevention 

6.4.1. - General 
A.  Applicability This section shall apply to development in all special flood hazard areas within the corporate limits and ETJ of the City of High Point. 
B.  Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), for Guilford County dated March 16, 2009, Davidson County, dated March 16, 2009, Forsyth County, dated January 2, 2009, and Randolph County, dated January 8, 2008, along with its accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels (6789, 6798, 6799K, 6880, 6881, 6882K, 6890K, 6891K, 6892K, 6893K, 6894K, 7708, 7709K, 7719K, 7729K, 7739, 7800, 7801, 7802, 7803, 7804, 7805, 7810, 7811, 7812, 7813, 7814, 7815, 7820, 7821, 7822, 7823, 7824, and 7830), which are incorporated herein by reference. 
C.  Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit A floodplain development permit is required prior to commencement of development within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the provisions of this section and Section 2.5.8, Floodplain Development Permit. 
D.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This section shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee of the City for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
6.4.2. - Application, Permit, and Certification Requirements 
A.  Application Requirements An application for a floodplain development permit shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements in the Development Guide , the certification requirements in Section 6.4.2 B below, and submitted in accordance with the requirements of Section 2.5.8, Floodplain Development Permit. 
B.  Certification Requirements Development subject to this section shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Elevation Certificates   
(a)  Before the Start of Construction   
(1)  An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. 
(2)  Certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level shall be submitted. 
(3)  The Engineering Services Director shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies shall be corrected by the applicant. 
(4)  Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. 
(b)  After Reference Level Established   
(1)  An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after the reference level is established. 
(2)  Within 7 calendar days of establishment of the reference level elevation, the applicant shall submit a certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. 
(3)  Any work done within the 7 day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the applicant's risk. 
(4)  The Engineering Services Director shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. 
(5)  Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(c)  Final As-Built Elevation Certificate   
(1)  A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after construction is completed and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  The permit holder shall submit a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities to the Engineering Services Director. 
(3)  The Engineering Services Director shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built construction. 
(5)  Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
2.  Floodproofing Certificate   
(a)  If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new construction. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit to the Engineering Services Director a certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. 
(c)  Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(d)  The Engineering Services Director shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to floodplain development permit approval. 
(e)  Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. 
(f)  Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
3.  Manufactured Dwelling If a manufactured dwelling is placed within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.4.3 B, Specific Standards. 
4.  Watercourse Alteration All the following items shall be submitted by a permit holder to the Engineering Services Director prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit if a watercourse is to be altered or relocated: 
(a)  A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; 
(b)  A professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and 
(c)  A map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. 
5.  Certification Exemptions The following structures, if located within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in this subsection: 
(a)  Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of Section 6.4.3 B.5, Recreational Vehicles; 
(b)  Temporary nonresidential structures meeting requirements of Section 6.4.3 B.6, Temporary Non-Residential Structures; and 
(c)  Accessory Structures less than 150 square feet meeting requirements of Section 6.4.3 B.7, Accessory Structures. 
6.4.3. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
A.  General Standards Compliance with the following standards shall be required within a special flood hazard area: 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements in special flood hazard areas shall: 
(a)  Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure; 
(b)  Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(c)  Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; 
(d)  Be designed so that electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities are configured to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  HVAC equipment; 
(2)  Water softener units; 
(3)  Bath/kitchen fixtures; 
(4)  Ductwork; 
(5)  Electric/gas meter panels/boxes; 
(6)  Utility/cable boxes; 
(7)  Hot water heaters; and 
(8)  Electric outlets/switches; 
(e)  Be designed so that new and replacement water supply systems minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(f)  Be designed so that new and replacement sanitary sewage systems minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(g)  Be located and constructed to avoid impairment of on-site waste disposal systems or contamination from them during flooding; 
2.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this section, shall comply with the requirements of "new construction" as established in this section; 
3.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this Ordinance and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this section; 
4.  New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted in the special flood hazard area; 
5.  A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.4.2 B, Certification Requirements; 
6.  Subdivision and other development applications shall: 
(a)  Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  Require public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  Require adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  Receive all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
7.  When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial improvement. 
8.  When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood elevation shall apply. 
B.  Specific Standards In addition to the standards in Section 6.4.3 A, General Standards, development in all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in Section 6.4.1 B, Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas, or Section 6.4.3 C, Standards for Floodplains without Established Base Flood Elevations, shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Non-Residential Construction   
(a)  New construction and substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as established in this section. 
(b)  A structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed in-lieu of elevation, provided all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are made watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
(c)  For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with Section 6.4.4 F, Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Engineering Services Director as set forth in Section 6.4.2 B, Certification Requirements, along with the operational and maintenance plans. 
2.  Manufactured Dwellings   
(a)  New and replacement manufactured dwellings shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as established in this section. 
(b)  Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either by a certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to NCGS 143-143.15. 
(c)  When the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required. 
(d)  All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirement of Section 6.4.3 B.3, Elevated Buildings. 
(e)  An evacuation plan shall be developed for evacuation of residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Engineering Service Director and the local Emergency Management Coordinator. 
3.  Elevated Buildings Fully enclosed areas associated with new construction and substantially improved structures that are below the lowest floor shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Not be designed or used for human habitation, but only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas. 
(b)  Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(c)  Include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings shall be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of 2 flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(2)  The total net area of all flood openings shall be at least 1 square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(3)  If a building has more than 1 enclosed area, each enclosed area shall have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit; 
(4)  The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above the adjacent grade; 
(5)  Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and 
(6)  Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above. 
4.  Additions/Improvements   
(a)  Not a Substantial Improvement   
(1)  In cases where an addition or improvement to a pre-FIRM structure does not constitute a substantial improvement, the addition or improvement shall be designed to minimize flood damages and shall not render the pre-FIRM structure any more nonconforming with respect to the standards in this section. 
(2)  In cases where an addition and/or improvement to a post-FIRM structure does not constitute a substantial improvement to the existing structure, then only the additions or improvements shall comply with the standards for new construction. 
(3)  Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in a common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction. 
(b)  Substantial Improvements In cases where an addition or improvement to a pre- or post-FIRM structure (whether in combination with interior modifications or not) do constitute a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements shall comply with the standards for new construction. 
5.  Recreational Vehicles Recreational vehicles shall either: 
(a)  Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or 
(b)  Meet all the requirements for new construction. 
6.  Temporary Non-Residential Structures Temporary nonresidential structures shall not remain within the special flood hazard area for a time period exceeding 3 months. This time period may be renewed up to a maximum of 1 year. 
7.  Accessory Structures   
(a)  An accessory structure shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas); 
(2)  Not be temperature-controlled; 
(3)  Be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
(4)  Be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
(5)  Be firmly anchored; and 
(6)  Incorporate flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces below regulatory flood protection elevation, if necessary. 
(b)  An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation or floodproofing certificate. 
(c)  Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance with Section 6.4.2 B, Certification Requirements. 
C.  Standards for Floodplains without Established Base Flood Elevations In addition to the standards in Section 6.4.3 A, General Standards, and Section 6.4.3 B, Specific Standards, development within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A and established in Section 6.4.1 B, Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas, where no BFE is provided by FEMA, shall be subject to the following: 
1.  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or new development shall be allowed within a distance of 20 feet each side from top of bank or 5 times the width of the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; and 
2.  The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria: 
(a)  When BFE data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this section and the Ordinance and shall be elevated or floodproofed. 
(b)  All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development proposals shall provide BFE data if development is greater than 5 acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. The BFE data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with Section 6.4.1 B, Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas, and utilized in implementing this section. 
(c)  When BFE data is not available from a Federal, State, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
D.  Standards for Riverine Floodplains with BFE, but Without Established Floodways or Non-Encroachment Areas In addition to the standards in Section 6.4.3 A, General Standards, and Section 6.4.3 B, Specific Standards, development along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 1 foot at any point within the community. 
E.  Floodways and Non-Encroachment Areas In addition to the standards in Section 6.4.3 A, General Standards, and Section 6.4.3 B, Specific Standards, development proposed in floodways or non-encroachment areas established by Section 6.4.1 B, Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas, shall be subject to the following: 
1.  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless: 
(a)  It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the Engineering Services Director prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or 
(b)  A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is approved by FEMA. 
(c)  A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment. 
2.  If (E.1) above is satisfied, development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
3.  No manufactured dwellings shall be permitted, except replacement manufactured dwellings in an existing manufactured dwelling park or subdivision, provided the following provisions are met: 
(a)  The anchoring and the elevation standards of Section 6.4.3 B.2, Manufactured Dwellings; and 
(b)  The no encroachment standard of (1) above. 
F.  Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO) In addition to the standards in Section 6.4.3 A, General Standards, and Section 6.4.3 B, Specific Standards, development located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Section 6.4.1 B, Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas, as shallow flooding areas shall comply with the following: 
1.  The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a freeboard of 2 feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least 2 feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified; 
2.  Nonresidential structures may, in-lieu of elevation, be floodproofed to the same level as required by subsection F.1 above so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
3.  Certification is required in accordance with Section 6.4.2 B, Certification Requirements; and 
4.  Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
CHAPTER 7: - SUBDIVISION STANDARDS 
7.1. - Subdivisions 

7.1.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the subdivision of land in the City. More specifically, this section is intended to: 
A.  Provide for the orderly growth and development of the City. 
B.  Coordinate the provision of streets within and contiguous to proposed subdivisions with other existing or planned streets in the general area. 
C.  Provide for adequate drainage and flood control. 
D.  Provide for the adequate provision of public services and infrastructure. 
E.  Provide for adequate open space for light, air, and recreation. 
F.  Provide for the conservation and protection of natural and historical areas. 
G.  Provide for the acceptance of rights-of-way, easements, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bikeways, drainage facilities, water and sewer facilities, and other improvements dedicated to public use. 
H.  Provide for the installation of monuments establishing street and lot lines. 
7.1.2. - Applicability 
A.  General No subdivision of land in the City's jurisdiction, as defined in Section 10.4, Definitions including group development or multiple lot development shall occur, and no lot or parcel created by such division of land may be sold or developed, unless the division is expressly exempted from this section or has received subdivision approval in accordance with Section 2.5.11, Preliminary Plat, Section 2.5.7, Final Plat, and the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Exclusions Divisions of land not considered a subdivision shall be exempted from these standards in accordance with Section 2.5.6, Exclusion Map. 
C.  Dedication and Acceptance   
1.  Rights-of-Way and Easements   
(a)  The approval and recordation of a final plat constitutes dedication to and acceptance by the City of each public street, alley, or utility easement shown on the plat. 
(b)  The approval and recordation of a final plat does not constitute acceptance by the City of maintenance responsibility for improvements within a right-of-way or easement. 
(c)  Improvements within a right-of-way or easement, such as utility lines, street paving, drainage facilities, or sidewalks may be accepted for maintenance by the City Council or by the Engineering Services Director, who is authorized to inspect and, where appropriate, accept the dedication of such improvements. 
2.  Open Space   
(a)  Land designated as public open space on a final plat shall be considered to be offered for dedication until such offer is accepted by the City. The offer may be accepted by the City through: 
(1)  Express action by the Engineering Services Director; or 
(2)  Conveyance of fee simple marketable title (unencumbered financially and environmentally) of the land to the City at the time of final plat recordation. 
(b)  Until such offer of dedication is accepted by the City, land offered for dedication may be used for open space purposes by the landowner or by the owners' association. Land offered for dedication shall not be used for any purpose inconsistent with the proposed public use. 
7.1.3. - Street and Utility Construction 
A.  Required Street and utility construction plan approval shall be required for all street, potable water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer facilities before the street and utility improvements occur. 
B.  Preparation Street and utility construction plans shall be prepared by a registered engineer licensed to practice in the State of North Carolina. They shall be prepared in accordance with the Development Guide. 
C.  Construction Plans   
1.  Street and utility construction plans for all street, potable water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer facilities shall be submitted to the City following or concurrently with preliminary plat review but shall not be reviewed until the street and utility network for the preliminary plat is found generally satisfactory by the TRC. 
2.  For each subdivision section, the street and utility construction plans shall include all improvements lying within or adjacent to that section as well as all water and sanitary sewer lines lying outside that section that are required to serve that section. 
3.  Street and utility construction plans shall not be approved until the preliminary plat is approved in accordance with Section 2.5.11, Preliminary Plat. 
D.  Statement of Required Improvements The applicant shall submit a statement of required improvements which specifies the length of streets to be constructed and the diameter material and length of sanitary sewer and water lines and other required public improvements to be installed for the subdivision section. The statement shall include all public improvements for which the developer/subdivider is responsible and the date when the improvements shall be completed. 
E.  Oversized Improvements and Extensions   
1.  The City may require the construction of wider streets and the installation of oversized utilities when it is in the interest of future development or the street is shown for improvement on the Comprehensive Transportation Plan . 
2.  When the construction of wider streets or the installation of oversized utilities is required, the City shall reimburse the developer for the oversizing. 
3.  The City may require the extension of streets and utilities to adjacent land when it is in the interest of future development or is shown on the Comprehensive Transportation Plan . 
F.  Approval Period Street utility construction plan approval shall be valid for 2 years unless the TRC determines that materials or methods shown on the plan pose a threat to the public health or safety. Plan approval shall be extended in conjunction with the extension of preliminary plat approval, unless the TRC determines that materials or methods shown on the plan pose a threat to public health or safety. The extension shall expire concurrently with the expiration of the preliminary plat. 
G.  Inspection Work performed in accordance with approved street and utility construction plans shall be inspected and approved by the City. 
7.1.4. - Dedication of Right-of-Way 
A.  Dedication of Right-of-Way with Density Transfer When land is proposed for subdivision or is being considered for approval as a conditional zoning district or special use and a portion of it is in a corridor for a street or highway shown on a plan established and adopted in accordance with North Carolina General Statutes Section 136-66.2, the City may provide for the dedication of right-of-way within that corridor pursuant to any applicable legal authority. 
1.  Required Dedication The City may require the applicant to dedicate, for street or highway purposes, the right-of-way within a corridor for a street shown for improvement in the City's Comprehensive Transportation Plan if the City allows the applicant to transfer density credits attributable to the dedicated right-of-way to contiguous land owned by the applicant. Dedication shall not be required unless the TRC finds that the dedication: 
(a)  Does not result in the deprivation of a reasonable use of the land; and 
(b)  Is either reasonably related to the traffic generated by the proposed development or the impact of the dedication is mitigated by measures provided in this Ordinance. 
2.  Voluntary Dedication If an applicant elects to dedicate right-of-way within a corridor for a street shown for improvement on the City's Comprehensive Transportation Plan , the City may allow the applicant to transfer density credits attributable to the dedicated right-of-way to contiguous land that is part of a common development plan. 
B.  Acquisition Review for Proposed Construction within Proposed Rights-of-Way When development is proposed that is within future rights-of-way of any existing or future street identified in the City's Comprehensive Transportation Plan, the development shall not be approved until the City is given an opportunity to purchase or acquire the street right-of-way in accordance with the following: 
1.  The landowner shall submit to the City a written proposal naming the price and terms upon which the owner will sell the land within the future right-of-way or a written statement of refusal to sell. In addition, the landowner shall provide the estimated cost of the proposed development within the future right-of-way. Once this written information is received by the City, then notification of the landowner's intent is established. 
2.  The City shall then determine whether it will take the necessary steps to acquire the right-of-way prior to development. If the City fails to begin acquisition, or to institute condemnation proceedings within 60 days from the receipt of the landowner's notification of intent, the landowner may proceed with the development after obtaining all approvals and permits required by this Ordinance. 
7.1.5. - Permanent Runoff Control Structures/Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Devices 
A.  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Devices An approved soil erosion and sedimentation control device may be installed prior to approval of street and utility construction plans in accordance with the standards in this section. 
B.  Permanent Runoff Control Structures   
1.  Coordination with Streets and Utilities Street and utility construction plans shall show the location of existing or proposed runoff control structures relative to the proposed improvements to avoid conflicts during and after construction. 
2.  Design and Construction A runoff control structure shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of Section 6.2, Watershed Protection, and this section. 
3.  Owners Association Required When a permanent runoff control structure serves more than 1 lot within a subdivision, an owners' association shall be required for the purposes of ownership and maintenance responsibility (see Section 7.3, Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association). 
4.  Maintenance Responsibility The owners association shall be responsible for maintaining the completed permanent runoff control structure(s). If the owners' association is dissolved or ceases to exist, all the owners of record at the time of required maintenance shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs related to the completed permanent runoff control structure(s). 
5.  Maintenance Note Required on Final Plat When a subdivision contains a permanent runoff control structure to which paragraph (3) above is applicable, the final plat shall contain a prominent note with the full text of paragraph (4) above. 
6.  Timing of Completion The permanent runoff control structure(s) shall be substantially completed and have full design volume available prior to the recordation of a final plat for the subdivision. This may require the cleanout and disposal of sediment from a pond. 
7.1.6. - Subdivision Standards 
A.  General   
1.  Design Proposed subdivisions and group developments shall: 
(a)  Comply with this section and the Development Guide ; 
(b)  Bear a reasonable relationship to the approved plans of the City; and 
(c)  Be designed to promote development that is beneficial to the City. 
2.  Development Name The name of a proposed development shall not duplicate or be phonetically similar to an existing development name in the City or its ETJ unless the proposed development lies adjacent or in proximity to the existing development. 
3.  Reasonable Relationship All required improvements, easements, and rights-of-way (other than required reservations) shall substantially benefit the development or bear a reasonable relationship to the need for public facilities attributable to the new development. 
4.  Off-Site Connections When in the opinion of the TRC it is necessary to connect streets and/or utilities off-site to adjoining streets and/or utilities, the connections may be required in accordance with City policy. 
B.  Lot Dimensions and Standards The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the proposed subdivision and for the type of development contemplated. Lots shall conform to the following standards. 
1.  Conformance to Other Regulations A lot shall have sufficient area, dimensions, and street access to allow a principal building to be erected on it in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
2.  Lot Depth to Width Ratio A lot shall not have a depth greater than 4 times its width, at the minimum front street setback. 
3.  Side Lot Line Configuration Side lines of lots should be at or near right angles or radial to street lines. 
4.  Lot Lines and Drainage Lot boundaries shall coincide with natural and pre-existing manmade drainageways, to the maximum extent practicable, to avoid disruption of established drainage patterns or lots that can be built upon only by altering such drainageways. 
5.  Lots Adjoining Dedicated Public Open Space or Required Watershed Stream Buffer Areas Single-family lots with public water and sewer service that abut a dedicated public open drainageway, dedicated public open space areas, or a required watershed stream buffer when such buffer is in a common area, may have less area than the minimum lot size required, provided the following standards are met: 
(a)  No lot area shall be less than 60 percent of the minimum lot size for the zoning district or less than 4,000 square feet. 
(b)  A note shall be placed on the Final Plat stating: 
"The required area of Lots ( insert lot # ) through ( insert lot # ) has been reduced in accordance with Section 7.1.6 B.5 Lots Adjoining Dedicated Public Space or Required Watershed Stream Buffer Areas. All other dimensional standards of the Development Ordinance shall apply." 
6.  Special Purpose Lots Minimum lot dimensional standards shall not apply to lots for family or religious institution cemeteries, sewage lift stations, and similar utility uses. Such lots shall comply with the following: 
(a)  A special-purpose lot shall be permitted only after the TRC has determined that the proposed lot has sufficient dimensions to accommodate the intended use and, where required by this Ordinance, landscape yards. 
(b)  If the special-purpose lot does not have direct access to a public street, an easement for ingress and egress with a minimum width of 10 feet shall be platted. 
(c)  The subdivision to create the lot shall be approved in accordance with this chapter. The final plat shall label the lot as a special purpose lot. 
7.  Access Requirements   
(a)  All lots shall be served by street access meeting the requirements of Chapter 5: Development Standards. 
(b)  Except for multi-family and single-family attached developments, no lot used for a use type included in the Household Living Use Category in Table 4.2.4, Residential Use Classification, shall be permitted direct access to a major or minor thoroughfare street. 
8.  Flag Lots Flag lots shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  A flag lot shall not have more than 1 single-family detached dwelling and an uninhabitable accessory structure; 
(b)  The maximum flagpole length shall be 300 feet; 
(c)  The minimum flagpole width shall be 25 feet; 
(d)  The maximum lot area with public sewer shall be 1 acre; 
(e)  The maximum lot area without public sewer shall be 3 acres. (Note: The flagpole portion of the lot shall not be used to calculate area, width, depth, coverage, and setbacks of the lot or to provide off-street parking); 
(f)  Where public water is available, any building on the flag lot shall be within 500 feet of a fire hydrant. The distance shall be measured along the street, then along the flagpole, then in a straight line to the building location; 
(g)  Where public sewer is available, an occupied building on the flag lot shall have a gravity service line, or the sewer pump requirement shall be noted on the plat; and 
(h)  Use of a single driveway to serve an adjoining flag lot or to serve a flag lot and an adjoining conventional lot is encouraged. In the latter case, the preferred location for the driveway is on the flagpole portion of the flag lot, with the conventional lot granted an access easement over the flagpole. 
9.  Minimum Street Frontage The minimum street frontage for a platted lot is 25 linear feet. 
C.  Streets   
1.  Dedication of Right-of-Way Right-of-way for public streets shall be dedicated to the City in accordance with North Carolina General Statutes Section 160A, Article 19, Part 2, and other applicable State law. When dedication cannot be required, future street right-of-way indicated on the City's Comprehensive Transportation Plan shall be shown on the plat. 
2.  Conformance with the Comprehensive Transportation Plan The location and design of streets shall be in conformance with the Comprehensive Transportation Plan . If conditions warrant, right-of-way widths and pavement widths in excess of the minimum street standards may be required in accordance with Section 7.1.3 E, Oversized Improvements and Extensions. 
3.  Conformance with Adjoining Street Systems The planned street layout of a proposed subdivision shall be compatible with existing or proposed streets and their classifications on adjoining or nearby tracts. 
4.  Access to Adjoining Land If the TRC determines access to adjoining land is necessary and appropriate for adequate traffic circulation, proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary of the site. 
5.  Development Entry Points   
(a)  Unless exempted in accordance with subsection (d) below, all subdivisions shall provide access from the development to the street system outside the development in accordance with Table 7.1.6.C, Development Entry Points: 
TABLE 7.1.6.C: DEVELOPMENT ENTRY POINTS 
DEVELOPMENT 
TYPE MINIMUM NUMBER 
OF ENTRY POINTS RESIDENTIAL USES (# OF UNITS) 50 or fewer 1 51-150 2 151 or more 3  
(b)  Nothing in this section shall limit the total number of streets providing access to the street system outside a development. 
(c)  The TRC may allow stub streets to count as a development entry point when there is a reasonable likelihood of the stub street connecting to a future roadway. 
(d)  Development shall be exempted from these standards if it is demonstrated the following conditions apply: 
(1)  No other street access points can be located to the site due to existing lot configurations, absence of connecting streets, environmental, or topographic constraints; 
(2)  NCDOT will not authorize the required number of entrances; or 
(3)  Alternative access can be provided in a manner acceptable to the City that is supported by a transportation impact analysis. 
6.  Reserve Strips A reserve strip adjoining street rights-of-way shall not be permitted under any condition to prevent access to adjacent land. 
7.  Street Classification The final determination of the classification of streets in a proposed subdivision shall be made by the TRC. 
8.  Public Street Design Criteria Streets shall be designed to conform to the standards set forth in the High Point Street Design Standards Manual located in the Development Guide. 
9.  Street Names Street names, prefixes, suffixes and addresses shall conform to the guidelines and policies set forth in the City's Street Name and Address Assignment Guidelines and Policies located in the Development Guide. 
10.  Private Street Standards   
(a)  Where Allowed Private streets are allowed in single-family sections of planned development districts, single-family attached developments, and multiple lot developments. 
(b)  Design and Construction   
(1)  The street design standards for private streets are the same as for public streets. 
(2)  The developer must furnish an engineer's seal and certification that a private street has been tested and certified for the subgrade, base, and asphalt. 
(3)  Private streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City's Standard Specifications and Details for Roads , or NCDOT's Subdivision Roads: Minimum Construction Standards , whichever is applicable. 
(c)  Owners' Association Required An owners' association is required to own and maintain all private streets allowed under this Ordinance. 
(d)  Plats All private streets must be shown as such on all plats. 
(e)  Through Streets A through street in a residential area that connects 2 public streets shall not be a private street. 
(f)  Connections to Public Streets All private streets connecting with public streets require driveway approvals from the City or NCDOT, as applicable. 
D.  Sidewalks Sidewalks shall be configured in accordance with the standards and Section 5.9, Sidewalks. 
E.  Utilities   
1.  Public Water and Sewer Construction Requirements Water and sewer lines, connections, and equipment shall be constructed in accordance with the City's Standard Specifications and Details for Roads, Structures, and Utilities , or the NCDOT's Subdivision Roads: Minimum Construction Standards , as appropriate. 
2.  Water and Sewer Connections   
(a)  Connection of each lot to public water and sewer utilities shall be required if the proposed subdivision is within 300 feet of the nearest adequate line of a public system, unless the Public Service Director determines geographic or topographic factors make such connection infeasible. 
(b)  Where public sewer is not available, lots shall comply with applicable County Environmental Health Division regulations. 
(c)  Approval of the applicable Environmental Health Division shall be obtained after preliminary plat approval. 
(d)  The final plat shall show the certificate of approval from the applicable Environmental Health Division. 
3.  Underground Utilities Electrical, community antenna, television, and telephone utility lines installed in subdivisions of 5 lots or more shall be underground, unless the TRC determines underground installation is inappropriate. 
4.  Utility Easements   
(a)  Width   
(1)  To provide for electric, telephone, gas, and community antenna television services, conduits, and water and sewer lines within a subdivision, appropriate utility easements not to exceed 30 feet in width shall be provided. 
(2)  The location of the easements shall be reviewed and approved by the TRC, with advice from utility providers, before final plat approval. 
(b)  No Buildings or Improvements within Easement   
(1)  Utility easements shall be kept free and clear of any buildings or other improvements that would interfere with the proper maintenance or replacement of utilities. 
(2)  The City shall not be liable for damages to any improvement located within the utility easement area caused by maintenance or replacement of utilities. 
5.  Electric Utilities   
(a)  Street Lights A development in the City with public streets shall include public street lights. The street lights shall be maintained by the City. 
(b)  Electric Service Development outside the City limits shall be provided electric service by the agency having jurisdiction in the area. 
F.  Drainage   
1.  General Requirements   
(a)  This section applies to all watercourses that have a drainage basin greater than 11/2 acres. In addition, watercourses which are contained in areas of special flood hazard as shown on the FEMA panels are subject to the requirements of Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention. In case of a conflict between this section and Section 6.4, the stricter regulation applies. 
(b)  Drainage within development affected by this section shall be designed using standard engineering practices including those described in the City of High Point Storm Drainage System Design Manual . 
(c)  No fill, buildings or structures, except for water dependent structures, greenways, utility substations, utilities, roads or other related public improvements, shall be placed or constructed within the protected drainage easements specified in this section. Parking areas and associated drives may be constructed over enclosed subsurface drains. 
(d)  Drainage within development affected by this section shall be handled in any of following systems: 
(1)  Enclosed subsurface; 
(2)  Open channel on private property; or 
(3)  Open channel in a drainageway dedicated to the City. 
2.  Determination of Drainage System   
(a)  The developer shall determine the drainage system to be used for projects unless the drainage areas meet the standards in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  The determination of the drainage system to be used shall be made by the TRC if: 
(1)  The area is identified on the Bikeway, Greenway, and Trails Master Plan ; or 
(2)  The drainage basin is greater than 50 acres; or 
(3)  The site is located in the WSO district; or 
(4)  The watercourse is depicted as a perennial stream on the City of High Point Water Supply Watershed Map. 
(c)  In determining the drainage system to be used, the following factors shall be considered: 
(1)  The type of development; 
(2)  The drainage system(s) employed by nearby development; 
(3)  The probability of creating a lengthy greenway or open space area to advance the purposes of the adopted Bikeway, Greenway, and Trails Master Plan ; 
(4)  The probability of creating future maintenance problems; 
(5)  The probability of erosion or flooding problems; and 
(6)  The pipe size necessary to handle drainage. 
3.  Drainage Systems   
(a)  Enclosed Subsurface Drains (Storm Sewers)   
(1)  Enclosed subsurface drainage systems shall be designed and constructed using standard engineering practices including those described in the City of High Point Storm Drainage System Design Manual . 
(2)  Enclosed subsurface drainage systems on private property shall be protected as provided in Section 7.1.6 F.3(d), Protected Drainage Easements. 
(b)  Open Channel on Private Land   
(1)  If open channels on private land are used as a drainage system, they shall be designed using standard engineering practices including those described in the City of High Point Storm Drainage System Design Manual . 
(2)  Open channel drainage systems on private land shall be protected as provided in Section 7.1.6 F.3(d), Protected Drainage Easements. 
(c)  Open Channels in Drainageway and Open Space Areas Dedicated to the City of High Point   
(1)  The TRC may require that a drainageway identified on the Bikeway, Greenway, and Trails Master Plan be dedicated to the City. 
(2)  Drainageway and open space shall be dedicated by a recorded plat and shall be labeled "Dedicated to the City of High Point and the public for Drainageway, Greenway and Open Space." 
(3)  The dedicated drainageway and open space area along any stream shall include the land between the natural 100-year flood contours. 
(4)  The area to be dedicated may be reduced in width if the applicant demonstrates to the Engineering Services Director that sound engineering practices are being employed. 
(5)  The dedicated drainageway and open space area shall have a minimum width of 60 feet. 
(6)  In cases of topographic or other obstacles, additional width may be required to assure reasonable ease of maintenance. 
(7)  Dedicated drainageway and open space shall have sufficient access to a publicly maintained street. If the TRC determines that suitable access is not provided, access shall be provided by a suitably located access easement not less than 20 feet in width. 
(8)  Dedicated drainageway and open space may also be used for drainage, open space, greenways, bikeways, trails, other similar recreation activities, public utilities, and street crossings. 
(9)  Drainageway and open space shall be left in its natural condition or graded to a cross section and stabilized with permanent vegetative cover approved by the City. 
(10)  Single-family lots abutting land dedicated to the City as drainageway and open space may be reduced in accordance with Section 7.1.6 B, Lot Dimensions and Standards. 
(d)  Protected Drainage Easements Subdivisions shall comply with the requirements in Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation, Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention, and the following standards: 
(1)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse or drainageway, an easement shall be indicated on all plats of the subdivision. The easement shall substantially conform with the lines of the watercourse or drainageway, plus the additional width that is necessary to convey expected storm flows in accordance with the standards in the City of High Point Storm Drainage System Design Manual . 
(2)  The size, design, and construction of drainage structures shall conform to the requirements in the City of High Point Storm Drainage System Design Manual . 
(3)  The City shall not accept the responsibility to maintain any drainage easement or storm drainage structures, except for those within a public street right-of-way or traversing City-owned land. 
G.  Flood Damage Prevention   
1.  Minimize Flood Damage A subdivision shall be designed to minimize flood damage; 
2.  Public Utilities A subdivision shall have public utilities and facilities such as sanitary sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
3.  Drainage A subdivision shall have adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
4.  Base Flood Elevation Data Required   
(a)  Base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be provided for subdivision applications unless a licensed engineer certifies that the 100-year storm flow for streams in or near the subdivision, site, or group development is less than 500 cubic feet per second. 
(b)  In special flood hazard areas designated by FEMA maps, BFE data shall be provided for development with more than 50 lots or 5 acres in area. (See Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention, for additional flood protection regulations.) 
H.  Placement of Monuments The Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina , as adopted by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, shall apply when installing permanent monuments. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , §§ 28-30, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , §§ 3, 15, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 8.B, 5-21-2018) 
7.2. - Financial Guarantees 

7.2.1. - Financial Guarantees in-lieu of Completion 
A.  General In-lieu of the completion, installation, and dedication of all required public improvements (streets, potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater, electricity, and street lights) and private site improvements (off-street parking, landscaping, screening, protected trees, fencing, stormwater management and sedimentation control) prior to approval of a final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy (as appropriate), a developer may submit: 
1.  A bona fide itemized estimate of the costs, including labor, for all required improvements, signed and dated by the preparer, for which the developer is responsible, and the date when the improvements are to be completed; and 
2.  An acceptable financial guarantee for the installation of said required improvements in accordance with Section 7.2.2., Performance Guarantee. 
B.  Timing The itemized estimate of the costs and financial guarantee shall not be accepted until after the construction plans and profiles for the development are approved, in accordance with Section 7.1.3, Street and Utility Construction, and a watershed development plan, if applicable, is approved in accordance with Section 6.2.11 E, Watershed Development Plan. 
C.  Effect Once the itemized estimate of the costs and the required financial guarantee is accepted by the City, the final plat or certificate of occupancy (as appropriate) may be approved if the proposed development complies with all other requirements of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 11, 11-20-2017) 
7.2.2. - Performance Guarantee 
A.  General A performance guarantee, in accordance with the standards in this section, shall be required in the following circumstances: 
1.  To ensure the completion of public infrastructure improvements (streets, potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater, electricity, and street lights) that are required as part of an approved preliminary plat, site plan, or group development plan, but are not approved as complete before approval of a final plat or certificate of occupancy, as appropriate; 
2.  To ensure completion of private site improvements (parking, screening, landscaping, protected trees, fencing, stormwater management, and sedimentation control,) that are required as part of a preliminary plat, site plan, or group development plan, but are not installed before approval of a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Term of Performance Guarantees The term of the performance guarantee shall reflect any time limit for completing installation of required improvements that is included in the preliminary or final plat, site plan, or group development plan, as appropriate, but in any case, the term shall not exceed 18 months. The City Manager, for good cause shown, may grant up to 1 extension of time, for a time period not exceeding 1 year. 
C.  Form of Performance Guarantee   
1.  The applicant shall propose the form(s) of the performance guarantee, which shall be provided in one or more of the following forms: 
(a)  Cash, Irrevocable Letter of Credit, or Equivalent Security   
(1)  The developer shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, such as an irrevocable letter of credit, either with the City or in escrow with a financial institution. 
(2)  If cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow with a financial institution, an agreement between the financial institution and the developer shall be filed with the City guaranteeing the following: 
(i)  That the escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the City and may not be used or pledged by the developer for any other matter during the term of the escrow; and 
(ii)  That in case of a failure on the part of the developer to complete or repair the improvements, the financial institution shall, upon notification by the City, immediately pay the funds deemed necessary by the City to complete or repair the improvements up to the full balance of the escrow account, or deliver to the City any other instruments fully endorsed or otherwise made payable in full to the City. 
(3)  The financial institution holding the cash or other instrument shall indicate to the City its notification requirements for release or payment of funds. 
(b)  Surety Bond   
(1)  The developer shall obtain a surety bond from a surety bonding company authorized to issue surety bonds in North Carolina. 
(2)  The bond shall be payable to the City and shall be in an amount as required by this subsection. 
2.  The performance guarantee shall distinguish between the portion of the guarantee provided for public improvements as well as the portion of the guarantee provided for private improvements, as appropriate. 
3.  The performance guarantee shall be conditioned on the performance of all work necessary to complete the installation of the required improvements within the term of the financial guarantee. 
D.  Apportionment of Performance Guarantee The performance guarantee shall: 
1.  Distinguish between the portion of the guarantee provided for public improvements versus the amount provided for private improvements, as appropriate. 
2.  Be conditioned on the performance of all work necessary to complete the installation of the required improvements within the term of the performance guarantee. 
E.  Amount of Performance Guarantee   
1.  General Performance guarantees shall be in an amount equal to 125 percent of the estimated cost of completing the installation of the required improvements, including the costs of materials, labor, and project management. 
2.  Estimated Costs   
(a)  Estimated costs of completing installation of required public improvements shall be itemized by improvement type and certified by the developer's licensed professional engineer, and is subject to approval by the Engineering Services Director. 
(b)  Estimated costs for completing costs of private site improvements shall be itemized and certified by the developer's contractor, and is subject to approval by the Engineering Services Director or the Planning and Development Director, as appropriate. 
F.  Release or Reduction of Performance Guarantees   
1.  Requirements for Release or Reduction The Planning and Development Director or Engineering Services Director, as appropriate, shall release or reduce a performance guarantee only after: 
(a)  The owner or developer has submitted to the City a written request for a release or reduction of the performance guarantee that includes certification by the owner's or developer's engineer or contractor, whichever is appropriate, that installation of the guaranteed improvements has been completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications, and as-builts (if applicable); 
(b)  City staff has performed an inspection of the improvements and certified in writing that installation of the guaranteed improvements is completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications; and 
(c)  No release or reduction in performance guarantee amounts will be considered until more than 25 percent of the work is in place and approved. 
2.  Acceptance Shall be Documented The Planning and Development Director or Engineering Services Director, as appropriate, shall provide written notice of the City's final acceptance of the improvements subject to performance guarantees. 
G.  Default and Forfeiture of Performance Guarantees   
1.  Notice of Failure to Install or Complete Improvements If the owner or developer fails to complete installation of the guaranteed improvements within the term of the financial guarantee (as may be extended), the Planning and Development Director or Engineering Services Director, as appropriate, shall give the owner or developer 30 days written notice of the scope and degree of the default, by certified mail. 
2.  City Completion of Improvements After the 30-day notice period expires, the City may draw on the guarantee and use the funds to perform work necessary to complete installation of the guaranteed improvements. After completing such work, the City shall provide a complete accounting of the expenditures to the owner or developer. In the event of a default triggering the use of the financial guarantee, the City shall return any of the unused deposited cash funds or other security. 
7.2.3. - Maintenance Warranty 
A.  General A maintenance warranty in accordance with the standards in this section is required to ensure against defects in workmanship or materials in providing stormwater management facilities required as part of an approved preliminary plat, site plan, or group development plan, as appropriate. 
B.  Term of Maintenance Warranty The term of a maintenance warranty shall be 1 year from the date of the engineer's certification of completion. 
C.  Form of Maintenance Warranty The applicant shall propose the form(s) of the maintenance warranty, which shall be provided in one or more of the forms in Section 7.2.2 C, Form of Performance Guarantee 
D.  Function of Maintenance Warranty The maintenance warranty shall: 
1.  Be conditioned on the performance of all work necessary to cure defects in materials and workmanship and maintain the required stormwater management facilities during the term of the maintenance warranty. 
2.  Provide that in case of the owner's or developer's failure to maintain and repair or replace the stormwater management facilities, the City shall be able to obtain the funds necessary to make necessary repairs or replacements in accordance with the warranty provisions for timeframe and forfeiture. 
E.  Amount of Maintenance Warranty Maintenance warranty shall be in an amount up to 25 percent of the full actual cost, including the costs of materials and labor, of installing the required stormwater management facilities. 
F.  Release of Maintenance Warranty The Public Services Director shall release a maintenance warranty at the end of the term of the guarantee only after an inspection is conducted of the stormwater management facilities, and it is certified in writing that the guaranteed stormwater management facilities have been maintained in accordance with approved plans and specifications. 
G.  Default and Forfeiture of Maintenance Warranty   
1.  Notice of Failure to Maintain Improvements If the owner or developer fails to maintain the stormwater management facilities improvements during the term of the maintenance warranty, the Public Services Director shall give the owner or developer 30 days written notice of the scope and degree of the default by certified mail. 
2.  City Correction of Defects After the 30-day notice period expires, the City shall present a plan to cure any defects within 30 days, and following such presentation, draw on the security and use the funds to perform work necessary to ensure the guaranteed stormwater management facilities comply with approved plans and specifications. After completing the work, the City shall provide a complete accounting of the expenditures to the owner or developer and, as applicable, refund all unused funds, without interest. 
7.2.4. - As-Built Plans Required 
Upon completion of a public infrastructure project, the developer shall certify to the Engineering Services Director that the completed project has been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and shall submit actual "as built" plans for all public improvements after final construction is completed. Upon completion of a private stormwater management facility, the developer shall certify to the Public Services Director that the completed project is in accordance with the approved plans and shall submit actual "as built" plans after final construction is completed. The plans shall show the final design specifications for all improvements and the field location, size, depth, and related measures, controls and devices, as installed. The designer shall certify, under seal, that the as-built design, measures, controls, and devices are in compliance with the approved plans and with the requirements of this Ordinance. A final inspection and approval by the respective Director shall occur before the release of the financial guarantee. 
7.2.5. - Improper Release of Financial Guarantees 
If the City releases a financial guarantee through error, the error shall not release the developer from responsibility for the completion of all improvements required by this section and this Ordinance. 
7.3. - Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association 

7.3.1. - Establishment 
A.  Creation A homeowners' or property owners' association (owner's association) shall be established to fulfill requirements of the North Carolina Condominium Act, NC Planned Community Act, or to accept conveyance and maintenance of all common elements (common areas) within a development. The owners' association shall be in legal existence prior to the conveyance, lease-option, or other long-term transfer of control of any unit or lot in the development. 
B.  Conveyance Where a development has common elements (common area) serving more than 1 dwelling unit or lot, these areas shall be conveyed to the owners' association, in which all owners of units or lots in the development shall be members. All areas other than public street rights-of-way, other areas dedicated to the City, and lots shall be designated as common elements. In a condominium development the common elements shall be platted in accordance with the North Carolina Condominium Act. In other development, the fee-simple title shall be conveyed by the subdivider or developer to the owners' association prior to the sale or development of the first lot. 
C.  Subdivision or Conveyance of Common Elements (Common Areas) Common elements (common areas) shall not subsequently be subdivided or conveyed by the owners' association unless a revised preliminary plat and a revised final plat showing such subdivision or conveyance is approved in accordance with the procedures and standards of its original approval. 
D.  Minimize Number of Associations Development, whether including different land uses, different types of housing, or simply different sections, shall hold the number of owners' associations to the minimum practicable. An association may establish different categories of membership, different budgets for the categories, and different rates of assessment when different kinds of services are provided to different categories. Smaller associations under an umbrella (master) association are allowed. 
E.  Owners' Association Not Required A development involving only 2 units attached by a party wall (or 2 separate walls back-to-back) shall not be required to have common elements or an owners' association. Such development without an owners' association shall establish a binding agreement between owners to govern any party walls and to ensure reciprocal easement rights needed for maintenance. 
7.3.2. - Submission of Owners' Association Declaration 
After preliminary plat approval, and before final plat approval, it is recommended that the subdivider submit a draft of the declaration of the owners' association containing covenants, conditions and restrictions governing the owners' association, lots or units, and common elements to the Planning and Development Director for review and approval. Prior to or concurrently with the submission of the final plat for review and approval, the subdivider shall submit a copy of the final declaration for review and approval. The declaration shall include provisions for the following: 
A.  Membership Membership in the owners' association shall be mandatory for each original purchaser and each successive purchaser of a lot or unit. Provisions shall be made for the assimilation of owners in subsequent sections of the development. 
B.  Responsibilities of Owners' Association The declaration shall state that the Association is responsible for: 
1.  Liability insurance and payment of premiums for liability insurance and local taxes; 
2.  Maintenance of all common elements including, but not limited to, stormwater management facilities, utilities, streets, drives, walks, and recreation facilities, at the time such common elements are transferred to the owners' association; 
3.  Establish and maintain an escrow account for the maintenance and repair of stormwater management facilities, as required in Section 6.2.11 D.5, Operation and Maintenance Agreement. 
4.  Payment of assessments for public and private improvements made to or for the benefit of the common elements. 
C.  Exterior Maintenance of Units The owners' association shall be responsible for exterior maintenance of all attached units (whether they be dwelling units or nonresidential units); or each unit owner shall be made responsible, with the owners' association granted authority to perform such exterior maintenance in the event the unit owner fails to do so in a prompt and satisfactory manner, and to assess the cost of the maintenance against the unit. 
D.  Default by Owners' Association   
1.  Upon default by the owners' association in the payment to the jurisdiction entitled thereto of any assessments for public improvements or ad valorem taxes levied against the common areas, which default shall continue for a period of 6 months, each owner of a lot in the development shall become personally obligated to pay to the jurisdiction a portion of the taxes or assessments in an amount determined by dividing the total taxes and/or assessments due to the jurisdiction by the total number of lots in the development. 
2.  If the sum is not paid by the owner within 30 days following receipt of notice of the amount due, the sum shall become a continuing lien on the property of the owner, the owners' heirs, devisees, personal representatives, and assigns. The taxing or assessing jurisdiction may either bring an action at law against the owner personally obligated to pay the same, or may elect to foreclose the lien against the property of the owner. 
E.  Membership The owners' association is empowered to levy assessments against the owners of lots or units within the development. Such assessments shall be for the payment of expenditures made by the owners' association for the items set forth in this section, and any assessments not paid by the owner against whom such assessments are made shall constitute a lien on the lot of the owner. 
F.  Easements Easements over the common elements (common areas) for access, ingress, and egress from and to public streets and walkways, and easements for enjoyment of the common elements and for parking shall be granted to each lot or unit owner. 
G.  Maintenance and Restoration Provisions for maintenance and restoration in the event of destruction or damage shall be established for common elements and party walls. It is recommended that the owners' association engage the services of a professional management company and that all inspections and repairs be conducted by qualified personnel. 
H.  Common Elements and Location The common elements shall be listed and the location of common areas or commons elements shall be shown graphically as an attachment to the declaration of the Owners' Association. 
7.3.3. - Inspection and Approval of Improvements 
The City shall inspect and approve, where required by this Ordinance, all private improvements prior to transfer of maintenance responsibility to the owners' association. 
7.4. - Greenway Dedication 

7.4.1. - Required Greenway Dedication 
Whenever a tract of land included within any proposed subdivision, including a group development plan, includes any part of a greenway designated on the Bikeway, Greenway, and Trails Master Plan , the greenway shall be platted and dedicated as a greenway easement. 
7.4.2. - Greenway Easement Width 
The width of the greenway easement shall be a minimum of 50 feet, to the maximum extent practicable. 
7.4.3. - Limitation on Dedication 
No dedication shall be required for a greenway lying outside of any floodplain or special flood hazard area, but such area may be reserved by TRC in accordance with Section 7.5, Reservation of Public Land, for possible City acquisition. 
7.4.4. - Density Credits 
Land that is dedicated in fee-simple interest to and accepted by the City of High Point for the expressed purpose of establishing a public greenway shall be credited toward the donating parcel, lot or tract area for the purpose of calculating the density of development and area coverage calculations though no longer part of the parcel. Dedicated land credits shall be transferred to subsequent holders if properly noted in transfer deeds. 
7.5. - Reservation of Public Land 

7.5.1. - General 
A.  Identification by TRC Where a proposed park, greenway, open space, or school shown in the City's adopted policy guidance is located in whole or in part in a subdivision or group development, the TRC may require the reservation of the land for future use. 
B.  Notification by TRC Upon submittal of a preliminary plan or group development that includes part or all of a site to be reserved, the TRC shall immediately notify City Council or other appropriate governmental agency, who shall promptly decide whether it wishes the site to be reserved. 
7.5.2. - Reservation Desired 
A.  Identification on Plat or Plan If the appropriate government agency decides it wishes the site to be reserved, then the preliminary plat or group development shall provide for the reservation of the site for a period of not more than 1 year from the date of approval, except as otherwise provided in Section 160A-372 of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
B.  Reservation Time Period The reservation period may be extended for additional periods of time upon mutual agreement between the landowner and the appropriate governmental agency, each of which shall not exceed 2 years. 
CHAPTER 8: - NONCONFORMITIES 
8.1. - General Applicability 

8.1.1. - Purpose and Scope 
There are existing uses of land, structures, lots of record, and signs that were lawfully established before the effective date of this Ordinance or a subsequent amendment thereto, that now do not conform to standards and requirements of this Ordinance. Such uses, structures, lots, and signs are collectively referred to as "nonconformities." The purpose and intent of this chapter is to allow nonconformities to continue to exist, but to regulate and limit their continued existence and expansion so as to bring them into conformity to the extent that is reasonably practicable. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 31, 1-17-2017) 
8.1.2. - Determination of Nonconformity Status 
In all cases, the burden of establishing that a nonconformity lawfully exists shall be the responsibility of the landowner of the land on which the alleged nonconformity is located. 
8.1.3. - Continuation and Minor Repairs and Maintenance Allowed 
A.  Maintenance Allowed Nonconformities are allowed to continue in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance, and are allowed and encouraged to receive minor repairs and routine maintenance that are necessary to maintain the nonconformity and its surroundings in a safe condition and to protect against health hazards. 
B.  Strengthening Allowed Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe or lawful condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe or unlawful by a duly authorized City official. 
8.1.4. - Change of Tenancy or Ownership 
No change of title or possession or right to possession of property involved with a nonconformity shall be construed to prevent the continuance of such nonconformity. 
8.2. - Nonconforming Uses 

8.2.1. - Applicability 
Nonconforming uses shall be subject to the standards in this section. 
8.2.2. - Standards Applied to All Nonconforming Uses 
The standards in this section shall apply to all nonconforming uses in the City except as otherwise provided in Section 8.2.3, Standards applied to specific nonconforming uses. 
A.  Continuation   
1.  A nonconforming use may be continued and maintained in accordance with the standards of this section. 
2.  If a nonconforming use is replaced by a conforming use, the nonconforming use may not be re-established. 
B.  Conversion   
1.  No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use unless the use is determined by the Planning and Development Director to be of equal or less intensity or density. In determining whether a nonconforming use is of equal or less intensity or density, the Planning and Development Director shall consider: 
(a)  Anticipated traffic of each use; 
(b)  Parking requirements of each use; 
(c)  Anticipated number of persons on the premises of each use at a time of peak demand; 
(d)  The number of dwelling units; and 
(e)  Off-site impacts of each use, such as noise, glare, dust, vibration, or smoke. 
2.  A nonconforming use must continue to occupy the same lot or plot of land. 
C.  Expansion or Enlargement A nonconforming use may be expanded or enlarged provided: 
1.  The additional square footage of the expansion or enlargement does not exceed 25 percent of the square footage of the structure(s) that existed at the time the use became nonconforming; 
2.  The expansion or enlargement occupies the same lot or plot of ground as occupied by the existing structure at the time the use became nonconforming; 
3.  Neither the number of dwelling units or the intensity of the use is increased; and 
4.  The expansion or enlargement does not create any additional nonconformities. 
D.  Cessation   
1.  General   
(a)  If a nonconforming use of land ceases operation for a continuous period of more than 180 days, any subsequent use of the land shall be a use permitted in the district by right. 
(b)  The landowner shall demonstrate that the nonconforming use has not ceased for a continuous period of more than 180 days, to maintain its nonconforming status. 
(c)  A determination by the City that a nonconforming use has ceased may be based on (but not limited to) any of the following: 
(1)  Removal of inventory, equipment, or machinery; 
(2)  Termination in or a substantial reduction in utility services; 
(3)  Absence or reduction in activity at the site compared with the former level of use; 
(4)  Failure to maintain minimal hours of operation; 
(5)  Voluntary demolition; 
(6)  Unoccupied buildings in which the use was formerly conducted; 
(7)  Removal of on-site signage or copy from that signage; 
(8)  Failure to apply or re-apply for the necessary permits; or 
(9)  Failure to appeal from the denial of necessary permits. 
2.  Damage, Destruction, or Demolition If a nonconforming use of land ceases because of damage, destruction, or demolition of the structure in which the use is located, the structure may be reconstructed or repaired and the use re-established within 180 days, but may not exceed the square footage existing prior to its damage or destruction, except as provided in Section 8.2.2 C, Expansion or Enlargement. 
E.  Signs Signage for nonconforming uses is subject to the standards in Section 5.7, Signage. 
8.2.3. - Standards Applied to Specific Nonconforming Uses 
The following specific nonconforming uses shall meet the requirements of Section 8.2.2, Standards Applied to All Nonconforming Uses, except as expressly stated in the specific nonconforming use requirements. 
A.  Standards Applied to Market Showrooms   
1.  Expansion or Enlargement A nonconforming market showroom use may be expanded or enlarged provided: 
(a)  The expansion or enlargement occupies the same lot or plot of land as occupied by the existing structure(s) at the time the use became nonconforming; and 
(b)  The expansion or enlargement does not create any additional nonconformities. 
2.  Cessation   
(a)  General   
(1)  If a nonconforming market showroom use ceases operation for a continuous period of more than 1 year, any subsequent use of land shall be a use permitted in the district. 
(2)  The landowner shall demonstrate that the nonconforming use has not ceased for a continuous period of more than 1 year to maintain its nonconforming status. 
(b)  Damage, Destruction, or Demolition If any nonconforming market showroom use ceases because of damage, destruction, or demolition of the structure in which the use is located, the structure may be reconstructed or repaired and the use re-established within 365 days. 
B.  Standards Applied to Lands in the MS Zoning District   
1.  Expansion or Enlargement Nonconforming uses in the (MS) district shall not be expanded or enlarged. 
2.  Cessation   
(a)  If a nonconforming use, other than a market showroom, in the (MS) District ceases for any reason including damage, destruction, or demolition for a continuous period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of land shall be a use permitted in the district. 
(b)  The landowner shall demonstrate that the nonconforming use has not ceased for a continuous period of more than 30 days to maintain its nonconforming status. 
C.  Standards Applied to Adult Entertainment Uses   
1.  Continuation   
(a)  A nonconforming adult entertainment use may be continued in accordance with the standards in Section 8.2.2 A, Continuation. 
(b)  A nonconforming adult entertainment use is not rendered nonconforming by the location of a religious institution, school, day care, public recreation facility, residential district, or an establishment having a North Carolina ABC license within 650 feet of the adult entertainment use. 
2.  Expansion or Enlargement Nonconforming adult entertainment uses shall not be expanded or enlarged. 
3.  Cessation   
(a)  If a nonconforming adult entertainment use ceases for any reason including damage, destruction, or demolition for a continuous period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of land shall be a use permitted in the district. 
(b)  The landowner shall demonstrate that the nonconforming use has not ceased for a continuous period of more than 30 days to maintain its nonconforming status. 
D.  Standards Applied to Manufactured Dwellings Nonconforming manufactured dwellings shall meet the requirements of Section 8.2.2. Standards Applied to All Nonconforming Uses except as stated herein. 
1.  Continuation and Replacement   
(a)  A nonconforming manufactured dwelling that is the sole principal structure on a lot, or is located within a manufactured dwelling park, may be continued or replaced, in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  A manufactured dwelling that replaces a manufactured dwelling located on a lot shall: 
(1)  Obtain a building permit in accordance with Section 2.5.3, Building Permit; 
(2)  Meet or exceed the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time the dwelling was manufactured; and 
(3)  Meet the requirements of a manufactured dwelling in accordance with Section 4.3.2 B.4, Manufactured Dwelling. 
(c)  A manufactured dwelling that replaces a manufactured dwelling located in a manufactured dwelling park shall: 
(1)  Obtain a building permit in accordance with Section 2.5.3, Building Permit; 
(2)  Meet or exceed the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time the dwelling was manufactured; 
(3)  Be a single-wide unit no wider than 15 feet; and 
(4)  Not increase the number of dwelling units in the manufactured dwelling park. 
(d)  No manufactured dwelling made prior to June 15, 1976 may be used to replace a lawfully established nonconforming manufactured dwelling. 
2.  Expansion or Enlargement A replacement manufactured dwelling or single-wide manufactured dwelling may be larger than the existing manufactured dwelling being replaced, provided: 
(a)  It is located in a residential or AGR zoning district; 
(b)  It is located on the same lot or space as the previous dwelling unit; and 
(c)  It meets all applicable setbacks for the district where it is located. 
E.  Standards Applied to Single-family Detached or Duplex Dwellings   
1.  Expansion or Enlargement A nonconforming single-family detached or duplex dwelling may be expanded or enlarged provided: 
(a)  The expansion or enlargement occupies the same lot or plot of ground as occupied by the existing structure at the time the use became nonconforming; and 
(b)  The expansion or enlargement does not create any additional nonconformities. 
F.  Standards Applied to Major and Minor Schools   
1.  Expansion or Enlargement A nonconforming major or minor school may be expanded or enlarged provided: 
(a)  The expansion or enlargement occupies the same lot or plot of ground as occupied by the existing structure at the time the use became nonconforming; and 
(b)  The expansion or enlargement does not create any additional nonconformities. 
(Ord. No. 7363/17-106 , § 11, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 12, 11-20-2017) 
8.3. - Nonconforming Structures 

8.3.1. - Applicability 
Nonconforming principal and accessory structures shall be subject to the standards in this section. 
8.3.2. - Continuation and Replacement 
A.  Continuation A nonconforming structure may be continued in accordance with Section 8.1.3, Continuation and Minor Repairs and Maintenance Allowed. 
B.  Replacement   
1.  After Damage in Excess of 50 Percent of Building Value In the event of damage by fire or other causes to an extent exceeding 50 percent of its building value prior to such damage, as established by the applicable county tax listing, reconstruction of a nonconforming structure shall be permitted only in compliance with the applicable dimensional standards of this Ordinance. 
2.  After Damage Less Than 50 Percent of Building Value In the event of damage by fire or other causes to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of its building value prior to such damage, as established by the applicable county tax listing, reconstruction of a nonconforming structure shall be permitted, provided it is constructed: 
(a)  In accordance with an approved site plan, group development, or building permit, as applicable; 
(b)  In the same location and up to the same dimensions as originally existed; or 
(c)  In compliance with the current dimensional standards. 
3.  Relocation A nonconforming structure shall not be moved, in whole or in part, to another location on or off the parcel of land on which it is located, unless upon relocation it conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 8.C, 5-21-2018) 
8.3.3. - Expansion and Enlargement 
A.  Alteration No nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any way which increases the nonconformity however, any nonconforming structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease the degree of nonconformity. 
B.  Enlargement Any enlargement of a nonconforming structure shall conform to the dimensional standards of the zoning district where it is located. 
(Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 8.D, 5-21-2018) 
8.4. - Nonconforming Lots of Record 

8.4.1. - Applicability 
Nonconforming lots of record shall comply with the standards in this section. 
8.4.2. - Continuation 
A.  Lots with Contiguous Frontage in One Ownership When 2 or more adjoining lots with contiguous frontage are under common ownership and the lots are nonconforming in terms of width or area, such lots shall be combined for development purposes to create 1 or more lots, each of which conforms to the applicable dimensional standards of the district. 
B.  Single Lot of Record in a Residential District When a lot in a residential zoning district has an area or width which does not conform to the dimensional standards of the district where it is located, but was of record on the effective date of this Ordinance, then a single-family dwelling may be built on the lot, subject to compliance with setback standards. 
C.  Single Lot of Record in a Nonresidential District When a lot in a nonresidential district has an area or width which does not conform to the dimensional standards of the district where it is located, but was of record on the effective date of this Ordinance, then development on the lot may be permitted, subject to compliance with all required setbacks, open space requirements, and all other applicable development and design standards. 
(Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 8.E, 5-21-2018) 
8.4.3. - Expansion or Enlargement 
The boundaries, shape, or size of a nonconforming lot may be modified through a lot line adjustment, boundary adjustment, recombination, or consolidation provided it reduces the extent of the nonconformity. 
8.4.4. - Division of an Existing Developed Lot 
A nonconforming lot containing an existing single-family detached or duplex dwelling that cannot be divided in compliance with the minimum lot area or minimum lot width requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, may be divided into individual lots provided: 
A.  Location The lot is a lot of record that existed in its present configuration on the effective date of this Ordinance, and is within the Core City; 
B.  Not a Subdivision That such division of land is not a subdivision as defined by this Ordinance; 
C.  Lots Created   
1.  No more than 3 lots are created; 
2.  Each lot created shall contain only 1 existing single-family or 1 existing duplex dwelling; 
3.  All lots meet all other requirements of the City and this Ordinance, including the provision and location of utilities; 
D.  Dimensional Standards   
1.  Each lot created has a minimum street frontage of 25 feet along an existing public street; and 
2.  All dwellings shall meet the required side or rear yards from the newly created lot line(s). 
E.  Driveways That any new driveways meet the requirements of the City's Driveway Ordinance. Where possible, shared driveway access is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 8.F, 5-21-2018) 
8.4.5. - Governmental Acquisition of Land 
Conforming lots subject to governmental acquisition of a portion of the lot for a public purpose that results in the lot becoming nonconforming because it no longer complies with lot area or width standards of the district shall be deemed conforming upon receipt of a zoning compliance permit (see Section 2.5.15, Zoning Compliance Permit), and compliance with the following: 
A.  Complies with Use Table The development proposed complies with Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table; 
B.  Complies with Dimensional Standards The development proposed complies with the dimensional standards of this Ordinance; 
C.  Complies with Off-Street Parking Standards The development proposed is designed to comply with the off-street parking and landscaping standards of this Ordinance; and 
D.  Complies with Other Applicable Standards The development proposed complies with all other standards and requirements of this Ordinance. 
8.5. - Nonconforming Signs 

8.5.1. - Applicability 
Nonconforming signs shall be subject to the standards in this section. 
8.5.2. - Prohibited Actions 
The following actions associated with a nonconforming sign shall be prohibited: 
A.  Enlargement or Alteration Enlargement or structural alteration of a nonconforming sign or sign structure; 
B.  Type of Lighting Changes to the type of sign lighting; and 
C.  Relocation Relocation of a nonconforming sign upon the premises. 
8.5.3. - Signs Rendered Nonconforming 
Signs made nonconforming by reason of annexation, expansion of the ETJ, or by amendment of the Official Zoning Map shall be removed within 365 days of the date they were rendered nonconforming. 
8.5.4. - Maintenance of Nonconforming Signage Allowed 
A nonconforming sign may remain in place and be maintained indefinitely as a legal nonconforming sign, subject to the following standards: 
A.  Maintenance Actions Normal maintenance of a nonconforming sign shall be allowed, and shall include the following: 
1.  Nonstructural repairs, such as repainting or electrical repairs; 
2.  Incidental alterations which do not increase the degree or extent of the nonconformity; and 
3.  Changing of copy, as provided in this section. 
B.  Change of Signs Copy Nonconforming signs may change copy in the form of replacement panels or replacement lettering, provided: 
1.  The copy size remains the same; or 
2.  The replacement copy is less nonconforming. 
8.5.5. - Replacement of Nonconforming Signage 
A.  Removal Any nonconforming sign that is removed for any reason shall be replaced only with a sign that complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.  Damage   
1.  If damage to a nonconforming sign from any cause is less than 50 percent of either the original or replacement value, whichever is less, the sign may be rebuilt or repaired to its original condition in its original location and may continue to be displayed. 
2.  If damage from any cause to a nonconforming sign equals or exceeds 50 percent of either the original or replacement value, the nonconforming sign may only be replaced with a sign that complies with the provisions of this ordinance. 
C.  Renovation Nonconforming sign shall be removed or replaced with conforming signage if any of the following occur: 
1.  Expansions of principal buildings that exceed 1,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA) or the total expansions of principal buildings, open uses of land or off-street parking that individually or collectively exceed 3,000 square feet; or 
2.  Structural or nonstructural alterations (excluding routine maintenance and repair of the façade of the principal building) that exceed 50 percent of the façade's area, which is calculated from the area of the façade or wall used in calculating the maximum allowable sign area. 
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 18, 1-17-2017) 
8.5.6. - Discontinuance of Business Activity 
A.  Discontinued for Less than 90 Days If the business activity on the premises where a nonconforming sign is located is discontinued for a continuous period of less than 90 days, then the nonconforming sign shall be allowed to remain. 
B.  Discontinued for 90 Days or More If the business activity on the premises where a nonconforming sign is located is discontinued for a continuous period of 90 days or more, then the nonconforming sign must be removed or replaced by a sign conforming to the standards of this Ordinance. 
8.5.7. - Change in Use 
Nonconforming signage shall be removed or replaced with conforming signage if there is a change in use. 
8.5.8. - Additional Sign Permit Application 
Nonconforming signage shall be removed or replaced with conforming signage if an application for a sign permit to add new or additional signage to the premises is approved. 
CHAPTER 9: - ENFORCEMENT 
9.1. - Purpose 
This chapter establishes procedures through which the City seeks to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and obtain corrections for Ordinance violations. It also sets forth the remedies and penalties that apply to violations of this Ordinance. The provisions of this chapter are intended to encourage the voluntary correction of violations, where possible. 
9.2. - Compliance Required 
Compliance with all the procedures, standards, and other provisions of this Ordinance is required by all persons owning, developing, managing, using, or occupying land or structures in the city. 
9.3. - Violations 
Any of the following shall be a violation of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties provided by this chapter and by State law. 

9.3.1. - Development without Authorization 
Engage in any development, use, construction, land disturbance, or other activity of any nature upon land or improvements thereon subject to the jurisdiction of this Ordinance without all required plans, permits, certificates, or other forms of authorization as set forth in this Ordinance. 
9.3.2. - Development Inconsistent with Authorization 
Engage in any development, use, construction, land disturbance, or other activity of any nature in any way inconsistent with any approved plan, permit, certificate, or other form of authorization granted for such activity. 
9.3.3. - Violation by Act or Omission 
Violate, by act or omission, any term, variance, modification, adjustment, condition, or qualification placed upon any required plan, permit, certificate, or other form of authorization for the development, use, construction, land disturbance, or other activity upon land or improvements thereon. 
9.3.4. - Use in Violation 
Erect, construct, alter, repair, maintain or use any building or structure, or use any land in violation of this Ordinance or any regulation made under the authority conferred thereby. 
9.3.5. - Subdivide in Violation 
Subdivide land in violation of this Ordinance or transfer or sell land by reference to a plat or map showing a subdivision of land before the plat or map has been properly approved under this Ordinance and recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring land does not exempt the transaction for violation this Ordinance. 
9.3.6. - Continue a Violation 
Continuance of any violations in this section is a separate and distinct offense. 
9.4. - Responsible Persons 

9.4.1. - General 
The landowner, tenant, or occupant of any land or structure, and an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, or any other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains a situation that constitutes a violation of this Ordinance may be held responsible for the violation and is subject to the remedies and penalties set forth in this chapter. 
9.4.2. - Failure by City Does Not Relieve Individual 
Failure of a City official charged with enforcement responsibility to observe or recognize conditions which violate the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, or to deny the issuance of a development or land disturbance permit, shall not relieve the landowner from responsibility for the condition or damages resulting therefrom and shall not result in the City, its officers, or agents being responsible for conditions or damages resulting therefrom. 
9.4.3. - Remedy Upon Notice 
Upon notice of a violation, the landowner and any other responsible person shall immediately remedy the violation. 
9.5. - Enforcement 

9.5.1. - Responsibilities 
The Engineering Services Director, Planning and Development Director, and Public Services Director shall be responsible for enforcing the following: 
A.  Engineering Services Director The Engineering Services Director is responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance pertaining to land disturbance, flood damage prevention, and the construction of public infrastructure. 
B.  Planning and Development Director The enforcement of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance are the responsibility of the Planning & Development Director. 
C.  Public Services Director The Public Services Director is responsible enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance pertaining to the inspection and maintenance of stormwater management devices. 
9.5.2. - Investigations 
As appropriate, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 above has the power to conduct such investigation as may be deemed necessary to carry out their duties as prescribed in this Ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating any complaints or alleged violations of this Ordinance. 
9.5.3. - Inspections 
As appropriate, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 above has the right upon presentation of proper credentials, or inspection warrant if necessary, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspecting the sites of any complaints or alleged violations, or determination of compliance or other enforcement action of this Ordinance. 
9.5.4. - Supporting Documentation 
As appropriate, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 above has the power to require written statements, certificates, certifications, or the filing of reports with the respect to pertinent questions relating to complaints or alleged violations of this Ordinance. 
9.5.5. - Interference 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the City who requests entry for purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out their official duties. 
9.6. - Enforcement Procedure 
When the Planning and Development Director, Engineering Services Director, or Public Services Director, as appropriate, finds a violation of this Ordinance, it shall be their duty to notify the responsible persons of the violation. 

9.6.1. - Notice of Violation 
If the landowner or occupant of the land, building, structure, sign, or use in violation fails to take prompt action, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1, as appropriate, shall give the owner or occupant written notice (by certified or registered mail to their last known address, by personal service, or by posting notice conspicuously on the property) of the following: 
A.  Violation Exists That the land, building, structure, sign, or use is in violation of this Ordinance; 
B.  Nature of the Violation The nature of the violation, and citation of the Section(s) of this Ordinance violated; 
C.  Remedy The measures necessary to remedy the violation; 
D.  Allowable Time Period The time period in which the violation must be corrected; except that no time period need be given for grading without a permit or interference with official duties; 
E.  Penalties that May be Assessed That penalties or remedies may be assessed; and 
F.  Appeal That the party cited has the right to appeal the Notice in accordance with Section 2.4.3, Appeal. 
9.6.2. - Failure to Comply with Order 
If the owner or occupant of a property fails to comply with a notice of violation from which no appeal has been taken, or a final decision by the BOA following an appeal, the landowner or occupant shall be subject to such remedies and penalties as may be provided for by State law or by Section 9.7, Remedies. 
9.7. - Remedies 

9.7.1. - Civil Penalties 
Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to the assessment of a civil penalty under the procedures provided in Section 9.9, Assessment of Civil Penalties. 
9.7.2. - Denial of Permit or Certificate 
As appropriate, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 above may withhold or deny any permit, certificate, or other authorization on any land, subdivision, building, structure, sign, or use in which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this Ordinance, or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, or other authorization previously granted. 
9.7.3. - Conditional Permit or Temporary Certificate 
As appropriate, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 above shall condition the authorization of any permit or certificate upon the correction of the deficiency, payment of civil penalties within a specified time, or the posting of a compliance security approved by appropriate governmental authority. 
9.7.4. - Stop Work Orders 
A.  General Whenever a building, structure, sign, or part thereof is being constructed, altered, repaired, moved, or demolished in violation of this Ordinance, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1, as appropriate, may order the work to be immediately stopped. 
B.  Order in Writing The stop work order shall be in writing and directed to the landowner, occupant, or person doing the work. The stop work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
C.  In Accordance with State Statutes or Building Code Such action shall be in accordance with Section 160A-421 of the North Carolina General Statutes or the State Building Code. 
9.7.5. - Revocation of Permits 
As appropriate, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 may revoke and require the return of a permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for the revocation. Permits or certificates may be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit or certificate. Any permit or certificate mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or City law may also be revoked. 
9.7.6. - Criminal Penalties 
Violation of Erosion and Sedimentation Control. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any soil erosion and sedimentation control provision of this ordinance, or rule or order adopted or issued pursuant to the soil erosion and sedimentation control provisions, or who knowingly or willfully initiates or continues a land-disturbing activity for which a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is required, except in accordance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of an approved plan, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by a fine not to exceed $5,000, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , § 19, 12-3-2018) 
9.7.7. - Injunctive Relief 
A.  Action by City Council Whenever the City Council has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate this Ordinance, or any rule or order adopted or issued pursuant to this Ordinance, or any term, condition, or provision of an approved development plan, or soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, it may, either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this Ordinance, institute a civil action in the name of the City, for injunctive relief to restrain, correct, abate, mandate, or enjoin the violation or threatened violation. 
B.  Superior Court The action shall be brought in the Superior Court of the appropriate county. Upon determination by a court that an alleged violation is occurring or is threatened, it shall enter such orders or judgments as are necessary to abate the violation or to prevent the threatened violation. 
C.  No Relief from Criminal Penalties The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this section shall not relieve any party to such proceedings from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this Ordinance. 
9.7.8. - Order of Abatement 
A.  General In addition to an injunction, the City may apply for and the court may enter an Order of Abatement as part of the judgment in the case. An Order of Abatement may direct any of the following actions: 
1.  That buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished, or removed; 
2.  That fixtures, furniture, or other moveable property be moved or removed entirely; 
3.  That improvements, alterations, modifications, or repairs be made; or 
4.  That any other action be taken as necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Ordinance. 
B.  Lien As appropriate, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 may execute the Order of Abatement and have a lien placed on the property in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien for the cost of executing the order. 
9.7.9. - Equitable Remedy 
The City may apply to a court of law for any appropriate equitable remedy to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The fact that other remedies are provided under general law or this Ordinance shall not be used by a violator as a defense to the City's application for equitable relief. 
9.7.10. - State and Common Law Remedies 
In addition to other enforcement provisions contained in this section, the City Council may exercise any and all enforcement powers granted to it by state law or common law. 
9.7.11. - Previous Enforcement 
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the continuation of previous enforcement actions. 
9.8. - Remedies-Cumulative and Continuous 

9.8.1. - Cumulative Violations 
All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that North Carolina law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. 
9.8.2. - Repeat Violations 
If a landowner or occupant repeats the same violation within a two year period from the date of the initial violation, it shall be considered to be a continuation of the initial violation and shall be subject to additional penalties and remedies. 
9.9. - Assessment of Civil Penalties 

9.9.1. - Responsible Parties 
Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance, including the owner or occupant of any land, building, structure, sign, use of land, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who participates or acts in concert, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any condition that is in violation of this Ordinance may be held responsible for the violation and subject to the penalties and remedies provided in this Ordinance. 
9.9.2. - Notice 
A.  Notification Required Civil penalties may not be assessed until the responsible person in violation has been notified in accordance with Section 9.6, Enforcement Procedure. 
B.  Civil Penalty Imposed If after receiving a notice of violation under Section 9.6.1, the person fails to take corrective action or file an appeal, a civil penalty may be imposed in accordance with this section. 
C.  Notice of Penalty Assessment Notice of the civil penalty assessment shall be served in the same manner as a notice of violation. 
D.  Assessment Contents The assessment notice shall state the nature of the violation, the civil penalty to be imposed upon the violator, and shall direct the violator to pay the civil penalty within 15 days of the date of the notice. 
E.  Separate Notices Separate notices must be provided for the first, second, third and fourth violations. After notice for the fourth violation, penalties may be assessed and accrue on a daily basis without any further notice to the property owner. 
F.  Assessment Until Compliance Civil penalties may be assessed until compliance is achieved. 
9.9.3. - Continuing Violation 
For each day the violation is not corrected, the violator will be guilty of an additional and separate offense and subject to additional civil penalty. 
9.9.4. - Demand for Payment 
If compliance is not achieved, then any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1, as appropriate, shall make written demand for payment of penalties that have accrued while the property has been in violation. The demand for payment shall be sent to the responsible person in violation and must include a description of the violation for which the civil penalties have been imposed. 
9.9.5. - Nonpayment 
If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached within 30 days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to legal counsel to institute a civil action for recovery of the civil penalty. Moreover, if the civil penalty is not paid within the time prescribed, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1, as appropriate, may have a criminal summons or warrant issued against the violator. Upon conviction, the violator is subject to any criminal penalty the court may impose pursuant to Section 14-4 of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
9.9.6. - Penalties 
A.  General Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance, except for soil and erosion control violations, shall be subject to assessment of a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00 for the first violation, $100.00 for the second violation, $200.00 for the third violation, and $500.00 for the fourth and each succeeding violation. 
B.  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Civil penalties for specific violations of Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation, are assessed as follows: 
1.  Grading Without Permit $5000 per day for failure to secure a valid land disturbance permit prior to conducting a land-disturbing activity for which a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is required. 
2.  Failure to Protect $500 per day for failure to take all reasonable measures to protect public property or private property, including lakes and/or natural watercourses, from damage caused by land-disturbing activities. 
3.  Failure to Follow Plan $300 per day for failure to conduct a land-disturbing activity in accordance with the provisions of an approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
4.  Failure to Install Devices $500 per day for failure, when more than one acre is disturbed ($250 per day when one acre or less is disturbed), to install erosion and sedimentation control devices sufficient to retain the sediment generated by the land-disturbing activity within the boundaries of the tract(s) and prevent off-site sedimentation. 
5.  Failure to Maintain Measures $300 per day for failure to maintain satisfactory soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures and/or devices on the site that are designed to provide protection from the calculated maximum peak rate of runoff from the 10-year storm. 
6.  Failure to Maintain Temporary Measures $250 per day for failure to maintain temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and facilities during the development of the site. 
7.  Failure to Maintain Slopes $250 per day for failure on graded slopes and fills to maintain an angle sufficient to retain vegetative cover or other adequate soil erosion and sedimentation control devices or structures. 
8.  Failure to Cover Slopes $250 per day for failure, within 7 days of completion of any phase of grading, to plant or otherwise provide exposed, graded slopes or fills with ground cover, devices, or structures sufficient to restrain erosion. 
9.  Failure to Plant Cover $250 per day for failure on a tract when more than one contiguous acre is disturbed, to plant or otherwise provide ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion within 14 days of completion of any phase of grading. 
10.  Failure to Revise Plan $250 per day for failure to file an acceptable, revised soil erosion and sedimentation control plan after being notified of the need to do so. 
11.  Failure to Maintain Buffer $250 per day for failure to retain a buffer zone of sufficient width along a lake or natural watercourse to confine visible siltation within the 25 percent of the buffer zone nearest the land-disturbing activity. 
12.  Interference with Official Duties $500 per day for obstructing, hampering, or interfering with any authorized agent of the City or the NC Sedimentation Control Commission while in the process of carrying out their official duties. 
9.9.7. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Penalty Use 
Civil penalties collected for soil erosion and sedimentation control violations must be used or disbursed as directed by Section 113A-64(a) of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
CHAPTER 10: - MEASUREMENT AND DEFINITIONS 
10.1. - General Rules for Interpretation 
The following rules shall apply for construing or interpreting the terms and provisions of this Ordinance. 

10.1.1. - Meanings and Intent 
A.  All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the general purposes set forth in Section 1.3, General Purpose and Intent, and the specific purpose statements set forth throughout this Ordinance. 
B.  When a specific section of these regulations gives a different meaning than the general definition provided in Section 10.4, Definitions, the specific section's meaning and application of the term shall control. 
C.  Terms that are not defined are subject to their common or customary meaning. 
10.1.2. - Headings, Illustrations, and Text 
In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this Ordinance and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control. Graphics and other illustrations are provided for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a complete and accurate description of all applicable regulations or requirements. 
10.1.3. - Lists and Examples 
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms like "for example," "including," and "such as," or similar language are intended to provide examples and are not exhaustive lists of all possibilities. 
10.1.4. - Computation of Time 
The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the City, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the City. References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated. 
10.1.5. - References to this Ordinance 
A reference to a chapter, section, subsection, or paragraph means a chapter, section, subsection, or paragraph of this Ordinance, unless otherwise specified. 
10.1.6. - References to Other Regulations/Publications 
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such regulation, resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
10.1.7. - Delegation of Authority 
Any act authorized by this Ordinance to be carried out by a director may be delegated by the appropriate director to a subordinate of that department. 
10.1.8. - Technical and Non-Technical Terms 
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
10.1.9. - Public Officials and Agencies 
All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of High Point, unless otherwise indicated. 
10.1.10. - Mandatory and Discretionary Terms 
The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The words "may", "can", or "should" are suggestive and are not mandatory and they do not establish an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. 
10.1.11. - Conjunctions 
Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
A.  "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply; and 
B.  "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply. 
10.1.12. - Tenses and Plurals 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa. 
10.1.13. - Term Not Defined 
If a term used in any chapter of this Ordinance is not defined, the Planning and Development Director is authorized to provide a definition in accordance with Section 2.5.4, Determination, based upon the definitions used in professionally accepted sources. 
10.2. - Rules of Measurement 
The rules of measurement section includes terms that involve calculation and measurement. It groups terms together by subject area. Additional definitions of other terms are found in Section 10.4, Definitions. 

10.2.1. - Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to clarify the rules of measurement and exemptions that apply to all principal, accessory, and temporary uses allowed in this Ordinance. These standards may be further modified by other sections in this Ordinance, or in accordance with Section 2.5.4, Determination. 
10.2.2. - Measurement, Generally 
A.  Straight Lines Unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance, distances specified in this Ordinance are to be measured as the length of an imaginary straight line joining 2 points. 
B.  Rounding All calculations that result in part of a whole number shall be rounded up to the next highest whole number, unless otherwise provided in this section or elsewhere in this Ordinance. 
C.  Irregular Shapes In cases where an irregular shape complicates the application of these standards, the Planning and Development Director shall determine the applicable dimensional, setback, or bulk standards. 
D.  Separation   
1.  Lot to Lot When the provisions of this Ordinance require separation between 2 or more lots, or a lot and another feature, separation shall be measured by drawing straight lines from the nearest point of 1 lot line to the nearest point of the lot line subject to the separation requirement. 
2.  Use Type to Use Type When the provisions of this Ordinance require one use type to be separated from another use type, separation shall be measured by drawing straight lines from the nearest point of the wall of the existing or proposed principal structure to the nearest point of the wall of the existing or proposed structure subject to the separation requirement. 
FIGURE 10.2.2.D, USE SEPARATION

10.2.3. - Lot Dimensions 
A.  Lot Lines   
1.  Corner Side Lot Line The corner side lot line is a side lot line that abuts a street or other right-of-way. 
2.  Front Lot Line The front lot line is the line connecting the 2 side lot lines along the edge of the street that provides a lot's street address or that opposes the primary entrance of a building. 
3.  Rear Lot Line The rear lot line is the line connecting the 2 side lot lines along the edge of the lot opposite from the front line. 
4.  Side Lot Line The side lot line is the lot line connecting the front and rear lot lines regardless of whether it abuts a right-of-way or another lot line. 
FIGURE 10.2.3.A, LOT LINES

B.  Lot Types   
1.  Conservation Subdivision Lot A building lot located within a conservation subdivision. 
2.  Corner Lot A lot abutting 2 or more streets at their intersection. 
3.  Cul-de-Sac Lot A lot located on the head or turnaround of a cul-de-sac with side lot lines on a tangent to the arc of the right-of-way. 
4.  Double Frontage Lot A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on more than 1 street other than an alley. 
5.  Flag Lot A lot, created by a subdivision, with less lot width than is required for a conventional lot. It is composed of a narrow "flagpole" strip extending from the street and a much wider "flag" section lying immediately behind a lot or lots having the required street frontage for a conventional lot. In the case of a flag lot, the lot line at the end of the flagpole lying generally parallel to the street to which the flagpole connects shall be considered to be the front lot line for setback purposes. 
6.  Interior Lot A lot other than a corner lot with only 1 frontage on a street other than an alley. 
7.  Reverse Frontage Lot A lot with a building or structure that is oriented in an opposing direction to the existing buildings or structures on adjacent lots. 
8.  Single-Family Attached (Townhouse) Lot A parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership and lying underneath, or underneath and around, a single-family attached (townhouse) use. 
9.  Zone lot One or more lots of record in 1 undivided ownership with sufficient total area, area exclusive of easements and flood hazards, total dimensions, street access, and frontage to permit construction thereon of a principal building together with its required parking and landscape yards. 
FIGURE 10.2.3.B, LOT TYPES

C.  Lot Measurements   
1.  Minimum Lot Area   
(a)  The minimum amount of required land area, measured horizontally, that must be included within the lines of a lot. Lands located within any private easements shall be included within the lot area. The following features shall not be included in calculating minimum lot area: 
(1)  Public street rights-of-way; 
(2)  Private street common area; and 
(3)  The "pole" or "pan handle" portion of a flag lot. 
(b)  In the case of single-family attached and multi-family development, the district tables in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts set out a minimum development size for minimum lot area. The minimum development size is the land area necessary for at least 3 dwelling units. Beyond the first 3 units, the maximum density for the zoning district controls the maximum number of dwelling units per acre. 
2.  Lot Area Averaging Lot area averaging may be applied to new single-family detached development located outside the Core City area in certain zoning districts as noted in the individual zoning district dimensional standards in Chapter 3 Zoning Districts. The areas of residential lots in the same development may be averaged in order to meet the required minimum lot area for the applicable zoning district in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Lot area averaging must be proposed and approved at the time of preliminary plat approval. 
(b)  All lots to be averaged must be for residential use and be within 75% to 125% of the minimum lot area required by the zoning district. 
(c)  The areas of all such lots in the development are added together and divided by the total number of lots. The resulting number shall meet or exceed the required minimum lot area for the district. 
(d)  Residential lots that are larger than 125% of the required minimum lot area for the district are permitted, but shall be excluded from lot area averaging. 
3.  Lot Width The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured at the inside edge of the front setback. On cul-de-sac lots, lot width is measured at a front street setback of up to 50 feet from the right-of-way (which becomes the minimum building line). 
4.  Street Frontage The length of the lot line of a single zone lot abutting a public or private street right-of-way. 
FIGURE 10.2.3.C, LOT MEASUREMENTS

D.  Dimensional Standards in the Core City   
1.  Some forms of development in the Core City may take advantage of voluntary contextual setbacks. A contextual setback is a street, side, or rear setback of a distance that is between 75 percent and 125 percent of the average for the same kind of setbacks found among the existing structures along the same block face as the proposed development (see Figure 10.2.3.D, Determination of Dimensional Standards in the Core City). 
2.  This is the same process used for contextual lot width, contextual lot area, contextual side or contextual rear setbacks as well. 
FIGURE 10.2.3.D, DETERMINATION OF DIMENSIONAL
STANDARDS IN THE CORE CITY

(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 32, 1-17-2017) 
10.2.4. - Setbacks 
A setback is the horizontal distance from a lot line or street right-of-way line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, sign, or activity, measured perpendicularly to the line. 
A.  Perimeter Setback Setbacks applied to single building developments, group developments and multiple lot developments. When applied to group developments or multiple lot developments it applies only to the outermost buildings along the perimeter of a development. A perimeter setback does not apply along streets. 
FIGURE 10.2.4.A, SETBACKS FOR GROUP DEVELOPMENT

B.  Rear Setback A setback from an interior lot line lying on the opposite side of the lot from the front street setback. 
C.  Side Setback Any interior lot line setback other than a rear setback. 
D.  Street Setbacks Any setback from a street right-of-way line. 
1.  Front Street Setback Any setback from a street on which the building is addressed or primarily fronts. A through lot has 2 front street setbacks. 
2.  Maximum Street Setback The maximum distance a building can be located from the street it fronts. 
3.  Minimum Street Setback The minimum distance a building can be located from the street it fronts. 
E.  Side Street Setback Any setback from a street other than the front street setback. 
FIGURE 10.2.4.E1, SETBACKS

FIGURE 10.2.4.E2, SETBACKS FOR BUILDINGS EXCEEDING 50 FEET IN HEIGHT

F.  Setbacks Following Government Acquisition of Land Where land acquisition for a public purpose reduces the distance between an existing legally-established structure and an adjacent lot line to an amount less than the minimum required by the district, then the resulting distance shall be deemed the minimum setback for the lot. 
G.  Setback Encroachments Table 10.2.4.G, Allowable Encroachment into Setbacks, sets out the kinds of features that are permitted to encroach within a required setback, provided they do not obstruct visibility for motorists at any street intersection in accordance with the standards in Chapter 6: Visibility at Intersections, of the City Code of Ordinances. 
TABLE 10.2.4.G: ALLOWABLE ENCROACHMENTS INTO SETBACKS 
FEATURE 
ALLOWABLE ENCROACHMENT 
Bay windows May extend up to 3 feet into any required setback, if no more than 9 feet wide, but in no case shall be closer than 3 feet to any lot line Bus shelters and gatehouses May be located in any required setback Chimneys, fireplaces, or outdoor kitchens May extend up to 3 feet into any required setback, but in no case shall be closer than 3 feet to any lot line Flagpoles, mailboxes, lamp and address posts May be located in any required setback Fences or walls, ornamental entry columns, and gates May be located in any required setback, subject to the limitations in Section 5.11, Fences Handicapped ramps May be located within any required setback HVAC condensers, heat pumps, or other outdoor mechanical equipment May be located within any required setback Open balconies, fire escapes, or exterior stairways May extend up to 3 feet into any required setback, but in no case shall be closer than 3 feet to any lot line Pet shelters, play equipment, and outdoor furniture May be located in any required setback Roof eaves and overhangs, or awnings May extend up to 3 feet into any required setback, but in no case shall be closer than 3 feet to any lot line Signs, projecting or free-standing May extend into or be located in any required setback in accordance with Section 5.7, Signage Sills or entablatures May extend up to 12 inches into any required setback Uncovered porches, stoops, decks, patios, terraces, walkways, or driveways May extend into or be located in any required setback, if less than 12 inches high Vegetation and landscaping features such as retaining walls, fountains, ponds, ornamental ponds, trellises, arbors, and similar landscaping features May be located in any required setback Well houses and utility cabinets May be located in any required setback Canopies, awnings, and marquees attached to a building in the GB, CB, and MS districts May extend into the street right-of-way if: 
- No portion is closer than 3 feet to the face of the curb; 
- No portion is less than 9 feet above grade; and 
- No portion requiring vertical support from the sidewalk is located above a sidewalk of less than 8 feet in width Canopies attached to a building in the RC district May extend into the street setback provided no portion of the canopy is closer than 10 feet to the street right-of-way line Freestanding canopies May be located in the street setback provided no portion is closer than 15 feet to the street right-of-way Wall signs in the CB and MS districts May project into the street right-of-way  
FIGURE 10.2.4.G, ALLOWABLE ENCROACHMENTS

(Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
10.2.5. - Density and Intensity 
A.  Maximum Density The maximum number of residential dwelling units permitted per acre of land area. Density is determined by dividing the number of dwelling units by the total amount of land area within a particular lot or tract. 
B.  Maximum Density Calculation   
1.  Land area that is dedicated to the City for drainageway and open space on the final plat may be included in the lot area for the purpose of determining the maximum number of dwelling units permitted. 
2.  When the developer dedicates and builds a new public street in or abutting a multi-family development, the street right-of-way may be included in the lot area for the purpose of determining the maximum number of dwelling units permitted. 
3.  When a single-family attached or multi-family development occupies both sides of a street for a minimum centerline distance of 400 feet, the entire development may be treated as a single zone lot for purposes of calculation of the maximum number of dwelling units permitted, provided that a final plat is recorded with a prominent note specifying that the property must remain in 1 ownership (except for individual units in townhome or condominium developments). This plat note is not required if the portion of the development on each side of the street independently meets all requirements of this Ordinance. 
4.  Within a mixed-use development the density is determined by dividing the total number of dwelling units by the total acreage of the mixed-use development. 
C.  Density Equivalence   
1.  When calculating the density for a life care use or private dormitory, 2 bedrooms in a life care or private dormitory shall be equivalent to 1 regular dwelling unit. 
2.  When calculating the density for single-room occupancy (SRO) residence, a rooming unit of less than 150 square feet shall be equivalent to 1/2 a dwelling unit and a rooming unit of 150 square feet or more shall be equivalent to 1 dwelling unit. 
3.  Maximum density amounts do not apply to student housing or lodging on college or university campuses when the housing is owned or operated by the college or university. In these instances, residential land uses are considered as an accessory to the college or university principal use. 
D.  Rounding When computation of density results in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded down to the next lowest whole number. 
E.  Built-Upon Area   
1.  The portion of a development that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel, recreation facilities like courts, but not wooden slat structures such as decks or boardwalks. 
2.  The water area of a swimming pool is not considered built-upon area. 
F.  Gross Floor Area The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating 2 buildings. 
10.2.6. - Height 
A.  Maximum Building Height The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade to the topmost section of the roof. 
B.  Structure Height Restrictions   
1.  As required by Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Chapter 1, Part 77, and determined by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), no structure may be constructed or existing structure altered in a manner or at a height that constitutes a safety hazard to aerial navigation. Structures at or exceeding the following heights shall require FAA approval prior to construction: 
(a)  Any structure 50 feet and higher above ground level between 5,000 feet and under 10,000 feet of the closest runway; 
(b)  Any structure 100 feet and higher above ground level between 10,000 feet and 20,000 feet of the closest runway; and 
(c)  Any structure over 200 feet above ground level. 
2.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain FAA approval from the Piedmont Triad International Airport Authority (PTIAA) and provide it to the Planning and Development Director. 
3.  No permit or plan approval shall be granted in the absence of FAA approval. 
4.  Lighting or electronic signals that interfere with air traffic communications or navigational aids are prohibited as determined by the FAA. 
C.  Exemptions to Height Requirements Except as required in 10.2.6.B, Structure Height Restrictions, height limits shall not apply to bulk storage silos, grain elevators, barns, chimneys, elevator shafts, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, flagpoles, monuments, water towers, rooftop dish antennas, solar equipment, skylights, fire escapes or roof access stairways, mechanical equipment required to operate and maintain the building, derricks, conveyors, power transmission towers, or similar appurtenances, provided: 
1.  The appurtenance is not constructed for the purpose of providing additional floor area in the building; and 
2.  The appurtenance complies with the screening requirements for mechanical equipment and appurtenances in this Ordinance. 
FIGURE 10.2.6, HEIGHT MEASUREMENT

(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , § 33, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 1, 11-20-2017) 
10.2.7. - Slope and Elevation 
A.  Slope The degree of deviation of the ground surface from a flat, horizontal elevation, usually expressed in percent or degrees of deviation from horizontal. 
B.  Base Flood Elevation A determination of the water surface elevations of the base flood as published in the Flood Insurance Study. When the BFE has not been provided in a "Special Flood Hazard Area", it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a Federal, State, or other source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation establishes the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. 
C.  Finished Grade The established grade following grading, excavation, or other land-disturbing activity. 
D.  Natural Grade The level of the ground elevation prior to the commencement of development or land-disturbing activity. 
10.2.8. - Parking Space Computation 
A.  Rounding When computation of the number of required parking spaces results in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded down to the next whole number. 
B.  Multiple and Mixed Uses Unless otherwise approved, development containing more than 1 principal use shall provide off-street parking in an amount equal to the total requirements of all individual uses, unless the Planning and Development Director determines that a lower standard proposed as part of an alternative parking plan would be adequate because of differences in peak operating hours. 
C.  Seat Based Standards Where the minimum number of off-street parking spaces is based on the number of seats, all computations shall be based on the design capacity of the areas used for seating. 
D.  Floor-Area Based Standards Where the minimum number of off-street parking spaces is based on square feet of floor area, all computations shall be based on gross floor area. The square footage shall not include outdoor display or use area. 
E.  On-Street Parking Except as otherwise specifically permitted, on-street parking on public or private streets shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking standards of this Ordinance. 
F.  Driveways Used to Satisfy Requirements Driveways may be used to satisfy minimum off-street parking standards for single-family detached, single-family attached, and duplex dwellings, provided sufficient space is available to satisfy the standards of this Ordinance. 
10.2.9. - Landscaping 
A.  Setback Less than the Required Planting Area   
1.  In cases where the required building setback is less than the required planting area width, the building setback shall control, reducing the required planting area width only alongside the building. 
2.  The planting rate of the required planting area shall still apply. 
B.  Rounding When computation of the amount of landscaping material to be provided results in a fraction, the minimum number of shrubs or trees to be provided shall be rounded upwards to the next highest whole number. 
10.2.10. - Signage 
A.  Area for Single-faced Signs The area of a sign shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof which will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence. 
B.  Area for Multi-faced Signs For multi-faced signs, the sign area shall be computed by including all sign faces visible from any one point. When 2 identical sign faces are placed back to back so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of 1 of the faces. 
C.  Height Signs height shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at the finished grade or from the nearest adjacent street grade to which the sign is oriented and on which the lot has frontage, whichever is higher, to the top of the highest component of the sign. Finished grade shall be the grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. 
D.  Lots with Multiple Frontages Lots fronting on 2 or more streets are allowed the permitted sign area for each street frontage. The total sign area that is oriented toward a particular street, however, may not exceed the portion of the lot's total sign area that is derived from that street frontage or building frontage. 
E.  Wall Area (for the purposes of Sign Area Measurement) For the purposes of determining allowable sign area, a wall is the vertical exterior surface of a building, the area of which shall be determined as follows: 
1.  The area of all parallel vertical surfaces along a single building elevation regardless of offsets shall be counted as 1 wall. 
2.  The front of each unit of a multiple tenant commercial building shall be counted as a separate wall. 
3.  The area of an angled wall surface shall be counted as part of whichever adjoining wall surface it is most parallel with. 
4.  A 45 degree angled wall may be counted as part of the area of either adjoining wall, but not as a part of both. 
10.2.11. - Exterior Lighting 
A.  Measured at the Lot Line Light level measurements shall be made at the lot line of the land upon which light to be measured is being generated. If measurement on private property is not possible or practical, light level measurements may be made at the boundary of the public street right-of-way that adjoins the land. 
B.  Measured at Finished Grade Measurements shall be made at finished grade (ground level), with the light-registering portion of the meter held parallel to the ground pointing up. The meter shall have cosine and color correction and have an accuracy tolerance of no greater than plus or minus 5 percent. 
C.  Measurement Device Measurements shall be taken with a light meter that has been calibrated within 2 years. 
10.2.12. - Fences 
Fence height shall be measured in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Measurement Location Fence height shall be measured at the highest point above grade (not including columns or fence posts) on the portion of the fence nearest an abutting or adjacent lot or street right-of-way. 
B.  Column and Post Height Columns or posts shall not exceed a height 18 inches above the built height of the fence. 
C.  Wall or Berm Below Fence Any retaining wall or berm below a fence shall be included within the fence height. 
D.  Railings Not Included Safety railings required by the State Building Code shall not be included in fence height measurements. 
10.3. - Abbreviations 
Table 10.3, Abbreviations, includes the abbreviations and their corresponding terms as used in this Ordinance. 
TABLE 10.3: ABBREVIATIONS 
ABBREVIATION 
ASSOCIATED TERM 
ADA Americans with Disabilities Act ADU Accessory Dwelling Unit ANSI American National Standards Institute ARO Airport Overlay District ATM Automatic Teller Machine BFE Base Flood Elevation BMP Best Management Practice BOA Board of Adjustment bua Built-upon area CZ Conditional Zoning dB Decibel DBH Diameter at Breast Height DENR North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources DO Development Ordinance DWR North Carolina Department of Water Resources EPA Environmental Protection Agency ETJ Extraterritorial Jurisdiction EV Electric Vehicle FAA Federal Aviation Administration FAR Federal Aviation Regulation FCC Federal Communications Commission FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency FBFM Flood Boundary and Floodway Map FHBM Flood Hazard Boundary Map FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Map FIS Flood Insurance Study FTA Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 GCO Gateway Corridor Overlay District GWA General Watershed Area HPC Historic Preservation Commission HPDOT High Point Transportation Department HQW High Quality Water HUD Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development HVAC Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning kW Kilowatt LCID Land Clearing and Inert Debris Ldn Day-Night Average Sound Level Lf or LF Linear Feet LEED Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design LHO Local Historic Overlay District LOMA Letter of Map Amendment LOMR Letter of Map Revision LOMR-F Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill MHO Manufactured Housing Overlay District MW Megawatt NC North Carolina NCDCR North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources NCDOT North Carolina Department of Transportation NCO Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District NCGS North Carolina General Statute NFIP National Flood Insurance Program OS Open Space PD Planned Development PTIA Piedmont Triad International Airport P&Z Planning and Zoning Commission ROW Right-of-way SF or Sq. Ft. Square Feet SFHA Special Flood Hazard Area SR Secondary Road in the North Carolina Secondary Road System TIA Traffic Impact Analysis TRC Technical Review Committee UFC Urban Forestry Committee WEC Wind Energy Conversion System WCA Watershed Critical Area WSE Water Surface Elevation WSO Watershed Protection Overlay District  
10.4. - Definitions 
The following are definitions for terms used in this Ordinance that do not involve calculations or measurement (see Section 10.2, Rules of Measurement, for terms and definitions related to calculation or measurement). 
ABUTTING 
The condition of 2 parcels of land having a common property line or boundary, including cases where 2 or more parcels of land adjoin at a corner, but not including cases where parcels of land are separated by a street or alley. ACCESS 
The right or ability of pedestrians, vehicles, and boats to enter and leave property. ACCESS EASEMENT 
An easement which grants the right to cross land. ACCESSORY BUILDING 
A detached building, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building and which is located on the same lot as the principal building. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT 
A secondary dwelling unit established in conjunction with and clearly subordinate to a principal dwelling unit, whether part of the same structure as the principal dwelling unit, or as a detached structure on the same lot. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE 
A detached subordinate or incidental structure, the use of which is incidental to the principal structure and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure. ACCESSORY USE 
A use that is incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings and located on the same lot. ACTIVE RECREATION AREA 
Uses or structures intended for specific active recreational uses such as athletic fields, playgrounds, swimming pools, courts, tracks walking trails, paths, porches, and other similar uses typically located in open space areas or parks and served by parking facilities, spectator areas, restroom facilities, and exterior lighting, where appropriate. ADDITION 
An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. ADJACENT 
A parcel of land or development that shares all or part of a common lot line or boundary with another parcel of land, or a parcel of land that would abut another parcel of land, but for the fact a street or right-of-way divides the parcels. ADOPTED POLICY GUIDANCE 
The combined future land-use policy guidance provided by the adopted Community Growth Vision , the comprehensive plan (also referred to as the Land Use Plan ), area plans prepared for specific parts of the City, and system plans related to the City's infrastructure systems. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
The following definitions relate to adult entertainment uses: a) Adult arcade (also known as "peep show") A place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to persons in booths or viewing rooms where the images so displayed depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas. b) Adult bookstore or adult video store A commercial establishment which as 1 of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
  1) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
  2) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." c) Adult cabaret A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial establishment that regularly features, exhibits or displays as one of its principal business purposes: 
  1) persons who appear nude or semi-nude; or 
  2) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
  3) films, motion pictures, videos, slides, or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe "specified sexual activities "or" specified anatomical areas." d) Adult motel A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
  1) offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, or other photographic reproductions that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as one of its principal business purposes; or 
  2) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or 
  3) allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours. e) Adult motion picture theater A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown as one of its principal business purposes that depict or describe "specified sexual activities "or" specified anatomical areas." f) Adult theater A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features, exhibits or displays, as one of its principal business purposes, persons who appear in a State of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances that expose or depict "specified anatomical areas "or" specified sexual activities." g) Escort A person who, for tips or any other form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. h) Escort agency A person or business that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its principal business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. i) Nude model studio A place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude, or who displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration for such right. Nude Model Studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of North Carolina or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
  1) that has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
  2) where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least 3 days in advance of the class; and 
  3) where no more than 1 nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. j) Nude or a State of nudity   1) the appearance of a human anus, male genitals, or female genitals; or 
  2) a State of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus, male genitals, or female genitals. k) Semi-nude A State of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. l) Sexual encounter center A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex, or activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a State of nudity or semi-nude. m) Specified anatomical areas Human genitals in a State of sexual arousal. n) Specified sexual activities Any of the following: 
  1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or 
  2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or 
  3) masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
  4) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in 1. through 3. above. AFFECTED PARTY 
Owners of land adjoining the land subject to an application and any other person who could suffer an adverse effect to a property interest from a proposed development. AGGRIEVED PARTY 
A person, with a legally recognized interest (i.e., fee simple ownership) and standing to appeal, that is injuriously affected by a decision from any decision-making body of the City, including any officer or agent of the City. ALLEY 
A roadway set aside primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of lands otherwise abutting a street or open space. ALTERNATIVE LANDSCAPE PLAN 
A plan or other proposal to deviate from the basic landscaping or tree planting standards in this Ordinance. ALTERNATIVE PARKING PLAN 
A plan or other proposal to utilize one or more of the alternative parking provisions as a means of providing more off-street parking spaces than typically allowed, fewer spaces than required, or alternative surfacing materials. APPLICANT 
A person who has submitted a development application for review under applicable provisions of this Ordinance. APPLICATION 
The completed form or forms and all accompanying documents, exhibits, and fees required of an applicant by the appropriate City department or board as part of the development review processes. ARBOR 
A structure with an open roof system providing partial shading and which may also have non-opaque fencing on the outside perimeter. ARCADE 
A series of arches supported by piers or columns. ARCH 
A curved, semicircular opening in a wall. ARCHITECTURAL LIGHTING 
Exterior lighting that is designed to highlight structures, plantings, or significant architectural features in a direct or indirect fashion. AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING 
A designated AO zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident. AS-BUILT PLANS 
A set of engineering or site drawings that delineate the specific permitted development as actually constructed. ASSESSED VALUE 
The monetary price that a parcel of land, portion of land, improvement on land, or other commodity assigned by property appraiser's office for the purposes of taxation. AUTHORIZED AGENT 
A person with express written consent to act upon another's behalf. AWNING 
A plastic, canvas, or metal porch or shade supported by a frame and often foldable that is placed over a storefront, doorway, or window. BANNER 
A temporary sign of lightweight fabric or similar material which is rigidly mounted to a pole or a building by a rigid frame at two or more opposite sides. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. BASE FLOOD 
The flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. BASE FLOOD ELEVATION 
A determination of the water surface elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. The base flood elevation, when combined with the "freeboard", establishes the "regulatory flood protection elevation". BASEMENT 
An area of a building with a floor located below ground level on all sides. BERM 
An elongated earthen mound typically designed or constructed on a site to separate, screen, or buffer adjacent uses. BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE 
A structural or non-structural management-based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce nonpoint source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals. BIO-RETENTION DEVICE 
A stormwater infiltration device consisting of an excavated basin that is refilled with engineered soil and mulch that allows stormwater run-off to collect and percolate through the engineered soil where it is treated prior to infiltrating into the surrounding undisturbed soil. Also known as a rain garden or bio-cell. BLOCK 
The land lying within an area bounded on all sides by streets. BLOCK FACE 
A specific side of a block referenced in relationship to the setback, bulk, height, or uses on the block. BLOCK LENGTH 
The distance, measured along the right-of-way of each side of a street, between one intersecting through street (not a cul-de-sac or loop street) and the next intersecting through street. BREAKAWAY WALL 
A wall not part of the structural support of a building and intended to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. BREWPUB 
An eating and drinking establishment that produces less than 15,000 barrels of malt beverage per year. BORROW 
Fill material which is required for on-site construction and is obtained from other locations. BUFFER 
An area of natural or planted vegetation adjoining or surrounding a use and unoccupied in its entirety by any building, structure, paving or portion of such use, for the purposes of screening and softening the effects of the use, no part of which buffer is used for recreation or parking. BUFFER, PERIMETER LANDSCAPING 
Vegetative material and structures (i.e., walls, fences) that are used to separate uses from each other as required by this Ordinance, including but not limited to the Type A Opaque, Type B Semi-Opaque, Type C intermittent, and Type D Basic. BUILDING 
A structure having a roof supported by walls or columns constructed or used for residence, business, industry, or other public or private purposes. BUILDING ELEVATION 
A fully dimensioned drawing of the exterior front, side or rear of a building showing architectural features such as windows, doors and roof lines, and which may also contain information regarding exterior materials, colors, and fixtures. BUILDING MARKER 
A sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. BUILDING MASS 
The visual form of a building that includes the exterior walls, projections, recesses, roof features, and any attachments. BY RIGHT 
Land uses that are permitted in a zoning district without requiring special use review. CALIPER 
Measurement for determining the size of trees at time of planting. Caliper is the quantity in inches of the diameter of trees measured at 6 inches above the ground. CANOPY 
A permanent structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal or other material attached or unattached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed structure. CANOPY TREE 
A species of tree which normally grows to a mature height of 40 feet or more with a minimum mature crown width of 30 feet. CHANGE OF USE 
The change in the use of a structure or land. Change of use includes a change from one use type to another use type. CHANNEL 
A natural water-carrying trough cut vertically into low areas of the land surface by erosive action of concentrated flowing water or a ditch or canal excavated for the flow of water. CHANNELIZATION 
Any improvements or other construction activity which occurs within or in the vicinity of an existing natural drainageway or perennial stream which directs or relocates said waterway along some desired course, by increasing its depth or by the use of piping or any other manmade storm drainage structures. CITIZEN INFORMATION MEETING 
A meeting conducted by an applicant on a proposed development before an application for the development permit or approval is reviewed by the P & Z Commission. CITY 
The City of High Point, North Carolina. COMMERCIAL MESSAGE 
A sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. CONDOMINIUM 
A development containing individually owned dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities that is subject to the North Carolina Unit Ownership Act (North Carolina General Statutes Section Ch. 47A) and/or the North Carolina Condominium Act (North Carolina General Statutes Section Ch. 47C). CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION 
The division of a tract of land into 2 or more lots, building sites, or other divisions along with additional land area set aside as open space for conservation and/or recreation purposes. CONSTRUCTION 
The erection of any building or structure or any preparations (including land disturbing activities) for the same. CONTIGUOUS 
Abutting directly or immediately adjacent to a boundary or separated only by a street, railroad, or public utility right-of-way. CORE CITY 
The area subject to the Core City Plan provisions and delineated on the Official Zoning Map. CORNICE 
Any horizontal member, structural or nonstructural, of any building, projecting outward from the exterior walls at the roof line, including eaves and other roof overhang. CROSS-ACCESS 
Vehicular access provided between the vehicular use areas of 2 or more development sites or parcels of land intended to allow travel between the sites without the use of a public or private street. CROSSWALK 
A right-of-way dedicated to public use which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties. CUL-DE-SAC STREET 
A short local street having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. CUPOLA 
A domelike structure on top of a roof or dome, often used as a lookout or to admit light and air. CUT-OFF FIXTURE 
A cut-off light fixture that emits none of its light above the horizontal plane of the fixture (90 degrees) and no more than 10 percent of its emitted light between 80 degrees and 90 degrees. CUT-OUT LETTER LIGHTING 
Lighting so arranged that only the outlines of letters, numerals, or symbols are illuminated from an internal lighting source while the remainder of the sign is covered with nontransparent materials that prevent illumination. DECK 
A structure, without a roof, directly adjacent to a principal building which has an average elevation above finished grade. DENSITY CREDIT 
The potential for a portion of a development or subdivision, expressed in dwelling units or other measures of intensity, that may be transferred to other portions of the same lot, tract, or site that is part of a common development plan. DETERMINATION 
A final decision by a local jurisdiction's officer with the highest level of authority to make the determination, including those with authority to hear appeals. DEVELOPER 
A person engaging in land, site, or building development. DEVELOPMENT 
Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to: buildings or other structures; mining; dredging; filling; grading; paving; excavation; drilling operations; or storage of equipment or materials. DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) 
Measurement for determining the size of existing trees to be credited towards landscaping requirements or for violations of this Ordinance. DBH is the measurement of the diameter of an existing tree trunk taken at a height of 4 1/2 feet above the ground. Trees with multiple trunks should be treated as multiple trees and the DBH for each trunk added to aggregate diameter measurement. DISABLED MOTOR VEHICLE 
A motor vehicle that meets one of more of the following criteria: 
  -  It does not display a current license plate; 
  - It is partially dismantled or wrecked; 
  - It cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner originally intended; or 
  - It is more than 4 years old and appears to be worth less than $500.00. 
Nothing in this definition shall be construed to apply to any vehicle in an enclosed building or vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner and the vehicle being necessary to the operation of the business enterprise, or to a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the City. DISCHARGE POINT 
The point at which stormwater runoff leaves a tract of land. DITCH 
A manmade, open drainageway into which surface water or groundwater from land, stormwater runoff, or floodwaters flows either continuously or intermittently. DRAINAGEWAY 
A natural or manmade channel that carries surface runoff from precipitation. DRAINAGE EASEMENT 
An easement which grants the right to maintain, relocate, or, utilize land within the easement for the improvement of drainage and stormwater flow. DRIPLINE 
A vertical line extending from the outermost portion of a tree's canopy to the ground. DRIVEWAY 
A private road or vehicular accessway providing access to parking areas, garages, dwellings, drive-up windows, or other similar features. DRIVE-THROUGH 
A facility designed to enable a person to transact business while remaining in a motor vehicle. DWELLING 
A structure or portion thereof that is used exclusively for human habitation. DWELLING UNIT 
One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided therein. EASEMENT 
A grant of 1 or more property rights by the property landowner to, or for use by, the public, a corporation, or other entity. EAVE 
The projecting lower edges of a roof that overhangs the wall of a building. EGRESS 
An exit from a building or site. ELEVATION 
The front, side, or rear of a structure. ENCROACHMENT 
As used in the flood damage prevention standards, the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures or development into a special flood hazard area, which may impede or alter the area's flooding flow capacity. EROSION 
The wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water, gravity, or any combination thereof. EROSION CONTROL MEASURE 
A device which controls the soil material within the land area under responsible control of the person conducting a land-disturbing activity. EXPANSION 
An increase in the floor area of an existing structure or building, or the increase of area of a use. EXTENSIVE EROSION CONTROL MEASURE 
Erosion control devices that are designed by a registered professional engineer, architect, landscape architect, certified professional in erosion and sedimentation control (CPESC), or a registered surveyor to the extent permitted by North Carolina laws. FACADE 
The entire exterior wall of a building facing a lot line measured from the grade to the eave or highest point of a flat or mansard roof. Facades may be on the front, side, or rear elevation of the building. FAMILY 
One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household unit. FENCE 
A physical barrier or enclosure consisting of wood, stone, brick, block, wire, metal, or similar material used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement, but not including a hedge or vegetation. FINANCIAL GUARANTEE 
Cash or other guarantee provided by an applicant in-lieu of completion of public infrastructure or installation of required private site features prior to issuance of a building permit or other development approval. FLOOD OR FLOODING 
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. FLOOD INSURANCE 
The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program. FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) 
The official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that depicts special flood hazard areas and risk premium zones applicable in the City. FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) 
An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The flood insurance study report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), if published. FLOODPROOFING 
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to land or development. FLOODWAY 
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1 foot. FLOODWAY FRINGE 
The land located between the floodway and maximum elevation subject to inundation by the base flood. FLOOD ZONE 
A geographical area on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. FLOOR 
As used in the flood damage prevention standards, the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including the basement), such as the top of the slab in concrete slab construction or the top of the wood flooring in wood frame construction. FOOTCANDLE 
A unit of measure of the intensity of light falling on a surface. It is often defined as the amount of illumination the inside surface of a 1-foot-radius sphere would be receiving if there were a uniform point source of 1 candela in the exact center of the sphere. 1 footcandle is equal to 1 lumen per square foot. FREEBOARD 
The height added to the BFE to account for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. FRONT FACADE 
The side or elevation of a structure that contains the structure's architectural front, or the portion of the structure facing the street from which the structure derives its street address. FULL CUT-OFF LENS 
An artificial outdoor lighting fixture designed to ensure that no light is directly emitted above a horizontal line parallel to the ground. GABLE 
A triangular area of an exterior wall formed by 2 sloping roofs. GLARE 
The effect produced within the visual field by a high intensity or insufficiently shielded light source that is significantly brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance or visibility of objects. GLAZING 
The portion of an exterior building surface occupied by glass or windows. GOVERNING BODY 
The City Council for the City of High Point. GRADING 
Excavating, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth material, or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. GREEN ROOF 
The roof of a building that is partially or completely covered with vegetation and a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing membrane. It may also include additional layers such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigation systems. GREENWAY 
Public open space under the control and maintenance of the City which has been designated on an officially adopted greenway or open space plan and developed in accordance with the adopted greenway or open space plan. GROUND COVER 
Any vegetation, masonry, paving, rip-rap, or other material or materials which render the soil surface stable against accelerated erosion. GROUP DEVELOPMENT 
A development in which, in-lieu of the division of a tract of land into separate lots for separate principal buildings, a tract of land is divided into 2 or more principal building sites for the purpose of building development (whether immediate or future) and occupancy by separate families, firms, businesses, or other enterprises. HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCE GENERATOR 
A use listed as a "Hazardous Waste Facility" by the North Carolina Department of Human Resources, Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Division, or a use included on the U.S. EPA's "Categorical Pretreatment List". HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCE HANDLER 
A use engaged in the permanent or temporary storage, treatment, transporting, and/or disposal of hazardous or toxic substances including a building, structure or use of land devoted , or intended to be devoted to, changing by any method, technique, or process, the physical, chemical, or biological character of any hazardous or toxic substance so as to neutralize such material or render it nonhazardous or nontoxic, safer for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage or reduced in bulk, or to reprocess the hazardous or toxic substance to form a new material, or for the temporary or long term storage of hazardous or toxic substance(s). Such uses may also be considered temporary storage facilities normally associated with these operations and of sufficient size to conduct a commercial feasible operation. HISTORIC STRUCTURE 
Any structure that is: 1) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 2) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 3) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places; 4) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with a Certified Local Government (CLG) Program; or 5) certified as contributing to the historic significance of a historic district designated by a community with a Certified Local Government (CLG) Program. Certified Local Government Programs are approved by the US Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended. HOME OCCUPATION 
Any activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted in the resident's dwelling unit. HUMAN SCALE 
Features of a building or built environment that are sized and configured in accordance with the typical human frame. Human-scale details and features are most often configured for observation and recognition by people who are walking. ILLUMINATION, DIRECT 
Illumination from a light source that is contained within the sign, where the light source is internal to the sign. ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT 
Illumination from a light source that is not contained within the sign, where the light source is external and projected onto the sign. IMPROVED WALKWAY 
An improved walkway is a walkway dedicated to pedestrian access that has a width of at least four feet and includes a paved, all-weather surface (excluding gravel or cinders) that is graded and configured to ensure safe pedestrian movement. IMPROVEMENT 
The construction of buildings and the establishment of basic services and amenities associated with development, including, but not limited to streets and sidewalks, parking areas, water and sewer systems, drainage system, property markers and monuments, recreation facilities (i.e., lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts, golf courses, riding stables, club houses, cabanas, marinas, docks and the like) and other similar construction or establishment. INFILL 
Development, redevelopment, and re-use of existing sites and buildings in the City's existing neighborhoods and commercial corridors. INGRESS 
Access or entry to a building or site. JUST CAUSE 
Legitimate cause; legal or lawful ground for action. LAND CLEARING AND INERT DEBRIS (LCID) LANDFILL 
A landfill limited to concrete, brick, concrete block, uncontaminated soil, rock, gravel, untreated wood, limbs, leaves and stumps. LCID does not include materials that have been painted or coated with sealants or finishes. LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY 
Any movement of earth or substrate, manually or mechanically, including but not limited to any modification of existing grade by dredging, demolition, excavation or fill, grading, scraping, vegetation removal, landscaping, coring, well drilling, pile driving, undergrounding utility lines, trenching, bulldozing, sheeting, shoring and excavation for laying or removing foundations, pilings or other purposes. LAND USE CLASS 
A numeric value denoting the intensity of an individual use type for the purposes of determining applicable perimeter landscape yard requirements. LANDOWNER 
As applied to the standards related to vested rights, an owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property, including the heirs, devisees, successors, assigns, and personal representative of the owner. LANDSCAPING 
The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with grass, shrubs, and trees. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flower beds, ornamental objects such as fountains, statuary, and objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect. LANDSCAPING STRIP, PERIMETER 
Vegetative material associated with the perimeter landscaping required for a vehicular use area. LARGE VEHICLE 
A vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of 14,000 or more pounds, a recreational vehicle, or a school or church bus. LOADING SPACE 
Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles, and not considered as part of the minimum required off-street surface parking. LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
Any county, incorporated municipality, or any combination of counties and/or incorporated municipalities acting through a joint program pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance. LOT 
A legally described piece of contiguous land that has been or may be developed as a unit. This term is synonymous with "parcel." LOT OF RECORD 
A lot that has been recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds and which was in conformance with the Development Ordinance in effect at the time of recording. LOWEST FLOOR 
As used in the flood damage prevention standards, the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) that is typically an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure that does not include habitable space. LUMEN 
A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light emitted by a light source. MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE 
Cash or other guarantee provided by an applicant to ensure public infrastructure functions as intended following acceptance by the City. MANSARD ROOF 
A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall. MARQUEE 
A permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or building wall generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE 
No feasible or practical alternative exists, as determined by the City, and all possible efforts to comply with the standards or regulation to minimize potential harmful or adverse impacts have been undertaken by an applicant. Economic considerations may be taken into account but shall not be the overriding factor determining "maximum extent practicable." MEAN SEA LEVEL 
The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood elevations on the FIRM are referenced. MEMBRANE STRUCTURE 
A structure, building, or tent composed of a membrane material, such as canvas, plastic, or other fabrics, that is supported by a rigid framework of metal, plastic, or other material. MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT 
A tract of land or structure developed for 2 or more different uses, such as, but not limited to, residential, office, retail, institutional, public, or entertainment. Such uses are functionally integrated and share vehicular use areas, ingress/egress, and pedestrian access. MOTOR VEHICLE 
A vehicle required by the North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles to be registered under North Carolina State Law. MULTIPLE LOT DEVELOPMENT 
A development containing 2 or more lots, and 2 or more businesses that is planned, organized, and managed to function as a single development or single zone lot for the purposes of development standards. NATURAL INFILTRATION AREAS 
A type of stormwater management device that relies on vegetation, soil, or other natural matrix configured to allow stormwater runoff to enter, filter, and be re-released with fewer pollutants. NEW CONSTRUCTION 
As used in the flood damage prevention standards, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the flood damage prevention standards. NIT 
A measurement of a sign's luminance measured in the number of candela per square meter (cd/m2). NON-ENCROACH-
MENT AREA 
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1 foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report. NONCONFORMING LOT 
A lot of record that that was lawful at the date on which it was established, but does not conform to the current dimensional standards of the zoning district in which it is located. NONCONFORMING SIGN 
Any sign that was lawful at the date on which it was established, but does not meet the standards of this Ordinance. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE 
A structure that was lawful at the date on which it was established, but does not conform to current dimensional standards, elevation, location, or other requirements of this Ordinance. NONCONFORMING USE 
A use which was lawful at the date on which it was established, but is now not a permitted use of that parcel or structure under this Ordinance. NONCONFORMITY 
Any land use, development, structure, or site, including any lot of record, that was legally established, but that is not presently in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. NON-OCCUPIABLE SPACE 
A room or enclosed space, that is not used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking, and that is not designed for human occupancy or used for such activities as rest, amusement, treatment, education, dining, shopping, employment, labor, assembly or other similar purposes. Examples of non-occupiable space are closets, toilet rooms, mechanical equipment rooms and storage rooms. NORTH CAROLINA SEDIMENTATION POLLUTION CONTROL ACT 
North Carolina General Statutes Section 113A-50 et seq., and all rules and orders adopted pursuant to it. NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
A notice indicating a violation of this Ordinance not associated with a fine. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 
The Official Zoning Map upon which the boundaries of various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of this Ordinance. OPACITY 
A measurement indicating the degree of obscuration of light or visibility. OPEN SPACE 
An area of land or water intended to provide light, air, amenity, recreation and/or resource protection set aside in some permanent manner for public or private use and enjoyment. Open space includes, but is not limited to, preserves, parks, passive and active recreation areas, floodplains, plazas, squares, greenways, and waterbodies. ORDINANCE 
A legislative enactment of the City of High Point, North Carolina. OUTDOOR DISPLAY 
The placement of any goods, merchandise or vehicles outside an enclosed building for exhibition, sale or rent, typically in an area accessible by the public. OUTDOOR STORAGE 
The keeping of any goods, material, merchandise or vehicles outside an enclosed building for a period of time exceeding 24 hours, typically in an area inaccessible by the public. OUTPARCEL 
A subdivided or leased parcel within a group development, multiple-lot development, or shopping center. OWNERS' ASSOCIATION 
An organization of homeowners or property owners of lots or land in a particular subdivision, condominium, or planned development. The owners association is responsible for maintaining and enhancing the shared private infrastructure (e.g., stormwater, streets, and sidewalks) and common elements recreation. PARAPET 
A building facade that rises above the roof level, typically obscuring a gable or flat roof as well as any roof-mounted equipment. PARCEL 
See "Lot." PARKING LOT DRIVE AISLE 
A vehicular accessway located within an off-street parking or vehicular use area which serves individual parking stalls and driveways. PARKING SPACE, ACCESSIBLE 
A space designated for the parking or temporary storage of 1 motor vehicle in addition to the space necessary for the ingress and egress from the vehicle by a disabled person and any equipment needed for that purpose. PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET 
A space that is designated for the parking or temporary storage of 1 motor vehicle located outside of a dedicated street right-of-way, vehicular travel way, or parking aisle. PARKING, OFF-SITE 
An off-street parking area provided on a different parcel than the use it is intended to serve. PARKING, ON-STREET 
A location or area within the right-of-way of a public or private street that is reserved for the parking of vehicles. Such areas may or may not be formally designated with signage, striping, or parking meters. PARKING, SHARED 
Off-street parking facilities shared by 2 or more uses that are in close proximity to one another and the parking area, and that have different operational characteristics such that use of the parking facilities by one use will not generally overlap with the use of the parking area by the other use(s). PASSIVE RECREATION AREA 
Open space areas designated for passive recreation uses including walking trails, pathways, gazebos, picnic areas, fountains, plazas, and similar areas. Such areas may also include undisturbed natural vegetation. PATIO 
An area, usually paved, adjoining a building - used as an area for outdoor lounging, dining, or gathering. PEDESTRIAN AMENITY 
Seating, outdoor play areas, bicycle racks, kiosks, water features, public art, freestanding structures such as a clock tower or similar amenities, intended primarily for use by pedestrians. PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION 
Interconnected paved walkway that provides a pedestrian passage through blocks running from street to street, vehicular use areas, or other locations. PEDESTRIAN-
ORIENTATION 
Development elements, such as density, building placement, street and path connections, and mixture of uses designed with pedestrians in mind and intended to encourage and promote pedestrian activity. PENNANT 
A lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. PERSON 
Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, or public or private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body, or other legal entity. PILASTER 
A rectangular column with a capital and base that is attached or affixed to a wall as an ornamental design feature. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT 
An area of land under unified ownership or control to be developed and improved as a single entity under a Planned Development Master Plan in accordance with this Ordinance. PLANTING SEASON 
The dormant time of the year for trees beginning with leaf drop and ending with bud break; generally late fall to early spring. PLANTING STRIP 
An area usually within or adjacent to a right-of-way or lot line that contains required vegetation. PLAT 
A surveyed map or plan for a parcel of land which is to be, or has been, subdivided. PLAYBILL 
A sign announcing entertainment offered or to be offered at a business location on the site where the sign is displayed. PLAZA 
An open space at the intersection of important streets or adjacent to important structures, set aside for civic purposes and commercial activity, which may include parking, consisting of durable pavement, and formal landscaping or tree plantings. PORCH 
A covered projection (can be glazed or screened) from the main wall of a building, with a separate roof, that is not used for livable space. PORTICO 
A large porch usually with a pediment usually associated with an entrance, supported by columns. POST-FIRM 
Construction or other development for which the "start of construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map. PRE-FIRM 
Construction or other development for which the "start of construction" occurred before the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map. PRIMARY DRIVE AISLE 
The main aisle(s) that extends from the street right-of-way, or from the driveway entrance(s) serving a development along the front of the building it serves. PRIMARY ENTRANCE 
The place of ingress and egress to a building, parcel, or development used most frequently by the public. PRINCIPAL BUILDING 
A building in which is conducted the principal use(s) of the lot on which it is located or, in a group development, of the building site on which it is located. Any dwelling is considered a principal building unless it is an accessory dwelling. PRINCIPAL BUILDING FACADE 
The entire exterior wall of a building facing a lot line measured from the grade to the eave or the highest point of a flat or mansard roof. The principal building facade is the front of the building, or the side that contains the primary building entrance. PRINCIPAL BUILDING LINE 
A line or horizontal plane that is measured from the portion of the building closest to the lot line laterally along the lot line. PRINCIPAL DWELLING 
Any principal building or structure which is used and designed for human habitation including living, sleeping, cooking, and eating activities, excluding dormitories, hotels, motels, shelters for the homeless, or other structures designed for transient residents. PRINCIPAL USE 
A primary or predominate use of a lot or parcel. PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE 
A structure in which is conducted the principal use(s) of the lot on which it is located. PRIVATE DRIVE 
A vehicular travelway that is not a public street or a private street that provides access to a parking lot(s) or a principal building(s). PRIVATE STREET 
A vehicular travelway not dedicated or offered for dedication as a public street but resembling a local street by carrying traffic from a series of driveways to the public street system. PROJECTING BAY 
A space projecting outward from the main walls of a building and forming a bay in a room, often incorporating a window. PROPERTY OWNER 
See "Landowner." PUBLIC HEARING, QUASI-JUDICIAL 
A formal public hearing involving the legal rights of specific parties conducted by the City Council or the Board of Adjustment based on evidence and sworn testimony presented during the public hearing. Decisions made during such hearings are based upon and supported by the record developed at the hearing, and typically involve findings of fact made by the decision-making body. PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE 
Aspects of the public realm owned and maintained by the City or the State that serve the public at large, including streets, highways, sidewalks, curb and gutter, potable water distribution systems, sanitary sewer systems, stormwater drainage retention and conveyance features, street lights, on-street parking spaces, and similar aspects located within a public right-of-way or public easement. PUBLIC STREET 
A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic and street rights-of-way offered for dedication, but not yet accepted, in which the roadway design and construction have been approved under public standards for vehicular traffic. PUBLIC TREE 
A tree in the public street right-of-way, in a park, or other areas owned or controlled by the City. QUORUM 
The minimum number of board or commission members that must be present in order to conduct official business or take official action. RAIN GARDEN 
A planted depression that allows rainwater runoff from impervious urban areas like roofs, driveways, walkways, parking lots, and compacted lawn areas the opportunity to be collected in a single location and absorbed. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE 
A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty vehicle (including a travel trailer), and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. REFERENCE LEVEL 
The top of the lowest floor for structures within special flood hazard areas designated as zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO. REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN ELEVATION 
The base flood elevation plus the freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where BFEs have been determined, this elevation is the BFE plus 2 feet of freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established, this elevation is at least 2 feet above the highest adjacent grade. RESERVATION 
An obligation, shown on a subdivision or site plan, to keep land free from development and available for public acquisition for a stated period of time. RETAINING WALL 
A structure, either masonry, metal, or treated wood, designed to prevent the lateral displacement of soil, rock, fill, or other similar material. RIGHT-OF-WAY 
An area dedicated to public or private use for pedestrian and vehicular movement, which may also accommodate public utilities. ROOF LINE 
The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of a building. RURAL CHARACTER 
Patterns of land use and development in which open space, the natural landscape, and vegetation predominate over the built environment. SEDIMENT 
Solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that is transported by water, air, gravity, or ice from its site of origin. SEDIMENTATION 
The process by which sediment resulting from accelerated erosion is transported off-site by land-disturbing activity. SEVERE PRUNING 
The pruning, cutting, or otherwise damaging of the natural form of a tree or shrub, whether existing or planted, such that a significant or noticeable portion of the crown system is removed (e.g., 25 percent of the crown removed from a tree, or the continued cutting/trimming of trees previously pruned illegally, or pruning of trees that must grow naturally to meet the landscaping requirements), and/or if more than 1/3 of the overall circumference of a tree is exposed by pruning cuts. SHIELDED FIXTURE 
A light fixture constructed and installed in such a manner that all light emitted by it, either directly from the lamp (bulb) or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the fixture, is projected below the horizontal plane of the fixture. SHIELDED SILHOUETTE LIGHTING 
Lighting achieved by an illumination source located behind individual letters or parts of a sign but not visible directly through such letters or parts of the sign to the viewer. SHRUB 
A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems emerging from the ground, or small branches near the ground. Shrubs may be deciduous or evergreen. SIDEWALK 
A paved area public right-of-way running parallel to the street for the purposes of pedestrian travel and to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and land. SIGN 
An object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including but not limited to words, letters, pennants, banners, emblems, trademarks, trade names, insignias, numerals, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images or any other attention directing device. SIGN, A-FRAME 
A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, that is displayed for a limited period of time, and is constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or tent-like shape, hinged or not hinged at the top; each angular face held at an appropriate distance by a supporting member. Also known as a "menu board" or "sandwich board sign." SIGN, ANIMATED 
A sign which flashes, revolves, rotates, or swings by mechanical means or which uses a change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. SIGN, ATTACHED 
A sign that is affixed directly or indirectly to the exterior of any surface of any building, to a projecting structure of a building, or to any outdoor structure. SIGN, AWNING 
Any sign which is a part of a fabric or other nonstructural awning. SIGN, CANOPY 
A sign which is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric-like or plastic protective structure which is extended over a door, window, or entranceway. SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY 
A sign which displays messages in which the copy may be arranged or rearranged by hand. SIGN, CONSTRUCTION 
A sign which identifies the architects, engineers, contractors, and other individuals or firms involved with construction of development, the name of the building or development, the intended purpose of the building or development, and/or the expected completion date. SIGN, ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY 
A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, non-pictorial text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED's), fiber optics, light bulbs, or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic displays, and also include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects. Electronic changeable copy signs do not include traffic control or other official signage. SIGN, FLASHING 
A type of animated sign which contains an intermittent, blinking, scintillating, or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light, or an externally mounted intermittent light source. SIGN, FREESTANDING 
A sign which is placed on or anchored in the ground with one or more supports that are not part of a building or other structure. SIGN, GOVERNMENTAL 
A sign erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post a legal notice, identify public property, convey public information of significant importance, and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic. SIGN, GROUND SURFACE 
A sign composed of manmade or organic materials displayed upon the surface of the ground. SIGN, HISTORICAL OR MEMORIAL 
A sign which commemorates a historical person, structure, place, or event or which denotes, honors, celebrates, or acknowledges an historical person, structure, place, or event. SIGN, IDENTIFICATION 
A sign used to display the name, address, logo or other identifying symbol of an individual, family, business, institution, service, or organization occupying the premises; the profession of the occupant; the name of the building on which the sign is attached; or directory information in group developments or buildings with multiple tenants. SIGN, INSTRUCTIONAL 
A sign that provides assistance, with respect to the premises on which it is maintained, for the direction, safety, or convenience of the public such as "entrance," "exit," "one way," "telephone," "parking," "no parking," and similar instructions. SIGN, MARQUEE 
A sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. SIGN, MONUMENT 
A monolithic sign in which the bottom of the sign is flush with the ground. SIGN OWNER 
A person holding legal title or legal right to occupy or carry on business in a structure or any facility and shall include each and every person who shall have title to or benefit of a sign, or for whose benefit any type sign is erected or maintained. Where there is more than 1 landowner, as defined, their duties and obligations under this Ordinance are joint and several, and shall include the responsibility for such sign. SIGN, PORTABLE 
A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including but not limited to signs: designed to be transported by means of wheels; converted to A- or T- frames; menu and sandwich board signs; gas or hot-air filled balloons; umbrellas used for advertising; signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operation of the business. SIGN, PROJECTING 
A sign end-mounted or otherwise attached to an exterior wall of a building which forms an angle with the wall. SIGN, REAL ESTATE 
A sign displayed for the purpose of offering for sale, lease, or rent the land on which the sign is erected, affixed, or otherwise established. SIGN, ROOF 
A sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof on a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. SIGN, SPECIAL PROMOTION 
An advertising activity or circumstance of a business which is not part of its daily activities or normal routine and in which the display and/or sale of merchandise, ware, or other tangible items is the sole purpose for the promotion. SIGN, SUSPENDED 
A sign which is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plan surface and is supported by the surface. SIGN, TEMPORARY 
A sign that is displayed for a limited period of time and/or is not permanently mounted. SIGN, VIDEO 
A sign consisting of a single computer monitor, video projector or television set, or multiple computer monitors, video projectors, or television sets tiled together contiguously or overlapped in order to form one large screen. Typical display technologies include, but are not limited to, LCD panels, LED arrays, DLP tiles and rear projection screens. Such signs may display static text, animation, images or photos, electronic changeable copy including the use of changing light to depict action or create special effects, video, or any combination thereof. SIGN, WALL 
A sign attached parallel to, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of the outside wall, mansard roof structure, penthouse, or parapet of any building or structure, which is supported by a wall, building, or structure, but does not extend vertically above the highest portion of the roof, and which displays only 1 sign surface. SIGN, WARNING 
A sign with no commercial message that displays information pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the public such as signs warning of high voltage, "no trespassing," and similar directives. SIGN, WINDOW 
A sign which is painted on, affixed to, or designed to be visible through a window, excluding displays of merchandise. SILTATION 
Sediment transported from its point of origin within the site of a land-disturbing activity that is deposited on land or is in suspension in water. SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM 
A wind energy facility, constructed as an accessory use, consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 100 kW per year and a maximum tower height of 120 feet or less. SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT 
The Guilford Soil and Water Conservation District created pursuant to Chapter 139 of the North Carolina General Statutes. SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN 
The graphic plan and narrative required as a prerequisite for a land disturbance permit that explains existing conditions, proposed grading, and measures undertaken to control accelerated soil erosion and sedimentation. SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FACILITY 
Containers and structures designed to collect and hold solid waste on-site until transported to a solid waste management facility, including but not limited to, dumpsters, compactors, bins for trash and recyclables, etc. SPECIAL EVENT 
A temporary, short-term use of land or structures, not otherwise allowed as a principal or accessory use by this Ordinance, for concerts, carnivals, circuses, fairs, festivals, exhibitions, religious events and similar community events. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA 
The land in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year. SQUARE 
An open space that is defined by streets or adjacent buildings that is set aside for civic purposes, with landscaping consisting of paved walks, lawns, trees, and may contain civic buildings. STACKING LANE 
A portion of the vehicular use area on a site that is dedicated to the temporary storage or "standing" of vehicles engaged in drive-through use of the site or development. Parking or storage of vehicles is not permitted within the stacking/standing area. START OF CONSTRUCTION 
As used in the flood damage prevention standards, the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. STORM, 100 YEAR 
The surface runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on average, once in 100 years. STORM, 10 YEAR 
The surface runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on average, once in 10 years. STORM, 25 YEAR 
The surface runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on average, once in 25 years. STORMWATER OR STORMWATER RUNOFF 
The direct runoff of water resulting from precipitation in any form. STREAM 
A watercourse that collects surface runoff. STREET FRONTAGE 
The length of lot abutting a public right-of-way or private street. STREET, COLLECTOR 
A street whose principal function is to carry traffic between cul-de-sac, local streets and streets of higher classification but which may also provide direct access to abutting lands. Term also includes subcollector streets. STREET, INDUSTRIAL 
An existing public or private street that serves as access to industrially zoned properties exclusively, or serves as access to properties that are developed with, or are planned to be developed with, wholesale, transportation, warehousing, utility, manufacturing or other industrial land uses. STREET, LOCAL 
A street whose primary function is to provide access to abutting lands. This term includes both residential and industrial streets. STREET, THOROUGHFARE 
An interstate, other freeway, expressway, or parkway links, or other major street that provides for the expeditious movement of high volumes of traffic within and through urban areas. Term includes both major and minor thoroughfare streets. STREET NAME AND ADDRESS ASSIGNMENT GUIDELINES AND POLICIES 
A set of guidelines and policies to provide the Planning and Zoning Commission with direction when naming and assign street names and addresses. STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY 
A strip of land whose legal title rests with the City or State and is occupied or intended to be occupied by a travelway for vehicles and is also available, with the consent of the appropriate governmental agency, for installation and maintenance of traffic control devices, traffic signs, street name signs, historical marker signs, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, gas lines, power lines, and communication lines. STREET STUB 
A nonpermanent dead end street intended to be extended in conjunction with development on adjacent lots or sites. STREET TREE 
A canopy tree planted or existing within or along either side of a street right-of-way. STREETSCAPE 
An area within a public or private street right-of-way that may contain sidewalks, street furniture, landscaping, street trees, bus shelters, street lighting, building projections, and other features that create interest and interaction at the street level. STRUCTURE 
Any material constructed, erected or placed in or upon the ground, including buildings. SUBDIVIDER 
A person who subdivides land. SUBDIVISION 
All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into 2 or more lots, building sites, or other divisions when any one or more of those divisions is created for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and includes all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. The following are not included within this definition and are not subject to any subdivision regulations in this Ordinance: 
  a. The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots if the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this Ordinance. 
  b. The division of land into parcels greater than 10 acres if no street right-of-way dedication is involved. 
  c. The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets, or for public transportation system corridors. 
  d. The division of a tract in single ownership, the entire area of which is not greater than 2 acres, into not more than 3 lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this Ordinance. 
  e. The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms of a probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under Chapter 29 of the North Carolina General Statutes. SUBDIVISION, MINOR 
A subdivision of land meeting either of the following, that is reviewed and approved as a final plat with no preliminary plat approval required: 
  a. Consisting of not more than four (4) lots, fronting on an existing street, not requiring any new street(s) for access to interior property, and not requiring extension of public water or sewer lines, OR 
  b. The entire area of the tract or parcel to be divided is greater than five (5) acres, no more than three (3) lots result from the division, and no part of the tract or parcel to be divided has been subdivided in the ten (10) years prior to this division. SUBORDINATE 
A staff member designated to fulfill the function of the Planning and Development Director, Engineering Services Director, Transportation Director, or Public Service Director, as appropriate. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT 
Any repair, reconstruction, expansion, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of a structure (derived by tax records) as determined either before the expansion or improvement begins or before the damage occurred giving rise to the repair or reconstruction. Substantial improvement does not include, however, any repair or improvement required to bring the structure into compliance with existing State or county health, sanitary, safety, or building ordinance specifications necessary to ensure safe habitation of the structure. SURFACE WATER BUFFER 
A natural, vegetated, or revegetated area through which stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering of pollutants. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT FEATURES 
One or more development features voluntarily provided by an applicant or developer as a means of promoting sustainable development and/or taking advantage of available sustainable development practice incentives. TENANT 
A person who alone or jointly or severally with others occupies a building under a lease or holds a legal tenancy. TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICE 
A natural or constructed feature located within or adjacent to a street that is designed to reduce motorist speed or vehicle volumes, while at the same time increasing safety for pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles. TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
A study conducted to evaluate the capacity and safety impacts on the transportation system from a proposed development and identify necessary improvements or management strategies to mitigate negative impacts. Such studies shall be performed by a licensed professional engineer in accordance with the Traffic Impact Analysis Policy adopted by the City of High Point in this ordinance. UNDERSTORY TREE 
A species of tree which normally grows to a mature height of 15 to 35 feet. USE 
The purpose or activity for which land or structures are designed, arranged or intended, or for which land or structures are occupied or maintained. UTILITY EASEMENT 
An easement which grants the right to install and maintain utilities including, but not limited to, water lines, sewer lines, storm sewer lines, electrical power lines, telephone lines, natural gas lines, and community antenna television systems. VEGETATION, NATIVE 
Any indigenous tree, shrub, ground cover or other plant adapted to the soil, climatic, and hydrographic conditions occurring on the site. VEHICULAR USE AREA 
Areas used for the parking and circulation of automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles. Vehicular use areas do not include individual driveways serving single-family detached residential development. VEHICULAR USE AREA LANDSCAPING 
Vegetative material, structures (walls or fences), berms, and associated ground cover located around the perimeter of a parking lot, or other vehicular use area. VELOCITY 
The average velocity of flow through the cross section of the main channel at the peak flow of the storm of interest. For the purposes of this definition, the cross section of the main channel is the area defined by the geometry of the channel plus the area of flow below the flood height defined by vertical lines at the main channel banks. VESTED RIGHT 
A development right that cannot be changed or altered by changes in regulation. WALL 
For purposes of signage, the vertical exterior surface of a building. The area of all parallel vertical surfaces along a single building elevation regardless of offsets shall be counted as one wall. The front of each unit of a multiple tenant commercial building shall be counted as a separate wall. The area of an angled wall surface shall be counted as part of whichever adjoining wall surface it is most parallel with. A 45 degree angled wall may be counted as part of the area of either adjoining wall, but not as a part of both. WALL PACK 
An exterior lighting device that is flush-mounted on a vertical wall surface. WALL, PARAPET 
A low protective or decorative wall or railing along the edge of a raised structure such as a roof or balcony. WATER DEPENDANT STRUCTURE 
Structure which requires access or proximity to surface waters to fulfill its basic purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, docks, and bulkheads. WATER QUALITY CONSERVATION EASEMENT 
A permanent easement conveyed to the City for the protection of water quality in which no structures or land-disturbing activities are allowed. WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED 
The entire land area contributing surface drainage to a designated water supply reservoir. WATER SURFACE ELEVATION 
The height, in relation to mean sea level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. WATERSHED CRITICAL AREA 
The area adjacent to a water supply intake or reservoir where risk associated with pollution is greater than from the remaining portions of the watershed. The critical area is defined as extending either 1/2 mile from the normal pool elevation of the reservoir in which the intake is located or to the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes first); or 1/2 mile upstream from the intake located directly in the stream or river (run-of-the-river), or the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes first). WETLANDS 
Those areas that are inundated or saturated by an accumulation of surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. WIRELESS TELECOMMUN- 
ICATIONS FACILITY 
The following definitions relate to wireless telecommunications facilities: (a) Abandonment Cessation of use of a wireless support structure for wireless telecommunication activity. (b) Accessory equipment Equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless facility or wireless support structure. The term includes utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters or similar structures. (c) Antenna Communications equipment that transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless telecommunications services. (d) Base station A station at a specific site authorized to communicate with mobile stations, generally consisting of radio transceivers, antennae, coaxial cables, power supplies and other associated electronics. (e) Collocation The placement or installation of wireless facilities on existing structures, including electrical transmission towers, water towers, buildings and other structures including wireless support structures that are capable of supporting the attachment of such facilities in compliance with applicable codes and ordinances. (f) Concealed wireless facility (stealth wireless facility) A wireless facility that is integrated as an architectural feature of an existing structure or any new wireless support structure designed to camouflage or conceal the presence of antennae or towers so the purpose of the facility or support structure is not readily apparent to a casual observer. (g) Electrical transmission tower An electrical transmission structure used to support high voltage overhead power lines. The term shall not include any utility pole (h) Equipment compound An area surrounding or near the base of a wireless support structure within which are located wireless facilities. (i) Existing structure A wireless support structure, erected prior to the application for collocation or substantial modification under the wireless telecommunication facility provisions, that is capable of supporting the attachment of wireless facilities, including but not limited to electrical transmission towers, buildings and water towers. The term shall not include any utility pole. (j) Fall zone The area in which a wireless support structure may be expected to fall in the event of a structural failure, as measured by engineering standards. (k) Monopole A single, freestanding pole type structure supporting one or more antennae. The term shall not include any utility pole. (l) Ordinary maintenance Ensuring that wireless facilities and wireless support structures are kept in good operating condition. Ordinary maintenance includes inspections, testing and modifications that maintain functional capacity and structural integrity. Examples are: strengthening a wireless support structure's foundation or the structure itself; replacing antennae of similar size, weight, shape and color; replacing equipment within an existing equipment compound; and relocating antennae to different height levels on an existing monopole or tower upon which it is currently located. (m) Replacement pole A pole of equal proportions and of equal height - or such other height that would not constitute a substantial modification to an existing structure - in order to support wireless facilities or to accommodate collocation. A replacement pole requires the removal of the wireless support structure it replaces. (n) Substantial modification The mounting of a proposed wireless facility or facilities on a wireless support structure which: 
  (i) Increases the existing vertical height of the wireless support structure by the greater of; 
   (a) more than 10 percent, or 
   (b) the height of 1 additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, or 
  (ii) Involves adding an appurtenance to the body of a wireless support structure that protrudes horizontally from the edge of the support structure more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the support structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater (except where necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the support structure via cable), or 
  (iii) Increases the square footage of the existing equipment compound by more than 2,500 square feet, or 
  (iv) Adds antennae that would increase the girth (width) of the support structure by more than 20 feet. (o) Temporary wireless communications facility A portable, self-contained wireless facility that can be moved to a location and set up to provide wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis. Also known as a "COW" or "cell-on-wheels". A COW is normally vehicle mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the antenna support structure. (p) Tower A general term used to describe wireless support structures other than for concealed wireless facilities. Includes lattice-type structures (guyed or freestanding) and monopoles that support one or more antenna. (q) Utility pole A structure, usually a wooden or metal pole, owned and/or operated by a public utility, municipality, electric membership corporation or rural electric cooperative that is specifically for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires, primarily for local distribution, and/or to provide lighting. (r) Water tower or tank A water storage tank, standpipe or elevated tank situated on a support structure, constructed for use as a reservoir or facility to store or deliver water. (s) Wireless facility The set of equipment and network components, exclusive of the wireless support structure, necessary to provide wireless telecommunications services, including but not limited to; antennae, accessory equipment, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, and cabling. (t) Wireless support structure A freestanding structure such as a monopole or lattice tower designed to support wireless facilities, or a building or other structure proposed for and capable of supporting such facilities. ZONE LOT 
One or more lots of record in 1 undivided ownership with sufficient total area, area exclusive of easements and flood hazards, total dimensions, street access, and frontage to permit construction thereon of a principal building together with its required parking and landscape yards. In multi-family or single-family attached developments, the zone lot shall be considered to be the entire development. ZONING MAP, OFFICIAL 
See "Official Zoning Map".  
(Ord. No. 7266/17-08 , §§ 34, 35, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 7286/17-28 , § 1, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7287/17-29 , § 16, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 7365/17-108 , § 13, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 7415/18-44 , § 8.G, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 7476/18-105 , §§ 9.B, 17.B, 20, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 7488/19-05 , § 8, 2-4-2019) 
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location of those ordinances amending the High Point Development Ordinance, adopted May 16, 2016, effective January 1, 2017, and included herein. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code 7206/16-26  5-16-2016 1-8 Adopting 
Ordinance, pg. v 7266/17-08 1-17-2017 1 1.10.1 2 2.2.3 B.4. 2.2.4 B.4. 2.2.5 B.4. 3 2.2.12 A.1. 4 2.4.5 F.1.       Added 2.5.2 E.7. 5 2.4.18 B.1., 2. 6 2.5.2 B.1., 2. 7 3.4.10 G.1. 8 3.5.1 9 3.4.5 G.1. 3.4.6 G.1. 3.4.7 G.1. 3.5.6 G.3. 3.8.7 F.4. 10 Table 3.7.3.I 11 3.8.5 B.1. 12       Rnbd 3.8.9 B.2., 3.       as 3.8.9 B.3., 4.       Added 3.8.9 B.2. 13 Table 4.1.9 14 4.3.3 F.3. 15 5.2 (title) 5.5 (title) 16       Added 5.2.1 C. 17       Rnbd 5.2.2 C., D.       as 5.2.2 B.5., 6. 18 5.2.3 B. 5.4.2 5.5.2       Added 5.5.3 H.       Rnbd 5.5.10 B., C.       as 5.5.10 A.2., 3.       Rpld 5.5.10 D.       Rnbd 5.5.10 E., F.       as 5.5.10 B., C.       Rnbd 5.5.11 B.       as 5.5.11 A.2.-5.       Rnbd 5.5.11 C.-E.       as 5.5.11 B.-D. 5.6.2 5.7.2 5.9.2 5.10.2 8.5.5 C. 19 5.4.7 K.4. 20       Added 5.7.7 L. 21 Table 5.7.10.B 22 5.11.3 B. 23 5.12.5 F. 24 5.14.3 C.5. 25 Table 5.15.3 26 6.1.3 B.1. 27       Rnbd 6.2.3 A.       as 6.2.3       Rnbd 6.2.3 B.-D.       as 6.2.4-6.2.6       Rnbd 6.2.4-6.2.14       as 6.2.7-6.2.17 28 7.1.6 B.5. 29 7.1.6 C.9. 30 7.1.6 F.2. 31 8.1.1 32 10.2.3 C.2. Table 3.3.2 Table 3.3.3 Table 3.3.4 Table 3.3.6 Table 3.3.7 Table 3.3.8 Table 3.4.2 Table 3.4.3 Table 3.4.5 33 10.2.6 A. 34, 35 10.4 7286/17-28  4- 3-2017 1 10.4 2 5.7.9 B.3. 3 5.7.10 B.7. 7287/17-29  4- 3-2017 1 2.5.2 2 2.1.2 3.1.4 3.5.6 G.6. 3.5.7 C.4. 5.4.4 H. 5.12.4 B. 3 7.1.6 C.8.       Rnbd 7.1.6 C.8.(g)       as 7.1.6 C.9.       Rnbd 7.1.6 C.9.       as 7.1.6 C.10.       Rpld 7.1.6 C.10., 11.       Rpld 7.1.6 D.       Rnbd 7.1.6 E.-I.       as 7.1.6 D.-H. 4 Table 4.1.9 5 Table 4.1.9 5.14.3 B. 6 4.3.3 F.2. 7 5.5.6 A. 8 5.7.6 E. 9 5.10.7 B. 10 5.11.4 C. 11 5.14.6 C.5. 12 6.2.3 D. 6.2.9 C.8. 6.2.11 A. Table 6.2.11.A.1 13       Added 6.2.11 A.4. 14 6.3.3 N. 6.3.13 B. 15 7.1.6 G. 16 10.4 7299/17-41  5-15-2017 1 Table 5.7.9.B 7302/17-44  6- 5-2017 1 3.4.8 B. 2 3.4.8 G. 7363/17-106 11-20-2017 1 3.5.7 B.3.(c) 2 3.5.7 C. 3 3.5.7 D. 4       Added 3.5.7 E. 5 Table 4.1.9 6 4.3.5 E.1. 7 5.4.3 A. 8 5.5.3 C. 9 5.6.3 A., B. 10 Table 5.7.8.B 11 8.2.3 A.2.(a) 12 3.4.8 B. 13 3.4.8 G.2.(a) 14 3.4.8 G.2.(g)(3) 15 3.4.8 G.3.(c) 16 3.5.6 B. 17 3.5.6 G.2. 18 3.5.6 G.3.(a), (b) 19 3.5.6 G.3.(e) 20 3.5.6 G.3.(h) 21 3.5.6 G.3.(l) 22 3.5.6 G.4. 23       Rpld 3.5.6 G.6. 7365/17-108 11-20-2017 1 1.5.1 (figure) Table 1.9.1 2.1.1 Table 2.1.2 2.3.5 2.3.9 C. 2.4.1 2.5.1 3.5.6.G1, G2 (figure) 3.5.7.C1, C2 (figure) Tables 5.5.11.C1, C2 Table 5.5.16.C Table 5.10.6.A Table 5.11.5.B Table 5.12.4.A 5.12.5 F. 5.14.4.B (figure) Table 5.14.6.D 5.14.6.D1, D2 (figures) Table 5.15.3.E 5.15.4 Tables 6.2.11.A1, A2 Table 6.3.7.B Table 7.1.6.C 10.2.4.A (figure) 10.2.4.E1, E2 (figures) 10.2.6 (figure) 2 2.3.6 B.1. 3.A 2.4.8 C., D. 3.B       Rpld 3.7.2 C.-E. 4.A 3.4.6 G.2.(d) 4.B 3.4.7 G.2.(d) 4.C 3.4.10 G.1.(h)(4) 4.D 3.4.11 G.1. 4.E 4.3.3 B.1.(d) 4.F 4.3.4 G.1.(a)(5) 4.G 4.3.5 D.2.(b)(2) 4.H 4.4.5 S.1.(b)(2) 5 Table 4.1.9 6 4.3.3 A.-D. 7 4.3.4 G.1.(a)(1) 8 Table 5.7.10.B 9 5.9.3 C. 10 5.11.5 C. 11 7.2.1 12 8.2.3 D. 13 10.4 7389/18-18  2-19-2018 1 3.4.8 G.2.(d) 2       Rpld 3.5.7 C.2.(c)       Rnbd 3.5.7 C.2.(d)-(k)       as 3.5.7 C.2.(c)-(j) 3       Added 3.5.7 D.3. 4       Added 3.5.7 E.4. 7399/18-28  3-19-2018 1       Added 5.14.1 B.6. 2 5.2.1 B. 3       Added 5.14.7 4.A-C 5.14.6 B.-D. 7415/18-44  5-21-2018 1.A Table 2.1.2 1.B Table 2.3.6 1.C 2.4.4 C.5. 1.D 2.4.15 C.5.(b) 2.A 3.4.10 G.1.(a) 3.4.10 G.2. 2.B 3.8.7 E.2. 3.8.7 F.3. 3.8.7 F.4.(d) 3.8.7 F.7. 2.C       Added 5.14.3 C.5.(a) 5.14.3 C.6. 2.D       Added 5.14.4 B.1.(d) 5.14.4 B.3. 3.A 3.5.2 B. 3.B 3.3.2 B. 3.C 3.3.3 B. 3.D 3.3.4 B. 3.E 3.5.6 B. 3.F 3.5.7 D.2. Table 3.5.7.D 3.G 3.5.7 E.2. Table 3.5.7.E 4.A, 4.B Table 4.1.9 5.A 4.3 5.B 4.3.2 B.5. 5.C 4.3.3. A.1. 5.D       Rnbd 4.3.3 A.3.       as 4.3.3 A.4.       Added 4.3.3 A.3. 5.E 4.3.4 D.1. 5.F 4.3.4 F.3. 6 5.4.3 B.3. 7 Table 5.5.11.B 8.A 3.8.8 D. 8.B 7.1.6 B.5. 8.C 8.3.2 B. 8.D 8.3.3 B. 8.E 8.4.2 8.F 8.4.4 D. 8.G 10.4 7476/18-105 12- 3-2018 1.A 2.1.2 1.B 2.3.6.B.1 1.C       Added 2.4.2       Rnbd 2.4.2-2.4.19       as 2.4.3-2.4.20 1.D       Dltd 3.5.6.G.4(c)(5) 1.E       Dltd 3.5.7.C.3(c)(5) 2.A 2.1.2 2.B 2.2.3.A.2 2.C 2.2.5.A 2.D 2.3.6.B.1 2.E 2.3.8.D.3 2.F 2.3.9.G.1 2.G       Dltd 2.4.11.B.6       Rnbd 2.4.11.B.7       as 2.4.11.B.6 2.H 2.4.11.F.1(a) 3.A 2.2.10.A.1(a) 3.B 5.4.4.H 3.C 5.12.4.B 3.D 5.12.5.D 3.E 2.2.7.A.1(a) 4 2.3.6.B.1 5.A 2.3.10 5.B 2.4.5.D 6 2.4.15.D 7.A 2.5.2.C 7.B 3.4.8.G.1(c) 7.C 3.5.6.G.2(d) 7.D 3.5.7.C.1(d) 8       Added 2.5.6.A.5 9.A 2.5.7.A 9.B 10.4 9.C 2.5.11.A 10.A 3.4.6.G.2(a) 10.B 3.4.7.G.2(a) 10.C 3.4.10.G.1(h)(1) 10.D 5.14.3.C.2 5.14.3.C.6(a) 10.E 5.14.4.A 5.14.4.B.3(c) 11 3.7.5.C 12 3.7.5.D.2(c) 13 4.1.5.B 14.A 4.1.9 14.B 4.2.6.E 14.C 5.4.8.A.3 14.D 5.4.8.B.2 15 4.2.5.G.2(e) 16 4.3 17.A 4.5.4.E 17.B 10.4 18 5.4.4.B 19 9.7.6 20 10.4 7488/19-05  2- 4-2019 1 3.8.7.E 2 5.7.7 3 5.7.8.B.1 4.A 5.7.8.A 4.B 5.7.8.B.2(e) 5.A 5.7.9.A.1 5.B 5.7.9.B.1 5.C       Dltd 5.7.9.B.3(d), (e)       Rnbd 5.7.9.B.3(f)-(h)       as 5.7.9.B.3(d)-(f) 5.D 5.7.9.B.3(e)(1)(iii) 5.E 5.7.9.B.3(f)(1)(iii)       Dltd 5.7.9.B.3(f)(3) 6       Dltd 5.7.11       Rnbd 5.7.12-5.7.14       as 5.7.11-5.7.13 7       Added 5.7.14 8 10.4 7489/19-06  2- 4-2019 1 4.1.9 2       Added 4.3.5.B.2  
