
Hamlet, NC Code of Ordinances


CITY OF HAMLET, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through an ordinance passed 12-11-2018; and
State legislation current through 2018 North Carolina
Legislative Service, Pamphlet No. 5










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




CHARTER



Editor’s note:



   The charter herein set out is contained in Session Laws of 1969,
chapter 506, adopted by the city on April 1, 1969. Acts amending the charter
are cited following the section affected. Unless so indicated, the section
derives unchanged from the original act. A uniform system of capitalization
has been employed and a frontal analysis has been added for the convenience
of the user. Words in brackets have been added and catchlines occasionally
changed for purposes of clarification.



Article I:  Incorporation and Corporate Powers



   1.1   Incorporation and general powers



   1.2   Exercise of powers



Article II:  Corporate Boundaries



   2.1   City boundaries and map



Article III:  Charter Amendments



   3.1   Incorporation of amendments



Article IV:  Mayor and City Council



   4.1   Composition of city council; designation and duties of mayor



   4.2   Organization of council; oath of office



   4.3   Qualifications; vacancies



   4.4   Mayor pro tem



   4.5   Rules and journal of proceedings



   4.6   Mayor and councilmen to hold no other offices



   4.7   Meetings



   4.8   Quorum; voting



   4.9   Exercise of city powers



   4.10   Compensation of mayor and council



Article V:  Reserved



Article VI:  Council-Manager Form of Government



   6.1   Adoption



   6.2   Election of mayor



   6.3   Reserved



   6.4   Reserved



   6.5   Election of councilmen; term; filing as candidates for
reelection



Article VII:  Administrative Officers and Personnel



   7.1   Appointment and removal; compensation; duties; grievances



   7.2   City attorney



   7.3   City clerk



   7.4   City finance director



   7.5   City tax collector



   7.6   Consolidation of functions of certain offices



   7.7   Oath of office



Article VIII:  Taxation



   8.1   Powers of taxation



   8.2   Payment of delinquent taxes into general fund



   8.3   Additional remedies for collection of privilege license taxes



Article IX:  Assessments for Street Improvements



   9.1   Power generally



   9.2   When petition unnecessary



   9.3   “Street improvements” defined



   9.4   Assessment procedure



   9.5   Effect of assessments



Article X:  Establishment of Proposed Street Lines



   10.1   Authority to establish proposed street lines



   10.2   Platting of proposed street lines



   10.3   Adoption of official map; hearing; notice



   10.4   Right of city to acquire property before improvement



   10.5   Failure to give notice bars recovery for value of improvements



   10.6   Failure of city to act not to limit subsequent condemnation



Article XI:  Zoning



   11.1   Extraterritorial zoning



Article XII:  Parking and Parking Facilities



   12.1   Authority to regulate off-street parking



   12.2   Civil penalties



   12.3   Towing of vehicles from off-street areas; charges



   12.4   Towing of vehicles from streets; charges



   12.5   Registration to be prima facie evidence of responsibility



   12.6   Towing and storage facilities



Article XIII:  Reserved



Article XIV:  Police



   14.1   Jurisdiction extended



Article XV:  Sidewalks



   15.1   City may clean or repair after notice; charges to be a lien



Article XVI:  Refuse, Weeds and Trash



   16.1   Property to be kept free of offensive matter



   16.2   Removal of offensive matter; charges to be a lien



Article XVII:  Purchasing and Contracts



   17.1   Provisions of general law to govern



   17.2   Conflict of interest



Article XVIII:  Claims Against the City



   18.1   Presentation of and suits upon claims



   18.2   Settlement of claims



Article XIX:  Miscellaneous



   19.1   Signing of warrants or orders for payment



   19.2   City depositories; signatures to vouchers; surety bonds



   19.3   Bond elections



   19.4   Cemetery regulations



   19.5   Interments within city



   19.6   Consolidation of prior local acts



   19.7   Acts not affected



   19.8   Acts repealed



   19.9   Certain vested and derived rights preserved



   19.10   No revival of prior acts



   19.11   Ordinances, etc., to continue in effect



ARTICLE I:  INCORPORATION AND CORPORATE POWERS



Sec. 1.1.  Incorporation and general powers.



   The Town of Hamlet shall continue to be a body politic and corporate
under the name of the “City of Hamlet,” and shall continue to be vested
with all property and rights which now belong to the city; shall have
perpetual succession; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same
with pleasure; may sue and be sued; may contract, may acquire and hold all
such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in
any manner conveyed or dedicated to it, or otherwise acquired by it, and may
from time to time hold or invest, sell or dispose of the same; and shall have
and may exercise in conformity with this charter all municipal powers,
functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature
whatsoever.



Sec. 1.2.  Exercise of powers.



   All powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of the city,
its officers, agencies or employees, shall be carried into execution as
provided by this charter, or if this charter makes no provisions, as provided
by the general laws of North Carolina pertaining to municipal corporations,
their officers, agencies or employees, and as provided by ordinance or
resolution of the city council.



ARTICLE II:  CORPORATE BOUNDARIES



Sec. 2.1.  City boundaries and map.



   (a)   The boundaries of the city shall be those existing at the time
of adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to
time in the manner provided by law. As of the effective date of this charter,
the said boundaries shall constitute the territory embraced within the
following boundaries:



      (1)   A circle the center of which is the place upon which was
located the passenger depot of the Seaboard Air Line Railway Company when the
Town of Hamlet was originally incorporated in the year 1897, and the radius
of which is three-fourths (3/4) of a mile.



      (2)   Beginning at an iron stake in the northerly margin of
Juanita Avenue in the City of Hamlet, North Carolina, said point being north
42 degrees west 100 feet from the northwesterly intersection of Juanita
Avenue and Wallace Street, also the southwesterly corner of Lot No. 44, and
running thence as a northerly margin of Juanita Avenue north 42 degrees west
93.5 feet to a concrete marker, a corner in the easternmost line of the
Freeman property; thence turning and running as the Freeman and Kinsman lines
north 14 degrees 40' east 214.4 feet to an iron stake; a corner of the
Freeman property and the southeasterly corner of the J. P. Gibbons property
in the Kinsman line, also a corner of Lot No. 78-A; thence turning and
running parallel with Juanita Avenue south 42 degrees east 211.2 feet to an
iron stake, a common corner of Lots Nos. 43, 44, 76, and 77; thence turning
and running parallel with Wallace Street south 48 degrees west 175 feet to
the point or place of beginning, containing .543 acres. A plat of this
property is of record in Plat Book 8 at page 59 in the office of the register
of deeds for Richmond County, North Carolina, and this is the same property
as that conveyed to Vance Sykes, L. S. Brown, and S. B. McGuirt, trustees of
First Presbyterian Church, Hamlet, North Carolina, by Philip Gibbons and
wife, Aimee D. Gibbons, by deed dated September 5, 1968, and recorded in Book
506 at page 262 of the Richmond County registry.



      (3)   Area A.



   Beginning at a concrete monument set in the north right-of-way of Rice
Street, said monument being the old city limits line, and runs north 82
degrees 20' west 257.6 feet to a stake; thence south 54 degrees 11' west
387.1 feet to a stake; thence north 67 degrees 31' west and crossing Austin
Street to a stake in the western edge of Maple Avenue, said distance being
491.5 feet; thence south 56 degrees west and crossing Walnut Avenue 620.5
feet to a stake; thence north 34 degrees 52' west 1161.5 feet to a monument
in the northern right-of-way of Hawthorne Street; thence continuing the same
course 464.7 feet to a stake on the east side of Pine Hill Avenue; thence
along the eastern right-of-way of the above mentioned avenue north 11 degrees
10' west 401 feet to a stake; thence crossing U. S. Highway 177, north 15
degrees 37' west 69 feet to a stake; thence north 18 degrees 22' west 261.3
feet to a stake; thence north 56 degrees 31' east 527.9 feet to a stake in
the south side of Battley Road; thence crossing said Battley Road north 69
degrees 45' east 326.4 feet to a concrete monument at the southwest corner of
Richmond Street; thence north 77 degrees 13' east 516 feet to a concrete
monument in the right-of-way of Park Avenue; thence north 20 degrees 1' east
653.1 feet to a stake west of McDonald Street; thence north 65 degrees 14'
west 339.6 feet to a stake; thence north 25 degrees 14' east and crossing
McDonald, Fairview, and Branch Avenues 1016.4 feet to a stake in Woodland
Road; thence down said Woodland Road north 39 degrees 54' west and crossing
Boyette Street 972.5 feet; thence north 48 degrees 11' east 846 feet to a
stake; thence north 40 degrees 49' west 802.5 feet to a stake; thence north
49 degrees 4' east and crossing Hylan and Juanita Avenues 799.8 feet to a
stake; thence south 40 degrees 28' east and crossing Pineland and Sandhurst
Streets 901.7 feet; thence north 49 degrees 27' east and crossing Stacy
Avenue 400 feet to a stake; thence south 40 degrees 19' east and crossing
Boyette and Terry Streets 669 feet to a stake; thence north 82 degrees 37'
east 218.8 feet to a stake below the dam at Kinsman Lake; thence south 74
degrees 38' east 162.3 feet to a stake; thence north 43 degrees 4' east 374.3
feet to a stake; thence south 55 degrees 51' east 545 feet to a stake where
the original Hamlet city limits crosses the Seaboard Railroad right-of-way
east of Jefferson Street; thence in a westerly and southerly direction with
the original line of the Town of Hamlet 6200 feet to the beginning in the
edge of Rice Street.



   Area B.



   Beginning at a stake located in the original Hamlet city limits, said
stake being located in the western lot line of the Bankhead residence, said
point being located south of Fourth Street and west of U. S. Highway No. 74,
and running thence south 47 degrees east 852.7 feet to a stake; thence north
50 degrees 28' east 197.7 feet to a stake; thence south 46 degrees 57' east
305.8 feet to a stake; thence north 35 degrees 39' east and crossing U. S.
Highway No. 74 east of Hub Grill 421 feet to a stake; thence north 68 degrees
8' west 300.2 feet to a stake; thence north 61 degrees 40' west 94 feet to a
stake; thence north 53 degrees 48' west 80.6 feet to a stake; thence north 45
degrees 45' west 193.4 feet to a stake; thence north 44 degrees 15' east 51
feet to a stake; thence north 46 degrees 17' west and crossing Fifth Street
357.9 feet to a stake; thence 45 degrees 20' east and crossing Winston,
Durham, and Fayetteville Streets 1032.2 feet to a stake; thence north 10
degrees 34' west 177.2 feet to a stake; thence north 47 degrees 29' west and
crossing Fourth Street 410.4 feet to the original line of the Town of Hamlet
in a northwesterly direction 1600 feet to the beginning.



      (4)   Beginning at a point in the northwestern edge of Rice
Street said point being in the present town limits line of the Town of Hamlet
and marked by a concrete marker, and runs from said point with Rice Street in
a southwesterly direction to the southwestern edge of North Carolina Avenue,
Moore’s corner; thence continuing southwesterly with Rice Street 200 feet
to a stake; thence in a southeastern direction and parallel to North Carolina
Avenue 260 feet to a stake; thence in a northeasterly direction and parallel
to Rice Street to the present corporate limits of the Town of Hamlet; thence
with the present corporate limits of the Town of Hamlet in a circuitous line
to the beginning corner on the northwestern edge of Rice Street.



   (b)   The current city boundaries, at all times, shall be shown on a
map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained
permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case
may be, “Map (or Description) of Hamlet City Limits.” Alterations in
these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entry upon or additions to
such map or description. Such entries or additions shall be made by or under
the direction of the city clerk. Photographic, types or other copies of such
map or description, certified by the city clerk, shall be admitted in
evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as would the
original map or description.



   (c)   The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such
map. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps
which it is designated to replace.



Editor’s note:



   The city has adopted numerous ordinances that have annexed additional
territory. Such ordinances did not amend the charter. They are on file in the
city hall.



ARTICLE III:  CHARTER AMENDMENTS



Sec. 3.1.  Incorporation of amendments.



   (a)   As soon as possible after the adjournment of each General
Assembly, the city attorney shall present to the city council copies of all
local laws relating to the City of Hamlet that were enacted by such General
Assembly, whether or not amending in terms this charter, which he recommends
be incorporated into this charter. Such recommendations may include
suggestions for renumbering or rearranging the provisions of such laws, for
providing titles and catchlines, and for such other changes in arrangement
and form that do not change the law as may be necessary to implement the
purposes of this article.



   (b)   After considering the recommendations of the city attorney,
the city council may provide for the incorporation of such laws into this
charter.



   (c)   The purpose of this section is to enable the city to maintain
at all times a current and accurate city charter, organized in clear and
orderly fashion, and embracing all pertinent local laws relating to the city.



ARTICLE IV:  MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL



Sec. 4.1.  Composition of city council; designation and duties of mayor.



   (a)   The governing body of the City of Hamlet shall consist of a
mayor and five councilmen who shall be residents of the city.



   (b)   The mayor and the members of the city council shall be elected
from the city at large.



   (c)   The person receiving the highest number of votes for the
office of mayor shall be declared elected.



   (d)   The mayor shall take the required oath of office before the
city clerk to perform faithfully the duties of the office of mayor and as
required by the general laws of North Carolina.



   (e)   The mayor shall be the official head of the city and shall
preside at all meetings of the city council. In the absence or the disability
of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall perform his duties. In the absence or
disability of both the mayor and the mayor pro tem the council shall
designate one of its members to perform such duties. In the event of the
resignation of the mayor the members of the council shall by a majority vote
elect a mayor as provided by the General Statutes of the State of North
Carolina.



   (f)   The city council shall consist of five members. In the regular
municipal election to be held in 1971, and biennially thereafter, three
[councilmen] shall be elected. The two candidates for [councilman] receiving
the highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of four years and the
candidate receiving the next highest number of votes shall be elected for a
term of two years. All candidates elected as [councilmen] shall serve until
their successors are elected and qualified.



Sec. 4.2.  Organization of council; oath of office.



   The city council shall at 7:00 p.m. on the evening following the date
of their [its] election meet and organize for the transaction of official
municipal business. Before entering upon their offices the councilmen shall
severally take the required oath before the city clerk to perform faithfully
the duties of their respective offices. Any elected councilman not present at
the organization meeting may take the oath of office within thirty days, and
the failure on the part of any elected councilman to take said oath within
thirty days forfeits his right to the office and the council shall have the
authority to fill the vacancy.



(Ord. passed 6-14-1994)



Sec. 4.3.  Qualifications; vacancies.



   (a)   No person shall be eligible to be elected to the office of
mayor or to serve on the city council unless he is a qualified voter under
the election laws as prescribed by the General Statutes of the State of North
Carolina, and shall have resided within the corporate limits of the City of
Hamlet for thirty days immediately preceding the regular municipal election.



   (b)   If any elected councilmember shall refuse to be qualified or
if there is any vacancy in the office of councilman after election and
qualification, or if any councilman be unable to discharge the duties of his
office, the remaining members of the council shall elect some person to serve
the unexpired term, or during his disability, as the case may be. Councilmen
so elected shall have all authority and powers granted by this charter to
regularly elected councilmen.



Sec. 4.4.  Mayor pro tem.



   The mayor pro tem shall be elected by the city council from among its
own members and he shall hold such office for a term of two years at the
pleasure of the city council. In the absence, disability, or resignation of
the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall, to the extent permitted by the General
Statutes of the State of North Carolina perform the mayor’s duties, and
until a mayor has been selected as provided in article IV, section 4.1(e) of
this charter.



(Ord. passed 1-20-1976; Ord. passed 12-10-1985, § 1)



Sec. 4.5.  Rules and journal of proceedings.



   The city council shall determine its own rules and order of business
and shall cause to be kept a journal of its proceedings.



Sec. 4.6.  Mayor and councilmen to hold no other offices.



   Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall hold any
other office or position of trust, profit, or honor under the city government.



Sec. 4.7.  Meetings.



   (a)   The city council shall fix suitable times for its regular
meetings, which shall be at least as often as once monthly. The mayor or any
two councilmembers may at any time call a special meeting by signing a
written notice stating the time of the meeting, to be delivered to each
member or left at his usual dwelling place at least six hours before the
meeting. Meetings of the council may also be held at any time when all
members are present and consent thereto. Any business may be transacted at a
special meeting that might be transacted at a regular meeting.



   (b)   All meetings of the city council shall be public meetings and
as prescribed by the General Statutes of the State of North Carolina.



Sec. 4.8.  Quorum; voting.



   (a)   A majority of the members elected to the council shall
constitute a quorum to do business, but a less number may adjourn from time
to time and compel the attendance of absent members.



   (b)   The affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers shall
be necessary to adopt any ordinance or to authorize the expenditure of money.
All other matters voted upon shall be decided by a majority vote of the
councilmembers present, except as provided in article VI of this charter.



   (c)   No member of the council shall be excused from voting except
on any matter involving his own official conduct.



Sec. 4.9.  Exercise of city powers.



   (a)   The city council shall direct the exercise of all of the
powers of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter.



   (b)   In addition to the specific powers herein conferred, and to
other powers conferred upon it by general law, the city council may adopt and
provide for the execution of such ordinances, rules, and regulations, not
inconsistent with this charter, as may be necessary or appropriate for the
preservation and promotion of the health, safety, comfort, convenience, good
order, better government, and the general welfare of the city and its
inhabitants.



Sec. 4.10.  Compensation of mayor and council.



   Repealed pursuant to G.S. § 160A-64, which establishes a standard
procedure for establishing and changing local governing board compensation.



(Ord. passed 5-16-1996; Am. Ord. 2016-07, passed 5-26-2016)



ARTICLE V:  RESERVED



Editor’s note:



   Secs. 5.1—5.3 were repealed by ordinance on February 18, 1975.



ARTICLE VI:  COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT



Sec. 6.1.  Adoption.



   The city council, after notice and hearing as provided by North
Carolina law, shall reinstitute and does hereby reinstitute the
council-manager form of government as provided by North Carolina law.



(Ord. passed 2-18-1975, § 1; Ord. passed 3-13-1990, § 1)



Sec. 6.2.  Election of mayor.



   (a)   The mayor of the City of Hamlet shall be elected by the
popular vote of the qualified voters of the City of Hamlet.



   (b)   The person receiving the highest number of votes for the
office of mayor shall be declared elected for a term of two years.



   (c)   The mayor shall take the required oath of office before the
city clerk to perform faithfully the duties of the office of mayor, as
required by the general laws of North Carolina as they apply to the
council-manager form of government and any other laws of North Carolina
pertaining thereto.



(Ord. passed 10-9-1970, § 1; Ord. passed 2-18-1975, § 2; Ord. passed
3-13-1990, § 1)



Sec. 6.3.  Reserved.



Editor’s note:



   By ordinance on February 18, 1975, sections 6.2 and 6.3 were repealed,
and section 6.4 was changed to section 6.2.



Sec. 6.4.  Reserved.



Editor’s note:



   By ordinance on February 18, 1975, sections 6.2 and 6.3 were repealed,
and section 6.4 was changed to section 6.2.



Sec. 6.5.  Election of councilmen; term; filing as candidates for reelection.



   In the regular municipal election to be held in 1971, all five city
councilmen shall be elected. The three candidates for councilmen receiving
the highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of four years, and
the two candidates receiving the next highest number of votes shall be
elected for a term of two years. At the election to be held biennially
thereafter, any person seeking the office of city councilman whose term has
expired and who seeks reelection shall be required to file for reelection.
Beginning with the election in 1973, councilmen running for office shall be
elected for a term of four years, and candidates elected as councilmen shall
serve until their successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. passed
10-9-1970, § 1)



ARTICLE VII:  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL



Sec. 7.1.  Appointment and removal; compensation; duties; grievances.



   (a)   The city manager, except as provided by law, shall appoint and
may suspend and remove all city employees and heads of departments, and, in
its discretion, may employ consultants of any kind when needed.



   (b)   All salaries and compensation shall be fixed or approved by
the council.



   (c)   City employees and department heads shall perform such duties
as may be required of them under the general direction and regulations of the
council.



   (d)   The council reserves the right to provide that upon the
recommendation of a department head any employee shall be given the right to
present his grievance to the council.



   Except for the purpose of inquiry or for consultation with the city
attorney, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative
service through the city manager, the city clerk or the department heads,
either publicly or privately.



(Ord. passed 3-13-1990, § 1)



Sec. 7.2.  City attorney.



   The city attorney shall be appointed by the city council, and shall
have the following duties:



   (1)   To serve as legal advisor to the city council, the clerk, the
finance director, the tax collector, and all city departments, officers and
agencies;



   (2)   To represent as counsel the city, its officers, agents or
employees, in any legal action arising out of or connected with the proper
functions of the city, unless disqualified so to act;



   (3)   To draft such ordinances, resolutions and documents as
requested by the council.



Sec. 7.3.  City clerk.



   The city clerk shall be appointed by the city council, and shall have
the following duties:



   (1)   To act as clerk to the council, to attend all meetings
thereof, and to maintain a permanent record of all proceedings thereof.



Sec. 7.4.  City finance director.



   The city finance director shall be appointed by the city manager, and
shall receive and keep all monies belonging to the city and disburse the same
according to law, and keep the council advised of the status of all funds.



(Ord. passed 3-13-1990, § 1)



Sec. 7.5.  City tax collector.



   The city manager shall appoint a tax collector for the city, who shall
be charged with the collection of all taxes and assessments.



(Ord. passed 3-13-1990, § 1)



Sec. 7.6.  Consolidation of functions of certain offices.



   The city council may, in its discretion, consolidate the offices of
city clerk, city finance director, and city tax collector, and may assign the
functions of any one of these offices to the holder of any other of these
offices.



Sec. 7.7.  Oath of office.



   Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, the holders of the
following offices and positions shall be required to take the oath prescribed
for public officers, before the mayor or the city clerk: The city clerk, city
finance director, tax collector, any assistant city clerk or assistant tax
collector, or assistant city treasurer, chief of police and each member of
the police force, the building inspector and all employees empowered to
enforce the building code.



ARTICLE VIII:  TAXATION



Sec. 8.1.  Powers of taxation.



   The city shall have all taxing power and authority delegated to
municipal corporations by general law.



Sec. 8.2.  Payment of delinquent taxes into general fund.



   The city council may, in its discretion, direct the payment into the
general fund of the city all or any part of the proceeds of ad valorem taxes
which are, when collected, three or more years delinquent.



Sec. 8.3.  Additional remedies for collection of privilege license taxes.



   In addition to any other civil or criminal remedy available to enforce
the collection of privilege license taxes, the tax collector may employ the
remedies of levy upon personal property, attachment, and garnishment, in the
manner and subject to the limitations provided by general law for the
collection of ad valorem taxes.



ARTICLE IX:  ASSESSMENTS FOR STREET IMPROVEMENTS



Sec. 9.1.  Power generally.



   In addition to any authority which is now or may hereafter be granted
by general law to the City of Hamlet for making street improvements, the city
council is authorized to make street improvements, and assess the cost
thereof against abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of
this article.



Sec. 9.2.  When petition unnecessary.



   The city council may order street improvements and assess the cost
thereof, exclusive of the cost incurred at street intersections, against the
abutting property owners at an equal rate per front foot, without the
necessity of a petition, upon the finding by the council as a fact:



   (a)   That the street improvement project does not exceed twelve
hundred lineal feet; and



   (b)   That such street or part thereof is unsafe for vehicular
traffic and it is in the public interest to make such improvement; or



   (c)   That it is in the public interest to connect two streets or
portions of a street already improved; or



   (d)   That it is in the public interest to widen a street or part
thereof, which is already improved; provided, that assessment for widening
any street or portion of street without petition shall be limited to the cost
of widening and otherwise improving such street in accordance with the street
classification and improvement standards established by the city’s
thoroughfare or major street plan for the particular street or part thereof
to be widened and improved under the authority granted by this section.



Sec. 9.3.  “Street improvements” defined.



   For the purposes of the preceding section, the term “street
improvement” shall include grading, regrading, surfacing, resurfacing,
widening, paving, repaving, and the construction or reconstruction of curbs,
gutters and street drainage facilities.



Sec. 9.4.  Assessment procedure.



   In ordering street improvements without a petition and assessing the
cost thereof under authority of this article, the city council shall comply
with the procedure provided by G.S. 160A-216 et seq., except those provisions
relating to the petition of property owners and the sufficiency thereof.



Sec. 9.5.  Effect of assessments.



   The effect of the act of levying assessments under authority of this
article shall for all purposes be the same as if the assessments were levied
under authority of G.S. 160A-216 et seq.



ARTICLE X:  ESTABLISHMENT OF PROPOSED STREET LINES



Sec. 10.1.  Authority to establish proposed street lines.



   Whenever, in the opinion of the city council, it is in the best
interest of the city to do so, the council may make provision for the
ultimate widening or extension or both of existing streets and for the
opening of new streets, and for the gradual acquisition of the lands
necessary for such improvements, in accordance with the procedure established
by this article.



Sec. 10.2.  Platting of proposed street lines.



   From and after the time of adoption of a major street plan by the city
council and the state highway commission pursuant to provisions of G.S.
136-66.2, and as amended, the city council shall have power to request, make,
or cause to be made, from time to time, surveys for the exact locating of the
lines of new, extended, widened, or narrowed streets and highways in the
whole or any portion of the city and the area within one mile outside of its
corporate boundaries. Personnel making such surveys are empowered to enter
upon lands, make examinations or surveys and place and maintain necessary
monuments thereon, at reasonable times and with due care for the property. A
plat or plats of the area or areas thus surveyed shall be prepared on which
are indicated the locations of the lines recommended as the planned or mapped
lines of future streets, street extensions, street widenings, or street
narrowings. The preparation of such plat or plats shall not in and of itself
constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any
street or the taking or acceptance of any land for street purposes.



Editor’s note:



   G.S. 136-66.2 provides for the development, with the cooperation of the
department of transportation, of a comprehensive plan for a street system.



Sec. 10.3.  Adoption of official map; hearing; notice.



   Following the preparation of such plats, the city council may
officially adopt a map or maps of planned new street and highways,
extensions, widenings, narrowings or vacations of streets within the city and
the area within one mile outside of its corporate boundaries. Before taking
any such action, the council shall hold a public hearing thereof, notice of
the time and place of which shall have been given once a week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper published in the city, or if there be no
newspaper published in the city, by posting such notice at four public places
in the city and at four public places within the affected area outside of the
corporate boundaries. Said notice shall be published or posted for the first
time not less than fifteen days prior to the date fixed for said hearing.
Following adoption of such map or maps, the council shall certify a copy to
the register of deeds of Richmond County, which copy shall be duly filed. The
placing of any street or street line upon any official map or maps shall not
in and of itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or
establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for
street purposes.



Sec. 10.4.  Right of city to acquire property before improvement.



   From and after the time of adoption and certification to the register
of deeds of any such map or maps, it shall be unlawful to build upon any land
within the lines of proposed streets shown thereon or to repair or otherwise
improve any existing buildings within said lines until the city council shall
have been given an opportunity to purchase or otherwise acquire said property
for street purposes as provided by this article. To that end, any person
proposing to build upon such land or to make repairs or improvements to any
existing building on such land, shall, in writing, notify the city council of
the nature and estimated cost of such building, repairs, or improvements. The
council shall then determine whether it will take the necessary steps to
acquire said land prior to construction of said buildings or the making of
said repairs or improvements. If the council fails, within sixty days from
the receipt of such notice, to acquire, adopt a formal resolution directing
an appropriate officer to acquire, or institute condemnation proceedings to
acquire said property, then the owner or other person giving notice may
proceed to erect the building or to make the repairs or improvements
described in said notice. The building inspector is authorized to withhold
and refrain from issuing, for a period not exceeding sixty days from receipt
by the council of the notice herein prescribed, any building permit for the
erection of any building within the said lines, or for the making of any
repairs or improvements to existing buildings within said lines.



Sec. 10.5.  Failure to give notice bars recovery for value of improvements.



   If any person, firm or corporation builds upon any land included within
said proposed street lines, or repairs or otherwise improves that part of any
existing building within said lines, without giving the city council an
opportunity to acquire said property free from improvements, as provided in
section 10.4 of this article, the council shall not be required to pay for
the value of said building, repairs, or improvements in any proceeding
subsequently brought to acquire the land for the purpose shown on the
officially adopted map or maps.



Sec. 10.6.  Failure of city to act not to limit subsequent condemnation.



   The failure of the city council to take action under sections 10.4 and
10.5 of this article within sixty days after notice shall not have the effect
of limiting the right of the council at any subsequent time to condemn the
same. In such case, however, the owner shall be entitled to full compensation
as now provided by law for the building, repairs, or improvements made after
the failure of the council to take action within the prescribed period.



ARTICLE XI:  ZONING



Sec. 11.1.  Extraterritorial zoning.



   The city council shall have such authority to enact zoning regulations
as is granted by the general law and as provided by G.S. 160A-360 and
160A-381 et seq. and amendments thereto.



ARTICLE XII:  PARKING AND PARKING FACILITIES



Sec. 12.1.  Authority to regulate off-street parking.



   The city council shall have power and authority to enact ordinances for
the regulation of the use by vehicles of:



   (a)   Municipally owned or leased off-street parking areas and
facilities;



   (b)   Publicly owned off-street parks, outdoor recreation areas, and
yards and grounds occupied by public buildings; and



   (c)   Privately owned areas permissively used by the general public
for parking or street purposes.



Sec. 12.2.  Civil penalties.



   In the exercise of the authority granted by section 12.1, the city
council shall have authority to make and provide civil penalties for
violations of such ordinances, not exceeding the penalties provided by
general law for the violation of municipal ordinances.



Sec. 12.3.  Towing of vehicles from off-street areas; charges.



   The city council may, in addition to providing civil penalties, provide
that such vehicles in violation of parking regulations at any of the places
designated in sections 12.1 and 12.2 of this article, may be towed away and
the owner or person responsible therefor required to pay the resulting towing
and storage charges.



Sec. 12.4.  Towing of vehicles from streets; charges.



   The city council may provide by ordinance that vehicles stalled,
wrecked, abandoned, or illegally parked upon any public street may be removed
therefrom by having the same towed away to such place as may be designated by
a council-appointed city official and to require that the owner or person
responsible therefor pay the resulting towing and storage charges.



Sec. 12.5.  Registration to be prima facie evidence of responsibility.



   The ownership of any vehicle as established by its registration with
the North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles shall be prima facie evidence
as to the person, firm or corporation responsible for violating the
provisions of any ordinance adopted in accordance with the powers granted in
this article.



Sec. 12.6.  Towing and storage facilities.



   In the implementation of the authority granted by this article relating
to the removal and storage of vehicles, the city council may provide such
towing and storage facilities by and through its own forces, equipment and
property, as well as by contract with independent towing and storage
contractors and operators, and the city council may appropriate and use
reasonable sums of public funds to defray the necessary expenses thereof.



ARTICLE XIII:  RESERVED



ARTICLE XIV:  POLICE



Sec. 14.1.  Jurisdiction extended.



   (a)   The jurisdiction of the police force is hereby extended to
include all territory outside and within one mile of the corporate limits,
and all members of the police force shall have within each territory, all
rights, power, and authority, as they now have within the corporate limits.



   (b)   The jurisdiction of the police force is hereby extended to
include all city-owned property and facilities, whether located within or
outside the corporate limits, and all members of the police force shall have
upon and within such property and facilities all rights, power and authority
as they now have within the corporate limits.



ARTICLE XV:  SIDEWALKS



Sec. 15.1.  City may clean or repair after notice; charges to be a lien.



   The city council may, by ordinance, establish a procedure whereby city
forces may clean or repair any sidewalk upon failure of the abutting property
owner after ten days’ notice to do so. In such event, the cost of such
cleaning or repair shall become a lien upon the abutting property equal to
the lien for ad valorem taxes and may thereafter be collected either by suit
in the name of the city or by foreclosure of the lien in the same manner and
subject to the same rules, regulations, costs and penalties as provided by
law for the foreclosure of the lien on real property for ad valorem taxes.



ARTICLE XVI:  REFUSE, WEEDS AND TRASH



Sec. 16.1.  Property to be kept free of offensive matter.



   It shall be the duty of every property owner in the city to keep his
property free from noxious weeds, trash, and all other forms of offensive
animal or vegetable matter or refuse which may be dangerous or prejudicial to
the public health or which may constitute a public nuisance.



Sec. 16.2.  Removal of offensive matter; charges to be a lien.



   The city council may by ordinance establish a procedure whereby city
forces may clean, cut, and remove any weeds, trash, refuse or other offensive
matter from any property upon failure of the owner or occupant after ten
days’ notice to do so. In such event, the cost of such cleaning, cutting
and removal shall become a lien upon the particular property equal to the
lien for ad valorem taxes and may thereafter be collected either by suit in
the name of the city or by foreclosure of the lien in the same manner and
subject to the same rules, regulations, costs and penalties as provided by
law for the foreclosure of the lien on real property for ad valorem taxes.



ARTICLE XVII:  PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS



Sec. 17.1.  Provisions of general law to govern.



   All contracts of the city for construction or repair work or for the
purchase of apparatus, supplies, materials, or equipment shall be made in
compliance with the requirements of article 3, chapter 143 of the General
Statutes.



Sec. 17.2.  Conflict of interest.



   No officer, department head, employee, or board or commission member
shall make or participate in the making of any contract with the city in
which he may be in any manner financially interested, directly or indirectly.
Any such person who has such an interest in any proposed contract shall make
known that interest. The willful concealment of such a financial interest or
the willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office
or position, and any violator shall forfeit his office or position. Violation
of this section with the knowledge express or implied of the person, firm, or
corporation contracting with the city shall render the contract void.



ARTICLE XVIII:  CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY



Editor’s note:



   Portions of this article are superseded by G.S. 1-46 et seq. and
1-539.16.



Sec. 18.1.  Presentation of and suits upon claims.



   (a)   All claims or demands against the City of Hamlet arising in
tort shall be presented to the city council in writing, signed by the
claimant, his attorney or agent, within ninety days after the claim or demand
is due or the cause of action accrues, and no suit or action shall be brought
thereon within thirty days or after the expiration of twelve months from the
time said claim or demand is so presented. Unless the claim or demand is so
presented within ninety days after the cause of action accrues, and unless
suit is brought within twelve months thereafter, any action thereon shall be
barred.



   (b)   No action shall be instituted against the city on account of
damages to or compensation for real property taken or used by the city for
any public purpose of any kind or for the ejectment of the city therefrom, or
to remove a cloud upon the title thereof unless, within two years after such
alleged use, the owner, his executor, administrator, guardian or next friend
shall have given notice in writing to the city council of the claim, stating
in the notice the date that the alleged use commenced, a description of the
property alleged to have been used, and the amount of damage or compensation
claimed.



   (c)   Notwithstanding the provision of subsections (a) and (b) of
this section, if a complainant suffers from physical or mental incapacity
that renders it impossible for him to give notice, his action shall not be
barred if notice of claim is given by him or in his behalf within six months
after the termination of the incapacity, provided that minority shall not of
itself constitute physical or mental incapacity. If the complainant is a
minor, his action shall not be barred if notice of claim is given in his
behalf within three years after the happening or the infliction of the injury
complained of; or, if the minor suffers from physical or mental incapacity
that renders it impossible for him to give notice, his action shall not be
barred if notice of claim is given in his behalf within six months after
termination of the incapacity, or within three years after the happening or
the infliction of the injury complained of, whichever is the longer period.
The city may at any time request the appointment of a next friend to
represent any person having a potential claim against the city and known to
be suffering from physical or mental incapacity.



Sec. 18.2.  Settlement of claims.



   The city council may authorize the city manager to settle claims
against the city for: (1) Personal injury or damages to property when the
amount involved does not exceed the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) and does
not exceed the actual loss sustained, including loss of time, medical
expenses, and any other expense actually incurred, and (2) the taking of
small portions of private property which are needed for the rounding of
corners at street intersections, when the amount involved in any such
settlement does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) and does not exceed the
actual loss sustained. Any settlement of a claim by the city clerk or
treasurer pursuant to this section shall constitute a complete release of the
city from any and all damages sustained by the person involved in such
settlement in any manner arising out of the accident, occasion, or taking
complained of. All such releases shall be approved as to form by the city
attorney.



ARTICLE XIX:  MISCELLANEOUS



Sec. 19.1.  Signing of warrants or orders for payment.



   The city clerk, finance director, or city manager or any bonded
official of the City of Hamlet and who is authorized by the city council may
sign warrants or orders for payment on the city treasury or depository. In
addition, in the absence of the city clerk or other qualified and authorized
official, such warrants or orders may be signed by the mayor.



Sec. 19.2.  City depositories; signatures to vouchers; surety bonds.



   The city council from time to time shall have the power to designate
depositories to receive any and all funds collected or paid to the city. The
city council shall determine from time to time what security shall be
required for funds placed in a depository. The city finance director is
authorized and empowered to sign vouchers for all obligations of the city.
The council may from time to time designate other officials of the City of
Hamlet to sign vouchers in behalf of the city. The city council shall
designate what officials of the City of Hamlet shall furnish surety bonds and
the amount of said bonds.



Sec. 19.3.  Bond elections.



   The conduct of bond elections shall be governed by the provisions of
general law relating to municipal bond elections.



Sec. 19.4.  Cemetery regulations.



   The city council may provide rules and regulations for the use of all
city cemeteries, whether located within or outside the corporate limits, and
such rules and regulations shall be enforced by the police force within said
cemeteries as city ordinances.



Sec. 19.5.  Interments within city.



   The city council may regulate or prohibit interments within the
corporate limits, and may prohibit interments within the corporate limits
elsewhere than in city-owned cemeteries.



Sec. 19.6.  Consolidation of prior local acts.



   It is the purpose of this act to revise and reorganize the Charter of
the City of Hamlet (North Carolina Private Laws 1897, chapter 14) and to
consolidate into it certain local acts concerning the property, affairs, and
government of the City of Hamlet, including the following acts: North
Carolina Session Laws, 1959, chapter 851, providing for nonpartisan
primaries; and North Carolina Session Laws 1963, chapter 908, and North
Carolina Session Laws 1967, chapter 542, relating to municipal elections. It
is intended to continue in force without interruption those provisions of
prior local acts which are consolidated into this act, so that all rights and
liabilities that have accrued are preserved and may be enforced.



Sec. 19.7.  Acts not affected.



   This act shall not be deemed to repeal, modify, nor in any manner to
affect any of the following acts, or amendments thereto, even though such
acts or amendments are not expressly set forth herein:



   (a)   Any acts validating, confirming, approving or legalizing
official proceedings, actions, contracts, or obligations of any kind.



   (b)   Any acts authorizing conveyance or sale of particular city
property or interests therein.



   (c)   North Carolina Session Laws 1945, chapter 931, which
authorized the city to regulate or prohibit the sale of beer and wine from
7:00 p.m. Saturday to 7:00 a.m. Monday.



   (d)   North Carolina Public-Local Laws 1941, chapter 350, providing
for an election for airport bonds.



   (e)   North Carolina Private Laws 1909, chapter 144, establishing a
sewerage system, building and enlarging schools, and improving streets in the
city.



   (f)   North Carolina Private Laws 1929, chapter 43, authorizing the
city to issue bonds for refunding its floating indebtedness.



   (g)   North Carolina Private Laws 1913, chapter 43, and North
Carolina Private Laws 1925, chapter 90, authorizing the city to issue bonds
to build and to extend, respectively, the municipal sewerage system.



   (h)   North Carolina Private Laws 1913, chapter 50, and North
Carolina Private Laws 1911, chapter 256, authorizing the city to issue bonds
for street and bridge improvements.



   (i)   North Carolina Private Laws 1935, chapter 140, validating
certain bonds and authorizing the issuance of refunding bonds.



   (j)   North Carolina Session Laws 1947, chapter 218, authorizing the
city to establish a traffic bureau by ordinance to handle certain traffic
violations within the city, and North Carolina Session Laws 1963, chapter
655, relating to violations and penalties within the jurisdiction of the
traffic bureau.



   (k)   North Carolina Session Laws 1955, chapter 1117, authorizing
the chief of the fire departments of the Towns of Rockingham, Hamlet, and
Ellerbe to seize and impound all evidence of arson which they may discover.



   (l)   North Carolina Session Laws 1955, chapter 589, and North
Carolina Session Laws 1957, chapter 748, relating to exemption from ad
valorem taxes on the property of Senior Woman’s Club, Inc., and Junior
Woman’s Club, Inc., and Calvary Baptist Church.



   (m)   North Carolina Session Laws 1963, chapter 982, authorizing the
establishment of a town liquor control store, and North Carolina Session Laws
1967, chapter 1062, relating to the allocation of the net profits of the
Hamlet board of alcoholic control.



   (n)   North Carolina Session Laws 1963, chapter 166, authorizing the
chief of police to reside outside the corporate limits of the city.



   (o)   North Carolina Session Laws 1945, chapter 948, authorizing the
city to execute a quitclaim deed to the Seaboard Air Line Railway Company.



   (p)   North Carolina Private Laws 1927, chapter 2; North Carolina
Public-Local Laws 1937, chapter 276; North Carolina Session Laws 1945,
chapter 1001; and North Carolina Session Laws 1963, chapter 538, authorizing
the city to convey real estate.



   (q)   North Carolina Session Laws 1949, chapter 102, and North
Carolina Session Laws 1955, chapter 1217, relating to the fees of the jailer
of the city.



   (r)   North Carolina Session Laws 1951, chapter 299, creating a bird
sanctuary within the territorial limits of the city.



Sec. 19.8.  Acts repealed.



   The following acts, having served the purposes for which enacted or
having been consolidated into this act, are hereby repealed:



   (a)   North Carolina Private Laws 1907, chapter 171, providing for
petitions for appointment of election officers.



   (b)   North Carolina Private Laws 1931, chapter 191, providing for
the granting of franchises without a vote of the people.



   (c)   North Carolina Session Laws 1945, chapter 449, fixing the
compensation of the judge of the Hamlet recorder’s court.



   (d)   North Carolina Session Laws, 1955, chapter 1118, providing for
clerical assistance to the solicitor of the Hamlet recorder’s court.



   (e)   North Carolina Session Laws 1965, chapter 553, relating to
compensation for the mayor and the town board.



Sec. 19.9.  Certain vested and derived rights preserved.



   No provision of this act is intended, nor shall be construed, to affect
in any way any rights or interests (whether public or private):



   (a)   Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of
which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provisions of law
repealed by this act.



   (b)   Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in
reliance upon, action heretofore taken (including the adoption of ordinances
or resolutions) pursuant to or within the scope of any provision of law so
repealed.



Sec. 19.10.  No revival of prior acts.



   No law heretofore repealed expressly or by implication, and no law
granting authority which has been exhausted, shall be revived by:



   (a)   The repeal herein of any act repealing such law, or



   (b)   Any provision of this act that disclaims an intention to
repeal or affect enumerated laws.



Sec. 19.11.  Ordinances, etc., to continue in effect.



   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this act, all existing
Hamlet ordinances and resolutions and existing rules or regulations of City
of Hamlet departments or agencies in effect at the time of the ratification
of this act shall be and continue in full force and effect until repealed,
amended or modified.



   (b)   No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or
criminal, judicial or administrative, or otherwise) pending at the effective
date of this act by or against or before the City of Hamlet or any of its
departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption
of this act.



CHAPTER 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   1-1   How Code designated and cited



   1-2   Definitions and rules of construction



   1-3   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances



   1-4   Catchlines of sections



   1-5   Severability of parts of the Code



   1-6   General penalty; continuing violations



   1-7   Ordinances and the like, not affected by Code



   1-8   Supplementation of Code



   1-9   Ordinances generally



Charter reference:



   Charter amendments, see art. III



   Claims against the city, see art. XVIII



   Corporate boundaries, see art. II



   Incorporation, see art. I



   Miscellaneous, see art. XIX



§ 1-1  HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.



   The provisions of this and the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the Code of the City of Hamlet, North Carolina,
and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the Hamlet City Code.



(1972 Code, § 1-1)



Statutory reference:



   Code of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-77



   General ordinance-making power, see G.S. § 160A-174



   Ordinance book, see G.S. § 160A-78



   Pleading and proving city ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-79



§ 1-2  DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following
definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context clearly requires
otherwise.



   BOARD OF HEALTH.  The Board of Health of Richmond County, North
Carolina, or its authorized representative.



   BOND.  When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be
sufficient.



   CITY.  The City of Hamlet, in the County of Richmond and State of
North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.



   COMPUTATION OF TIME.  In computing any period of time, the day of the
act, event, default or publication after which the designated period of time
begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed
shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or
allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
shall be excluded in the computation. A half holiday shall be considered as
other days and not as a holiday.



   COUNCIL or THE COUNCIL.  The Council of the City of Hamlet.



   COUNTY.  The County of Richmond, except as otherwise provided.



   GENDER.  Words importing the masculine gender shall include the
feminine and neuter.



   G.S.  The General Statutes of North Carolina, as amended.



   HIGHWAY.  See STREET.



   IN THE CITY.  Any territory, jurisdiction of which for the exercise of
its regulatory power has been conferred on the city by public or private law.



   JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority
of those persons or officers.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   NUMBER.  Words used in the singular includes the plural and the plural
includes the singular number.



   OATH.  Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in
which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an OATH, and in those
cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED.



   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD.  Whenever certain hours are named in this
Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be
in current use in the city.



   OWNER.  Applied to building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of a building or land.



   PERSON.  Shall include a corporation, firm, company, partnership,
association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an
individual.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes every species of property except real
property, as herein defined.



   PRECEDING; FOLLOWING.  The next before and next after, respectively.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real and personal property.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   SHALL; MAY.  The word SHALL is mandatory; the word MAY is permissive.



   SIDEWALK.  The portion of a street between the curbline, or the
lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property
line, intended for the use of pedestrians.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STREET.  The entire width between property or right-of-way lines of
every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular traffic.
The terms HIGHWAY and STREET and their cognates are synonymous.



   TENANT; OCCUPANT.  Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of that building or land, whether
alone or with others.



   TENSE.  Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.



   WRITING and WRITTEN.  Shall include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters.



(1972 Code, § 1-2)



Statutory reference:



   “City” defined, see G.S. § 160A-1



   Computation of time, see G.S. §§ 1-593, 1A-1, Rule 6(a) and 159-2



   “County” defined, see G.S. § 153A-1



   Rules of construction, see G.S. § 12-3



§ 1-3  PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as
those of the 1972 Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the 1972 Code
and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as
new enactments.



(1972 Code, § 1-3)



Statutory reference:



   Construction of amended statute, see G.S. § 12-4



§ 1-4  CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.



   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of those sections, nor as any part of the
section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any
of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.



(1972 Code, § 1-4)



Statutory reference:



   Construction of amended statute, see G.S. § 12-4



§ 1-5  SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF THE CODE.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted
by the Council without the incorporation in this Code of any unconstitutional
or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.



(1972 Code, § 1-5)



§ 1-6  GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or subsection of this Code of Ordinances for which no other penalty
is provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with the same,
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a
fine not to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days and each day
that any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances are violated shall
constitute a separate offense.



(G.S. § 14-4(a))  (1972 Code, § 1-6)  (Ord. passed 3-1-2008)



Statutory reference:



   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175



§ 1-7  ORDINANCES AND THE LIKE, NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.



   (A)   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall
be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following:



      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before
the effective date of this Code;



      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of
the city or any evidence of the city’s indebtedness;



      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the city;



      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any municipal officer
or employee or other personnel matters;



      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the city;



      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving and the like, any street or
public way;



      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance or taxing ordinance;



      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for
a stated or limited term;



      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and
assessing taxes therefor;



      (10)   Any zoning ordinance;



      (11)   Any ordinance establishing subdivision regulations or
dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;



      (12)   Any ordinance describing or extending the boundaries of
the city;



      (13)   Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing the
amount of license or privilege taxes, permit fees or other rates or charges;
and/or



      (14)   Any ordinance prescribing the charge to be paid for
water and sewer taps and connections or the rates to be paid for utility,
water or sewer service rendered by the city, and the amount of the deposit
required to ensure the payment thereof.



   (B)   All ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.



Statutory reference:



   Designated classes of ordinances may be omitted from Code, see G.S. §
160A-77



   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7



§ 1-8  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.



   (A)   (1)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this
Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the
Council.



      (2)   A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Council or adopted by
initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to
the City Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary,
replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages
shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.



   (B)   In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions
of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the
omission thereof from reprinted pages.



   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier
(meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal,
nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the
supplement insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified
Code. For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
subdivisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and
make changes in the catchlines, headings and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;



      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the
same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this division”
and the like, as the case may be, or to “§§       to       “
(inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody
the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and



      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.



Statutory reference:



   Looseleaf supplementation of Code, see G.S. § 160A-77



§ 1-9  ORDINANCES GENERALLY.



   (A)   Every ordinance amending or repealing this Code or other
ordinance and every new ordinance shall be proposed in writing, signed by the
Council member presenting the same and approved as to form by the City
Attorney.



   (B)   If the Council desires to amend any existing article or
section of this Code, the article or section shall be specifically repealed,
and a new article or section containing the desired amendment shall be
substituted in its place.



   (C)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing Code a
new chapter, article or section shall indicate, with reference to the
arrangement of this Code, the proper number of the chapter, article or
section. In addition to the indication thereof as may be contained in the
text of the proposed ordinance, the title shall be shown in concise form
above the ordinance.



   (D)   Not more than one chapter, article or section of the Code
shall be amended, repealed or ordained by any one ordinance, unless the
chapters, articles or sections are consecutive.



   (E)   Every ordinance shall be in force immediately upon its
passage, except as otherwise hereinafter provided.



(1972 Code, §§ 1-7—1-11)



CHAPTER 2:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



Article I:  In General



   2-1   Elections generally



   2-2   Nonpartisan primaries and elections



   2-3   Registration method



Article II:  Mayor and City Council



Division 1:  Generally



   2-26   Composition of governing body



   2-27   Compensation and reimbursement for expenses



Division 2:  City Council



   2-41   Powers; enacting ordinances, resolutions and the like



   2-42   Powers; consolidation of offices



   2-43   Meetings; regular



   2-44   Meetings; special



   2-45   Meetings; adjourned



   2-46   Mayor presides over meetings



   2-47   Rules of procedure; quorum



   2-48   Order of business



   2-49   Elections by ballot



   2-50   Resignation of member



   2-51   Disqualification of member



Division 3:  Mayor



   2-61   Duties



   2-62   Voting in case of tie



Article III:  City Officers



   2-86   Appointed positions



   2-87   City Manager



   2-88   City Clerk



   2-89   City Attorney



Article IV:  Boards, Commissions and Departments



Division 1:  Generally



   2-111   Alcoholic Beverage Control Board



   2-112   City Housing Authority



Division 2:  Planning Board



   2-121   Created



   2-122   Composition; terms; vacancies; compensation



   2-123   Sits as Zoning Board of Adjustment



   2-124   Organization and officers; rules; records



   2-125   Funding



   2-126   Authorized expenditures



   2-127   Powers and duties generally



   2-128   Studies of land use, population and the like



   2-129   Planning for development



   2-130   Cooperation with redevelopment agencies



   2-131   Preparation of subdivision regulations



   2-132   Review and recommendation to Council



Division 3:  Auxiliary Police



   2-145   Auxiliary Police Division



Article V:  Purchasing Apparatus, Supplies, Materials or Equipment



   2-160   Grant of authority



   2-161   Report



   2-162   Extent of authority



   2-163   No limitation of other authority



   2-164   Appropriation required



   2-165   Application of General Statutes



   2-166   Authority



Article VI:  Security Surveillance Policy



   2-180   Security surveillance policy



Charter reference:



   Administrative officers, see art. VII



   Corporate powers, see art. I



   Council-Manager form of government, see art. VI



   Mayor and City Council, see art. IV



   Purchasing and contracts, see art. XVII



Cross-reference:



   Administration of abandoned vehicle ordinance, see § 11-197



   Animal control agency, see §§ 4-32, 4-33



   Cemeteries, see ch. 6



   Emergencies, see ch. 7



   Finance and taxation, see ch. 8



   Fire Department, see §§ 9-36 through 9-43



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



   Inspection Department, see §§ 5-66 through 5-77



   Municipal lakes, parks and recreation, see ch. 12



   Public employees to obey traffic regulations, see § 11-5



   Solid waste and vegetation, see ch. 17



   Streets and sidewalks, see ch. 18



   Utilities Department, see § 21-3



   Water and sewers, see ch. 21



Statutory reference:



   Administration of Council-Manager cities, see G.S. §§ 160A-147 et seq.



   Cities and towns, see G.S. Chapter 160A



   Elections, see G.S. Chapter 163



   Local development, see G.S. Chapter 158



   Local government finance, see G.S. Chapter 159



   Mayor and Council, see G.S. §§ 160A-66 et seq.



   Oath of office, see G.S. § 11-7



   Organization and procedures of the Council, see G.S. §§ 160A-68 et
seq.



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 2-1  ELECTIONS GENERALLY.



   The city shall conduct its own municipal elections with a municipal
board of elections which is regulated by G.S. Chapter 163, and the elections
shall be conducted as regulated by the election laws contained in G.S.
Chapter 163.



§ 2-2  NONPARTISAN PRIMARIES AND ELECTIONS.



   The City Council hereby adopts and reaffirms the nonpartisan plurality
election method (type no. 1) of determining election results for municipal
elections (G.S. § 163-294).



(Res. passed 1-4-1972; Ord. 93-006, passed 5-11-1993)



Charter reference:



   Election of Councilmen; term; filing as candidates for reelection, see
§ 6.5



   Election of Mayor, see § 6.2



Statutory reference:



   Authorization, see G.S. § 160A-101(7)(b)



   Definition, see G.S. § 163-292



§ 2-3  REGISTRATION METHOD.



   A full-time registration office shall be made available for
registration of voters pursuant to method D of G.S. § 163-288.



ARTICLE II:  MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL



Division 1:  Generally



§ 2-26  COMPOSITION OF GOVERNING BODY.



   The governing body of the city shall consist of a Council of five
members, who shall be elected in accordance with the provisions of state law.



(1972 Code, § 2-6)



Charter reference:



   Composition of City Council; designation and duties of Mayor, see § 4.1



§ 2-27  COMPENSATION AND REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES.



   The compensation for the Mayor and members of the Council shall be as
follows and/or to be determined by Council from time to time:



   (A)   Mayor, $6,000 per year, payable semi-annually; and



   (B)   Each member of the Council, $4,000 per year, payable
semi-annually.



   (C)   The Mayor and each member of the Council is entitled to
reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the course of performing his or
her official duties at rates not in excess of those allowed to other city
officials and employees, or to a fixed allowance, the amount of which shall
be established by the Council, for travel and other personal expenses of
office, provided that any fixed allowance so established during a term of
office shall not be increased during such term of office.



(1972 Code, § 2-7)  (Ord. 2016-07, passed 5-24-2016)



Division 2:  City Council



§ 2-41  POWERS; ENACTING ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND THE LIKE.



   The Council shall have power to enact amendments to this Code, the
Charter, ordinances, resolutions or bylaws, for the better government of the
city, not inconsistent with the Charter or laws of the land.



(1972 Code, § 2-8)



Charter reference:



   Exercise of city powers, see § 4.9



Statutory reference:



   General ordinance-making power, see G.S. § 160A-174



§ 2-42  POWERS; CONSOLIDATION OF OFFICES.



   The Council may in its discretion consolidate any two or more offices
and assign the duties of both offices to one or more persons.



(1972 Code, § 2-9)



Charter reference:



   Consolidation of functions of certain offices, see § 7.6



§ 2-43  MEETINGS; REGULAR.



   There shall be regular meetings of the Council held at City Hall or at
another place as may be designated on the second Tuesday of each month at
7:00 p.m. unless otherwise specified, in which case proper notice shall be
given and each member of the Council shall be notified pursuant to state
statute.



(1972 Code, § 2-10)  (Ord. passed 6-14-1994)



Charter reference:



   Meetings of City Council, see § 4.7



Statutory reference:



   Council meetings, see G.S. §§ 160A-68, 160A-71



§ 2-44  MEETINGS; SPECIAL.



   (A)   The Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore or any two members of the
Council may at any time call a special Council meeting by signing a written
notice stating the time and place of the meeting and the subjects to be
considered.



   (B)   The notice shall be delivered to the Mayor and each Council
member or left at his or her usual dwelling place at least six hours before
the meeting.



(1972 Code, § 2-11)



Statutory reference:



   Council meetings, see G.S. § 160A-71



   Public notice of official meetings, see G.S.§  143-318.12



§ 2-45  MEETINGS; ADJOURNED.



   If a quorum fails to attend any regular or special meeting of the
Council or if for any reason the meeting fails to complete the transaction of
the business before the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date
prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members
present.



(1972 Code, § 2-12)



§ 2-46  MAYOR PRESIDES OVER MEETINGS.



   The Mayor, when present, shall preside at all meetings of the Council.
In case of the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall preside.



(1972 Code, § 2-13)



Charter reference:



   Composition of City Council; designation and duties of Mayor, see § 4.1



§ 2-47  RULES OF PROCEDURE; QUORUM.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, the procedure of the Council
shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order.



   (B)   A majority of the total members of the Council shall
constitute a quorum.



(1972 Code, § 2-14)



Charter reference:



   Quorum; voting, see § 4.8



   Rules and journal of proceedings, see § 4.5



§ 2-48  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   The order of business at all regular Council meetings shall be
as set forth in the published agenda.



   (B)   If the Council directs any matter to be the special business
of a future meeting, the same shall have precedence over all other business
at the meeting.



   (C)   No proposition shall be entertained by the Mayor until it has
been seconded, and every proposition, when required by the Mayor or any
member of the Council, shall be reduced to writing.



(1972 Code, § 2-15)



Charter reference:



   Order of business, see § 4.5



§ 2-49  ELECTIONS BY BALLOT.



   All elections by the Council shall be by ballot, if required by any two
members present.



(1972 Code, § 2-16)



§ 2-50  RESIGNATION OF MEMBER.



   Resignation of any Council member shall be in writing, and the
resignation shall lie on the table until the next regular meeting unless
considered by unanimous consent.



(1972 Code, § 2-17)



§ 2-51  DISQUALIFICATION OF MEMBER.



   If any member of the Council or the Mayor moves his or her residence
from the city, his or her office shall be declared vacant at once.



(1972 Code, § 2-18)



Division 3:  Mayor



§ 2-61  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to:



   (A)   Act as ceremonial head of the city government;



   (B)   Preside over the meetings of the Council;



   (C)   Sign all contracts, ordinances, resolutions, papers or
writings authorized by the city; and



   (D)   Appoint special committees and outline their powers and duties
as he or she deems necessary to properly care for the affairs of the city.



(1972 Code, § 2-19)



Charter reference:



   Mayor generally, see § 4.1



§ 2-62  VOTING IN CASE OF TIE.



   When there is an equal division of the Council upon any question or in
the election of officers, the Mayor may vote to break the tie but shall have
no vote under any other circumstances.



(1972 Code, § 2-20)



ARTICLE III:  CITY OFFICERS



§ 2-86  APPOINTED POSITIONS.



   (A)   The City Council shall appoint the following city officers and
employees:



      (1)   City Manager;



      (2)   City Clerk; and



      (3)   City Attorney.



   (B)   These officers shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.



(1972 Code, § 2-23)



Charter reference:



   Administrative officers, see art. VII



   Police, see art. XIV



Statutory reference:



   General powers of Mayor, see G.S. §§ 160A-67, 160A-69



   Municipal officers, see G.S. §§ 160A-59 et seq.



§ 2-87  CITY MANAGER.



   The City Manager shall be the chief administrator of the city. He or
she shall be responsible to the Council for administering all municipal
affairs placed in his or her charge by it, and shall have the following
powers and duties.



   (A)   He or she shall appoint and suspend or remove all city
officers and employees not elected by the people, and whose appointment or
removal is not otherwise provided for by law, except the City Attorney, in
accordance with general personnel rules, regulations, policies or ordinances
as the Council may adopt.



   (B)   He or she shall direct and supervise the administration of all
departments, offices and agencies of the city, subject to the general
direction and control of the Council, except as otherwise provided by law.



   (C)   He or she shall attend all meetings of the Council and
recommend any measures that he or she deems expedient.



   (D)   He or she shall see that all laws of the state, the City
Charter and the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the Council are
faithfully executed within the city.



   (E)   He or she shall prepare and submit the annual budget and
capital program to the Council.



   (F)   He or she shall annually submit to the Council and make
available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the city as of the end of the fiscal year.



   (G)   He or she shall make any other reports that the Council may
require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies
subject to his or her direction and control.



   (H)   He or she shall perform any other duties that may be required
or authorized by the Council.



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-148



§ 2-88  CITY CLERK.



   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to:



   (A)   Act as Clerk to the City Council and, as such, keep a complete
and accurate account of all proceedings of all meetings in a book especially
provided for this purpose by the Council; and



   (B)   Perform other duties as the Council may require.



(1972 Code, § 2-24)



Charter reference:



   Boundary map in City Clerk’s office, see § 2.1



   City Clerk, see § 7.3



   City Finance Director, see § 7.4



Statutory reference:



   Ordinance book, see G.S. § 160A-78



   City Clerk, see G.S. §§ 160A-171, 160A-172



§ 2-89  CITY ATTORNEY.



   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to:



   (A)   Prosecute and defend suits for and against the city;



   (B)   Advise the Mayor, City Manager, Council or any other officer
of the city in regard to matters connected with the city’s business;



   (C)   Attend meetings of the Council when requested to do so by it;



   (D)   Draw those deeds, contracts, bonds, notes and other legal
papers as may be required for the proper conduct of the city’s business; and



   (E)   Approve all ordinances as to form before their introduction.



(1972 Code, § 2-26)



Charter reference:



   City Attorney, see § 7.2



Statutory reference:



   City Attorney, see G.S. § 160A-173



ARTICLE IV:  BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS



Division 1:  Generally



§ 2-111  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL BOARD.



   The Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, also referred to as the ABC
Board, is hereby established as a body of five members. The Board shall
provide for its own organization and shall provide the City Council with a
written description of duties and responsibilities of the Board. The terms on
this Board shall be for three years.



(Ord. 2011-06, passed 9-13-2011; Ord. 5-2012, passed 6-12-2012)



§ 2-112  CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY.



   The City Housing Authority is hereby established as a body of five
members. The members on this Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, and the
terms shall be for five years. The Board shall provide for its own
organization and shall provide the City Council with a written description of
the duties and responsibilities of the Board.



Division 2:  Planning Board



§ 2-121  CREATED.



   A City Planning Board is hereby created pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-361
et seq. and in accordance with and as restricted by the other laws of the
state.



(1972 Code, § 2-27)



Charter reference:



   Zoning, see art. XI



Statutory reference:



   Interlocal cooperation, see G.S. §§ 160A-460 et seq.



   Planning and regulation of development, see §§ G.S. 160A-360 et seq.



§ 2-122  COMPOSITION; TERMS; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Planning Board shall consist of four members who are
citizens of the city and shall be appointed by the Council and three members
that are residents of the extraterritorial area appointed subject to the
provisions of G.S. § 160A-362. Two alternate members shall also be appointed.



   (B)   Board members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three
years, with initial appointments being as follows: three members shall hold
an appointment for three years, three members shall hold an appointment for
two years, and one member shall hold an appointment for one year.



   (C)   Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of the
term shall be filled by the Council as they occur for the period of the
unexpired term. Faithful attendance of meetings is considered as a
prerequisite for the maintenance of membership on the Board, and the
unexcused absence of any member of the Board for as many as three consecutive
regularly appointed meetings shall constitute a forfeiture of the appointment
of the member. The Council shall have the right to declare the office of the
member vacant and appoint a successor for the unexpired term.



   (D)   All members of the Planning Board are to have equal rights,
duties and responsibilities.



   (E)   Appointed Planning Board members shall be compensated $50 per
meeting or such other amount as determined by the Council.



(Ord. passed 10-11-1977; Ord. 2016-08, passed 5-26-2016; Ord. passed
12-11-2018)



§ 2-123  SITS AS ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   The Planning Board shall serve as the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



Editor’s note:



   The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the City Clerk.



§ 2-124  ORGANIZATION AND OFFICERS; RULES; RECORDS.



   Within 30 days after appointment, the Planning Board shall meet and
elect a Chairperson, a Secretary and those other officers as it may
determine. The term of the Chairperson and other officers shall be for one
year with eligibility for reelection. The Board shall adopt rules for the
transaction of business, and shall keep a complete permanent record of
members’ attendance, of resolutions, notations of its discussions, findings
and recommendations. These records shall be a public record and subject to
the inspection of any citizen of the city at any time during office hours.
The records shall be kept in a permanent minute record book, and shall be
typewritten and approved at the next subsequent regular meeting after
recording.



(1972 Code, § 2-29)



§ 2-125  FUNDING.



   The Planning Board may receive any appropriations that are made by the
Council and any gift, grant or donation from any source, made under any
conditions acceptable to the Board and in accordance with law. The Board may
apply for any funds available from the state or from the federal government,
either by way of gifts, grants or loans. However, no obligation regarding any
financial assistance shall be binding upon the city until it has been fully
approved by the Council.



(1972 Code, § 2-30)



Cross-reference:



   Finance and taxation, see ch. 8



§ 2-126  AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES.



   The expenditures of the Planning Board, exclusive of the proceeds from
gifts, grants or other receipts made unconditionally to the Board and for
which the city is not in any way responsible, shall be in the amounts
appropriated for those purposes by the Council and no other. No indebtedness
for which the city shall be liable in any manner shall be contracted or
incurred by the Board unless an authorized appropriation is made by the
Council for those purposes or specifically approved by the Council as
authorized by law. The Board may accept gifts or donations of any kind of
property and use the same for any lawful purpose which, in the judgment of
the Board, is consistent with the best interest of the planning program.



(1972 Code, § 2-31)



§ 2-127  POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.



   (A)   The Planning Board shall have all of the power and authority
conferred upon the organization by the laws of the state and the laws of the
United States not inconsistent with the Charter and other laws relating to
the city. Any action of the Board shall be subject to review, acceptance,
rejection or modification by the Council at any time after any
recommendations are recorded and approved.



   (B)   The Planning Board shall act as an advisory agency for the
Council.



(1972 Code, § 2-32)



§ 2-128  STUDIES OF LAND USE, POPULATION AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   The Board shall make a careful study of the present conditions
and probable future development of the city and those environs as it is
authorized or may hereafter be authorized to operate in.



   (B)   The studies may include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Land use surveys; population studies;



      (2)   Economic base studies;



      (3)   Schools, park and recreation studies;



      (4)   Traffic and parking studies;



      (5)   Urban renewal studies; and



      (6)   Any other study of any nature whatsoever that may be
consistent with better planning for the city.



(1972 Code, § 2-33)



§ 2-129  PLANNING FOR DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   The Planning Board shall formulate and maintain a
comprehensive plan of the city and its environs for the purpose of achieving
a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city, which would
promote, in accordance with present or future needs, the safety, morals,
order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of its citizens;
efficiency and economy in the process of development; convenience of traffic;
safety from fire or other dangers; adequate light and air; healthful and
convenient distribution of population; provision of adequate open spaces;
good civic design and arrangement; wise and efficient expenditure of public
funds; adequate provision for utilities; and for other matters pertaining to
the public interests and requirements.



   (B)   The comprehensive plan should consist of a number of parts
which may include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   A land use plan;



      (2)   A utilities plan;



      (3)   A plan for economic development;



      (4)   A recreation plan;



      (5)   A community school plan;



      (6)   A community facilities plan; and



      (7)   Any other feature that may be considered necessary and
desirable.



(1972 Code, § 2-34)



§ 2-130  COOPERATION WITH REDEVELOPMENT AGENCIES.



   The Planning Board shall cooperate with all redevelopment agencies and
shall review all redevelopment plans within 45 days after the receipt of any
plans submitted to the Board. The Board shall certify to those agencies its
recommendations on the same, either for approval, rejection or modification;
if modifications are recommended, they shall be specified to the proper
authorities.



(1972 Code, § 2-35)



§ 2-131  PREPARATION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.



   The Planning Board may prepare subdivision regulations governing the
subdivision of land within the city and the environs as it has or hereafter
may have any jurisdiction over, and present the same to the Council for its
consideration and possible adoption.



(1972 Code, § 2-36)



§ 2-132  REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION TO COUNCIL.



   The Planning Board may review and make recommendations to the Council
on the extent, location and design of all public structures and facilities;
on the acquisition and disposal of public properties; upon the opening,
abandonment, widening, extension, narrowing or other change to streets or
other public ways; and on the construction, extension, expansion or
abandonment of utilities, whether publicly or privately owned. However, any
review and recommendations shall be adopted by the Council only in case it
sees fit to adopt the same, the final approving authority in all cases to
remain with the Council.



(1972 Code, § 2-37)



Division 3:  Auxiliary Police



§ 2-145  AUXILIARY POLICE DIVISION.



   There is hereby established within the City Police Department, as a
division thereof, an Auxiliary Police Division. The Auxiliary Police Division
shall be a volunteer organization, whose members shall serve without
compensation, composed of as many members as may from time to time be
determined by the Chief of Police and approved by the City Manager.



(Ord. passed 11-14-2006)



ARTICLE V:  PURCHASING APPARATUS, SUPPLIES, MATERIALS OR EQUIPMENT



§ 2-160  GRANT OF AUTHORITY.



   Subject to the restrictions and conditions hereinafter provided, when
purchasing, apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment for use by the city,
in addition to that authority as may be provided by law and/or otherwise
delegated by the City Council, the City Manager or his or her designee shall
have the authority to:



   (A)   Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and/or specifications
setting forth a complete description of the item(s) to be purchased and the
characteristics, features and/or requirements therefor;



   (B)   Include, where appropriate, in specifications for the item(s)
to be purchased an opportunity for bidders to purchase as trade-in specified
personal property owned by the city;



   (C)   Advertise, or otherwise secure bids, for those item(s), if
required under applicable law;



   (D)   Award contracts for the purchase of item(s) and, where
applicable, award contracts for the purchase of the item(s) and the sale of
trade-in property;



   (E)   Reject bids;



   (F)   Readvertise to receive bids;



   (G)   Waive bid bond or deposit requirements;



   (H)   Waive performance and payment bond requirements; and



   (I)   Execute and deliver the purchase contract(s).



(Ord. passed 2-10-1998)



§ 2-161  REPORT.



   At the first meeting of the City Council following the award of any
contract(s) pursuant to this article, the City Manager or his or her designee
shall submit a report to the City Council summarizing the bids received and
the contract(s) awarded. The report shall be included in the minutes of the
meeting at which it is received.



(Ord. passed 2-10-1998)



§ 2-162  EXTENT OF AUTHORITY.



   Except in cases of sole source purchases pursuant to G.S. § 143-129(f)
and cases of purchases from established contracts pursuant to G.S. §
143-129(g) unless otherwise provided by law, the provisions of this article
shall apply to the purchase of apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment
requiring the estimated expenditure of municipal funds in an amount not to
exceed $30,000 for any one item or group of similar items.



OR



   Except in cases of sole source purchases pursuant to G.S. §
143-129(g), unless otherwise provided by law, the provisions of this article
shall apply to the purchase of all apparatus, supplies, materials or
equipment required for use by the city.



(Ord. passed 2-10-1998)



§ 2-163  NO LIMITATION OF OTHER AUTHORITY.



   The provisions of this article are not intended to limit, restrict or
revoke, in any manner, authority otherwise granted and/or delegated to the
City Manager or his or her designee by statute, law or action of the City
Council.



(Ord. passed 2-10-1998)



§ 2-164  APPROPRIATION REQUIRED.



   No purchase shall be made by the City Manager or his or her designee
under authority of this article unless an appropriation for that purpose has
been authorized in the annual budget, or by supplemental appropriation or
budget appropriation amendment duly adopted by the City Council.



(Ord. passed 2-10-1998)



§ 2-165  APPLICATION OF GENERAL STATUTES.



   In acting pursuant to the authority delegated by this article, the City
Manager or his or her designee shall comply with the requirements of G.S.
Chapter 143, Article 8, as from time to time amended, modified, supplemented,
revised or superseded, to the same extent as would have otherwise applied to
the City Council.



(Ord. passed 2-10-1998)



§ 2-166  AUTHORITY.



   This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S. §
143-129(a).



(Ord. passed 2-10-1998)



ARTICLE VI:  SECURITY SURVEILLANCE POLICY



§ 2-180  SECURITY SURVEILLANCE POLICY.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the policy of the city to place security
cameras on its property where necessary and appropriate to aid in protecting
public safety and as a deterrent to crime. All video monitoring must be
conducted in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, and in a manner
that balances the city’s duty to promote a safe environment with the
privacy rights held by city staff, employees, and residents.



   (B)   Guidelines and responsibilities.



      (1)   The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, will
identify and recommend locations throughout the city where security cameras
would be necessary and appropriate; the Chief of Police will also regularly
inspect all security cameras to ensure functionality and compliance.



      (2)   Recorded security camera video will be stored in a
secure data storage system that can be accessed only by personnel within the
Hamlet Police Department.



      (3)   Recorded security camera video will be retained in
accordance with G.S. §§ 132-1.4 and 132-1.4A, and the North Carolina Public
Records Retention Schedule.



      (4)   Altering of security camera video is not permitted. The
only exceptions are enhancing image quality for investigative purposes or
blurring features to protect an individual’s privacy.



      (5)   Requests for external review or release of security
camera video must be submitted in writing to the Chief of Police. who will
consult with the City Manager and City Attorney.



(Ord. passed 12-11-2018)



CHAPTER 3:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   3-1   Unfortified wine; sale permitted



   3-2   Unfortified wine; license required



   3-3   Unfortified wine; privilege tax



   3-4   Unfortified wine; applicability of state regulations



   3-5   Drinking in public places



Cross-reference:



   Licenses and business regulations, see ch. 10



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



Statutory reference:



   Alcoholic Beverages, see G.S. Chapter 18B



§ 3-1  UNFORTIFIED WINE; SALE PERMITTED.



   Any qualified person may sell at retail unfortified wines (wines
containing less than 17% alcohol), either on premises or off premises,
provided that the person meets the qualifications set forth in G.S. §§
18B-100 et seq.



(1972 Code, § 5-17)



Statutory reference:



   Retail wine license, see § G.S. 105-113.77



§ 3-2  UNFORTIFIED WINE; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Before any person engages in the business of selling unfortified wines
(wines containing less than 17% alcohol), the person shall apply to the
Council for a license to make the sale and shall comply with state law and
regulations in regard thereto.



(1972 Code, § 5-18)



§ 3-3  UNFORTIFIED WINE; PRIVILEGE TAX.



   Taxes shall be levied for the privilege of selling unfortified wines
off the premises and for the privilege of selling unfortified wines on the
premises, as provided in G.S. § 105-113.77.



(1972 Code, § 5-19)



§ 3-4  UNFORTIFIED WINE; APPLICABILITY OF STATE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Every person who applies for a license to sell unfortified
wines shall meet all of the requirements of state law and especially the
regulations of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in regard
thereto.



   (B)   The license issued under this section shall be subject to all
the rules and regulations of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission
and state law in regard thereto.



(1972 Code, § 5-20)



§ 3-5  DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   Generally.  No person shall consume malt beverages or
unfortified wine on any property owned or occupied by the city.



(1972 Code, § 15-11)



   (B)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Consumption of beer and wine is permitted in areas
authorized by permit in § 18-14 of this Code.



      (2)   Malt beverages and unfortified wine may be sold and
consumed as part of any event taking place on city property, provided that
the person or group sponsoring the event obtains approval to do so from the
city prior to the date of the event. Any request for permission to sell
and/or consume alcohol on city property shall be submitted in writing at
least ten days prior to consideration of the matter by the City Manager. The
request shall include, at a minimum, the following information:



         (a)   The type of event being held;



         (b)   The date, time, and length of the event;



         (c)   The types of beverages proposed to be sold and/or
consumed;



         (d)   The designation of one or more responsible persons
who shall be onsite during the entire event, including a cell phone number at
which said person(s) may be contacted at any time during the event. The
responsible person shall be a representative of the applicant and shall have
the authority to discontinue alcohol sales and/or consumption at any time
during the event;



         (e)   A description of the approximate area where
alcohol may be sold and/or consumed during the event, and an affirmation that
alcoholic beverages will not be consumed outside of the designated area;



         (f)   If the event is to be open to the public, access
to the event area shall be controlled, and the event sponsor shall affirm
that it will be responsible for checking the identification of patrons prior
to selling or serving alcohol; and



         (g)   The event sponsor shall affirm that prior to the
beginning of the event it will obtain all necessary State or other permits
relating to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. The Hamlet Chief
of Police shall review all requests to sell and/or serve alcohol on city
property and shall provide a recommendation to the City Manager as to each
request.



(Ord. passed 1-9-2001; Ord. 2017-07, passed 10-10-2017; Ord. passed
11-13-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Manufacture, sale and the like, forbidden except as expressly
authorized, see G.S. § 18B-102



   Public intoxication, see G.S. §§ 14-443 et seq.



   Purpose of alcoholic beverage law, see G.S. § 18B-100



   Sale, possession and consumption, see G.S. §§ 18B-300 et seq.



CHAPTER 4:  ANIMALS



Section



Article I:  In General



   4-1   Birds; sanctuary established



   4-2   Birds; shooting, trapping and the like prohibited



   4-3   Restrictions on keeping hogs, fowl



   4-4   Cleanliness of stables and the like



   4-5   Riding or driving animals over sidewalks



   4-6   Dead animals



   4-7   Animals at special events



   4-8   Tethering of animals prohibited



Article II:  Animal Control



   4-31   Definitions



   4-32   Animal Control Agency; creation



   4-33   Animal Control Agency; duties



   4-34   Keeping of dogs



   4-35   Responsibility of owners



   4-36   Impounding stray dogs; redemption, sale or destruction;
disposition of funds



   4-37   Barking dogs



   4-38   Teasing and molesting



   4-39   Maintenance of dog lots, pens and the like



   4-40   Keeping stray dogs; requirements, failure to surrender



   4-41   Injuring dogs; notice required



   4-42   Impounded animals; notification of owner



   4-43   Rabies control; reporting of dog bites, observation period



   4-44   Records



   4-45   Potentially dangerous dogs and dangerous dogs



   4-46   Violations; interference with animal control officers



   4-47   Penalty



   4-48   Fines



Cross-reference:



   Dogs in cemetery, see § 6-10



   Licenses and business regulations, see ch. 10



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



   Noise, see ch. 13



   Parades, picketing and demonstrations, see ch. 15



   Stable and kennel manure, see § 17-40



   Traffic rules for animal-drawn vehicles, see § 11-7



Statutory reference:



   Abatement of public health or safety nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-193



   Abuse of animals, see G.S. § 160A-182



   Animal shelter, see G.S. § 160A-493



   Animal taxes, see G.S. § 160A-212



   Bird sanctuaries, see G.S. § 160A-188



   Cruelty to animals, see G.S. §§ 14-360 et seq.



   Disposition of dead domesticated animals, see G.S. § 106-403



   Dogs, see G.S. §§ 67-1 et seq.



   Livestock law, see G.S. §§ 68-15 et seq.



   Noise regulations, see G.S. § 160A-184



   Possession or harboring of dangerous animals, see G.S. § 160A-187



   Privilege license taxes, see G.S. § 160A-211



   Protection of animals, see G.S. §§ 19A-1 et seq.



   Rabies, see G.S. §§ 130A-184 et seq.



   Regulating and licensing businesses, trades and the like, see G.S. §
160A-194



   Regulation of domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-186



   Regulation of the use of pesticides, see G.S. §§ 143-440 et seq.



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 4-1  BIRDS; SANCTUARY ESTABLISHED.



   The entire area within the city limits is hereby designated as a bird
sanctuary.



(1972 Code, § 15-6)



Statutory reference:



   Bird sanctuaries, see G.S. § 160A-188



§ 4-2  BIRDS; SHOOTING, TRAPPING AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot, take,
kill or molest in any manner any bird or wildfowl or shall rob bird nests or
wildfowl nests; provided, that if starlings or similar birds are found to be
congregating in such numbers in a particular locality as to constitute a
nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health
authorities, the health authorities shall meet with the representatives of
the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club or humane society, after having
given at least three days’ actual notice of the time and place of the
meeting to the representatives of the clubs.



   (B)   If as a result of the meeting no satisfactory alternative is
found to abate the nuisance, the birds may be destroyed in those numbers and
in a manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the
supervision of the City Manager.



   (C)   Subsections (A) and (B) above do not protect any birds classed
as a pest under G.S. Chapter 113, Article 22A (G.S. §§ 113-300.1 et seq.)
and the Structural Pest Control Act of North Carolina of 1955 (G.S. §§
106-65.22 et seq.) or the State Pesticide Law of 1971 (G.S. §§ 143-434 et
seq.).



   (D)   Subsections (A) and (B) do not limit the authority of any
person holding a valid permit issued by the State Wildlife Resources
Commission under G.S. § 113-274(c)(1a) or under any other license or permit
of the Wildlife Resources Commission specifically made valid for use in
taking birds within city limits.



(1972 Code, §§ 15-7, 15-8)



§ 4-3  RESTRICTIONS ON KEEPING HOGS, FOWL.



   No person shall keep any hogs or fowl within the city limits.



(1972 Code, § 3-7)  (Ord. passed 2-17-1976)



Statutory reference:



   Feeding garbage to swine, see G.S. §§ 106-405.1 et seq.



§ 4-4  CLEANLINESS OF STABLES AND THE LIKE.



   Every stable and place where cattle, horses or other animals are kept
shall be maintained at all times in a clean and healthful condition.



(1972 Code, § 3-8)  (Ord. passed 2-17-1976)



§ 4-5  RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS OVER SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall drive or ride any animal, whether attached to a vehicle
or not, over any sidewalk.



(1972 Code, § 3-9)  (Ord. passed 2-17-1976)



Cross-reference:



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



   Streets and sidewalks, see ch. 18



§ 4-6  DEAD ANIMALS.



   No person shall permit the carcass of any dead animal to remain on
premises owned or controlled by him or her, nor shall any person deposit the
carcass of any dead animal upon any street or the premises of another person.



(1972 Code, § 11-2)



§ 4-7  ANIMALS AT SPECIAL EVENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to take an animal into or
allow the animal to enter or remain within the boundaries of a festival,
concert or other public gathering approved by the City Council as a city
sponsored or approved event. The event boundary shall include any area that
is part of the event and shall include any public street, sidewalks or other
publicly owned area within the confines of such event.



   (B)   The following animals are exempt from the prohibitions
contained in division (A) above:



      (1)   Service animals assisting persons who are physically
impaired;



      (2)   Animals under the control of on-duty law enforcement
personnel; and



      (3)   Animals that are part of an authorized exhibit or
attraction approved by the event organizers.



(Ord. passed 4-12-2016)



§ 4-8  TETHERING OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to chain, tie, fasten, or otherwise tether any
animal to a stationary object such as trees, posts, fences, and the like.
Animals shall be allowed to be on a running length of tether if they have a
proper fitting collar, the tether is at least four times the length of the
animal’s body, and the animal has access to proper food, water, and shelter.



(Ord. passed 11-9-2010)



ARTICLE II:  ANIMAL CONTROL



§ 4-31  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   ANIMAL CONTROL REVIEW BOARD.  The City Manager and the Police Chief
shall also serve as the ANIMAL CONTROL REVIEW BOARD in accordance with G.S.
§ 67-4.1(c).



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  A place provided and operated by the county for the
restraint, care and disposition of animals.



   AT LARGE.  Off the premises of the owner, and not under control either
by leash, cord or chain, or without the immediate and effective control of
the owner or other responsible person.



   CONTROL.  Within 50 feet of the owner and not on private property of
others.



   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:



      (1)   Without provocation, has killed or inflicted severe
injury on a person; or



      (2)   Is determined by the animal control officer or Animal
Control Board to be potentially dangerous because the dog has engaged in one
or more of the behaviors listed in the definition of “potentially dangerous
dog” below; or



      (3)   Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the
purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting.



   DOG.  Both male and female dogs over the age of four months.



   OWNER.  Any person or legal entity that has a possessory property
right in a dog. For the purposes of this article, the head of the household
shall be deemed to be the OWNER in respect to any dog or dogs owned, kept or
harbored by any person residing in the household and kept on the premises.



   OWNER'S REAL PROPERTY.  Any real property owned or leased by the owner
of the dog, but does not include any public right-of-way or a common area of
a condominium, apartment complex, or townhouse development.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.  A dog that the person or Board designated
by the county or municipal authority responsible for animal control
determines to have:



      (1)   Inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in broken
bones, disfiguring lacerations, or required cosmetic surgery or
hospitalization; or



      (2)   Killed or inflicted severe injury upon a domestic animal
when not on the owner’s real property; or



      (3)   Approached a person when not on the owner’s property
in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack.



   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury that results in broken bones,
disfiguring lacerations, or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization.



   VICIOUS DOG.  Any dog which has bitten one or more persons without
provocation, or one in which a propensity to attack humans exists and the
propensity is known or ought to reasonably be known to the owner.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



Cross-reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



Statutory reference:



   Confinement of biting dogs and cats, notice to local health director,
report by physician, see G.S. § 130A-196



   Dangerous dogs, see G.S. §§ 67-41 through 67.4.5



   Infected dogs and cats to be destroyed, protection of vaccinated dogs
and cats, see G.S. § 130A-197



   Rabies, see G.S. §§ 130A-184 et seq.



   Vaccination of dogs and cats, see G.S. §§ 130A-185, 130A-193



§ 4-32  ANIMAL CONTROL AGENCY; CREATION.



   There is hereby created an Animal Control Division for the city, which
shall consist of a(an) animal control officer(s) within the city’s Police
Department. Each animal control officer shall work under the supervision of
the Police Chief, or his or her designee.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



§ 4-33  ANIMAL CONTROL AGENCY; DUTIES.



   The Animal Control Division shall be charged with the responsibility of:



   (A)   Enforcement of the city laws, ordinances and resolutions
relating to cats and dogs, or to the care, custody and control of animals;



   (B)   Cooperation with the county agencies in the enforcement of the
laws of the state with regard to dogs and to the confinement and leashing of
dangerous animals. Reference is particularly made to the state laws as set
out and contained in G.S. §§ 67-1 through 67-18 and 130A-184 et seq.; and



   (C)   Investigations of reported and observed cruelty or animal
abuse with regard to cats, dogs and other animals, within the city limits,
pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 14-360.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



§ 4-34  KEEPING OF DOGS.



   (A)   Dangerous dogs.  It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep
any dangerous dog within the city limits.



   (B)   Running at large.  It shall be unlawful for any owner to
allow any dog of his or her to run at large within the city limits. When
walking dogs, they must be under leash or control, and the owner shall not
permit the dog to enter on or disturb in any manner the property of others
even though under leash.



   (C)   Female dogs in heat.  It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any female dog in heat to keep the same within the city limits during that
period, unless confined to the premises of the owner or other person with
that person’s consent.



   (D)   Dogs creating nuisances.  It shall be unlawful for any owner
to keep on his or her lot or premises any dog or dogs that result in
unsanitary conditions, or that bark, howl, fight or make other noises as to
disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the general public, and
result in a neighborhood or public nuisance. Failure to abate the same upon
warning from the Chief of Police, or his or her duly authorized
representative, or the an animal control officer, will be a misdemeanor
subject to punishment as indicated in § 1-6.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Permitting bitch at large, see G.S. § 67-2



   Permitting dogs to run at large at night, see § G.S. 67-12



§ 4-35  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.



   Owners of dogs are responsible for the acts of their dogs. The owner of
any dog who commits a nuisance upon the property of another person, or who
damages another person’s property or person, is fully responsible and
accountable for these acts.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 4-36  IMPOUNDING STRAY DOGS; REDEMPTION, SALE OR DESTRUCTION; DISPOSITION
OF FUNDS.



   (A)   Any dog within the city without an owner, turned in as
provided in § 4-40, or any dog running at large shall be taken by the animal
control officer and confined in the animal shelter controlled by the county
for a period established by the county for redemption by the owner.



   (B)   Complete and accurate records of all activities is the
responsibility of the county as indicated in paragraph IV of the Richmond
County Rabies Control Program, September 9, 1975.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 4-37  BARKING DOGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any dog owner to keep or have within the city
a dog that habitually or repeatedly barks in a manner or to an extent that it
is a public nuisance as defined in § 4-34.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 4-38  TEASING AND MOLESTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, molest, bait or in any
way bother any dog not belonging to him or her or legally under his or her
control.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Cruelty to animals, see G.S. §§ 14-360 et seq.



§ 4-39  MAINTENANCE OF DOG LOTS, PENS AND THE LIKE.



   Every person who owns or maintains any pen, lot, shelter or other place
where dogs are kept shall maintain same in a clean, sanitary condition which
precludes drifting of odors beyond boundaries of his or her own property and
to include providing shelter from inclement weather for the animal(s).



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 4-40  KEEPING STRAY DOGS; REQUIREMENTS, FAILURE TO SURRENDER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city knowingly and
intentionally to harbor, feed, keep in possession by confinement or otherwise
any dog which does not belong to him or her, unless he or she has, within 48
hours from the time the dog came into his or her possession, notified the
Police Department. Upon receiving the notice, the animal control officer(s)
may take the dog and place it in the shelter, record same and shall deal with
it as provided in § 4-36, and attempt to find the owner.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 4-41  INJURING DOGS; NOTICE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person injuring a dog, by running over or
into same with an automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle to fail to
notify, as soon as is reasonably possible, the owner or the Police Department.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 4-42  IMPOUNDED ANIMALS; NOTIFICATION OF OWNER.



   Immediately upon impounding an animal from the city, the animal shelter
personnel shall attempt to notify the owner by telephone and inform him or
her of the conditions whereby the animal may be redeemed.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 4-43  RABIES CONTROL; REPORTING OF DOG BITES, OBSERVATION PERIOD.



   (A)   Notice of bite.  When a person has been bitten by an animal
required to be vaccinated by state law, the person or parent, guardian or
person standing in loco parentis of the person, and the person owning the
animal or in control or possession of the animal shall notify the animal
control officer and the county health director immediately and give the name
and address of the person bitten and the owner of the animal. If the animal
that bites a person is a stray or feral animal, the animal control officer
shall make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner of the animal. If the
owner cannot be identified within 72 hours of the event, the county health
director may authorize the animal be euthanized, and the head of the animal
shall be immediately sent to the State Laboratory of Public Health for rabies
diagnosis. If the event occurs on a weekend or state holiday, the time period
for owner identification shall be extended 24 hours.



   (B)   Physician report. A physician who attends a person bitten by
an animal known to be a potential carrier of rabies shall report the incident
within 24 hours to the animal control officer and the county health director.
The report must include the name, age, and sex of the person.



   (C)   Confinement. As required by G.S. §§ 130A-196 and 130A-198, a
person who owns or has possession of an animal suspected of having rabies
shall immediately notify the animal control officer and the county health
director, and shall securely confine the animal in a place designated by the
health director. The animal shall be confined for a period of ten days.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Rabies control, see G.S. §§ 130A-196 through 130A-198



§ 4-44  RECORDS.



   It shall be the duty of the county animal control officer(s) to keep,
or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records as outlined in paragraph
IV of the County Rabies Control Program.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 4-45  POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS AND DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   Determination. The animal control officer shall determine when
a dog is “potentially dangerous” or “dangerous,” as defined in §
4-31.



   (B)   Precautions against attacks by dangerous dogs.



      (1)   It is unlawful for an owner to:



         (a)   Leave a dangerous dog unattended on the owner’s
real property, unless the dog is confined indoors, in a securely enclosed and
locked pen, or in another structure designed to restrain the dog;



         (b)   Permit a dangerous dog to go beyond the owner’s
real property, unless the dog is leashed and muzzled or is otherwise securely
restrained and muzzled.



      (2)   Transfer of ownership. If the owner of a dangerous dog
transfers ownership or possession of the dog to another person (as defined in
G.S. § 12-3(6)), the owner shall provide written notice to:



         (a)   The animal control officer, stating the name,
street address and mailing address of the new owner or possessor of the dog;
and



         (b)   The person taking ownership or possession of the
dog, specifying the dog’s dangerous behavior and the animal control
officer’s determination.



      (3)   Per G.S. § 67-4.2, violation of this subsection 4-45(B)
is a Class 3 misdemeanor.



   (C)   Penalty for attacks by dangerous dogs. Per G.S. § 67-4.3, the
owner of a dangerous dog that attacks a person and causes physical injuries
requiring medical treatment in excess of $100 shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.



   (D)   Strict liability. Per G.S. § 67-4.4., the owner of a
dangerous dog shall be strictly liable in civil damages for any injuries or
property damage the dog inflicts upon a person, his or her property, or
another animal.



   (E)   The provisions of this § 4-45 do not apply to:



      (1)   A dog being used by a law enforcement officer to carry
out the law enforcement officer’s official duties;



      (2)   A dog being used in a lawful hunt;



      (3)   A dog, where the injury or damage inflicted by the dog
was sustained by a domestic animal, while the dog was working as a hunting
dog, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of, or under the
control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a species or
type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog; or



      (4)   A dog, where the injury inflicted by the dog was
sustained by a person who, at the time of the injury, was committing a
willful trespass or other tort, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the
dog, had tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog, or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.



   (F)   Notice and right to appeal.  Before a dog may be considered
potentially dangerous, the animal control officer must notify the owner of
the dog, in writing, that the officer believes the dog to be potentially
dangerous. The written notice must give the reasons for the determination.
The owner may appeal the determination by filing written objections with the
Animal Control Review Board within three days of receipt of the notice. The
owner may file written objections by delivering them to the animal control
officer, who shall then transmit the objections to the Board.



   (G)   Animal Control Review Board. The Board shall schedule a
hearing within ten days of the filing of the objections. The hearing shall be
quasi-judicial in nature, and the burden shall at all times be on the owner
to prove that the decision of the animal control officer should be reversed
or modified.



   (H)   Appeal to Superior Court.  The owner or the city may appeal
the final decision of the Animal Control Review Board to the Richmond County
Superior Court, by filing a notice of appeal and a petition for review within
ten days of the issuance of the Animal Control Review Board’s final written
decision. Appeals from rulings of the Animal Control Review Board shall be de
novo before a superior court judge sitting in Richmond County.



(Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Dangerous dogs, see G.S. §§ 67-4.1 through 67-4.5.



§ 4-46  VIOLATIONS; INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or molest
the animal control officer(s) in the performance of any duty authorized by
this article, or to seek to release any animal in the custody of the agent.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 4-47  PENALTY.



   Any owner found violating any provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in § 1-6.



(Ord. passed 2-17-1976; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 4-48  FINES.



   Fines for violations to the Code as it relates to animals will be
assessed as follows:



 

First offense
 

$50



Second offense
 

$100



Third offense
 

$250



Each subsequent offense thereafter
 

$500




 



(per vote of City Council, 11-9-2010; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07,
passed 9-8-2015)



CHAPTER 5:  BUILDINGS



Section



Article I:  In General



   5-1   Scope



   5-2   Registration of contractors; required



   5-3   Registration of contractors; bond



   5-4   Permits



Article II:  Codes Adopted



   5-36   Mobile Home Code



   5-37   Building Code



   5-38   Plumbing Code



   5-39   Heating Code



   5-40   Electrical Code



   5-41   Residential Building Code



   5-42   Amendments to Codes



   5-43   Compliance with Codes



   5-44   Official copies of Codes filed with County Building
Inspector’s office



Article III:  Inspection Department



   5-66   Organization



   5-67   Duties generally



   5-68   Additional enforcement duties; dwellings unfit for human
habitation



   5-69   Additional enforcement duties; zoning



   5-70   Powers of Inspectors



   5-71   Conflicts of interest



   5-72   Reports and records



   5-73   Inspection of work in progress; required generally



   5-74   Inspection of work in progress; requests



   5-75   Inspection of work in progress; survey of street lines



   5-76   Inspection of work in progress; certificate of occupancy



   5-77   Oversight of Inspector does not legalize violation



Article IV:  Minimum Housing and Unsafe Building Code



Division I:  General Provisions



   5-101   Intent and findings of the City Council



   5-102   Purpose and scope



   5-103   Owner’s responsibilities generally



   5-104   Occupants’ responsibilities generally



   5-105   Conditions rendering residential buildings unfit for human
habitation; declaration of unsafe nonresidential building or structure



   5-106   Unlawful to rent or occupy property after expiration of time
limits under any orders issued pursuant to this article



   5-107   Unauthorized removal orders or notices



   5-108   Definitions



   5-109   Chapter supplemental; alternative remedies



Division II:  Administration and Enforcement



   5-110   Duties of Code Enforcement Officer and Inspector



   5-111   Powers of Code Enforcement Officer and Inspector



   5-112   Enforcement procedure



   5-113   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   5-114   In rem action by Inspector; demolition



   5-115   Collection of costs; creation of lien on premises



   5-116   Remedies; appeal by owner to Superior Court



   5-117   Summary ejectment if occupants fail to obey order or
ordinance to vacate



   5-118   Emergency enforcement



   5-119   Penalties and fees



   5-120   Alternative remedies



   5-121   Willful failure or refusal to comply with order



   5-122   Article to be supplementary



Article V:  Nonresidential Buildings or Structures



   5-125   Title



   5-126   Purpose



   5-127   Definitions



   5-128   Maintenance standards for nonresidential buildings and
structures



   5-129   Duties of Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer



   5-130   Powers of Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer



   5-131   Inspections



   5-132   Procedure for enforcement



   5-133   Limitations on orders and ordinances; historic landmarks or
historic district



   5-134   Limitation on orders and ordinances; vacant manufacturing
facility or vacant industrial warehouse



   5-135   Vacated and closed nonresidential buildings or structures



   5-136   In rem action by the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer



   5-137   Costs; a lien on premises



   5-138   Ejectment



   5-139   Filing of ordinances



   5-140   Alternative remedies



   5-141   Board of Adjustment to hear appeals



   5-142   Temporary injunction remedy for aggrieved person



   5-143   Conflict with other provisions



   5-144   Violations; penalty



Article VI:  Towers



Division 1:  General Provisions



   5-155   Title



   5-156   Authority and enactment



   5-157   Purpose



   5-158   Jurisdiction



   5-159   Definitions



   5-160   Effective date



Division 2:  Regulation of Towers in the City



   5-175   Permits required



   5-176   Enforcement Officer



   5-177   Permit application



   5-178   Application fee



   5-179   Issuance of permit



   5-180   Variances



   5-181   Criminal sanctions



   5-182   Remedies



   5-183   Appeals



   5-184   Severability



   5-185   Conflict with other laws



   5-186   City protocol for entering onto tower properties



Division 3:  Procedures



   5-200   Application submission and review process



   5-201   Requirements for site development and preliminary tower
design plans



   5-202   Tower approval standards



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



   Encroachments on streets, see § 18-12



   Finance and taxation, see ch. 8



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



   Licenses and business regulations, see ch. 10



   Permit for construction of swimming pools, see § 19-3



   Streets and sidewalks, see ch. 18



   Swimming pools, see ch. 19



   Water and sewers, see ch. 21



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see G.S. § 160A-76(b)



   Building inspection, see §§ G.S. 160A-411 et seq.



   Contractors, see G.S. Chapter 87



   Equitable enforcement of building inspection law, see G.S. § 160A-432



   Fire limits, see G.S. §§ 160A-435 et seq.



   Inspection Department, see G.S. § 160A-411



   Manufactured housing and mobile homes, see G.S. §§ 143-143.8 et seq.



   Minimum housing standards, see G.S. §§ 160A-441 et seq.



   North Carolina Code Officials Qualification Board, see G.S. §§
143-151.8 et seq.



   Public building contracts, see G.S. §§ 143-128 et seq.



   Regulating and licensing businesses, trades and the like, see G.S. §
160A-194



   State Building Code and Building Code Council, see G.S. §§ 143-136 et
seq.



   Technical ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-76(b)



   Warrants to conduct inspections, see G.S. § 15-27.2



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 5-1  SCOPE.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory Codes
herein shall apply to the following:



      (1)   The location, design, materials, equipment,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving,
demolition, removal, use and occupancy of every building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to the building or structure;



      (2)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains,
waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems and all fixtures
and appurtenances thereof;



      (3)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and
appurtenances thereof; and



      (4)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof.



   (B)   The adoption of this chapter and the Codes herein adopted by
reference shall constitute a resolution within the meaning of G.S. §
143-138(b) making the regulatory Codes herein adopted applicable to dwellings
and outbuildings used in connection therewith and to apartment buildings used
exclusively as the residence of not more than two families.



§ 5-2  REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS; REQUIRED.



   Every person carrying on the business of building contractor, plumbing
contractor, heating and air conditioning contractor or electrical contractor
within the city shall register at the County Building Inspections Department
in Rockingham, giving his or her name and place of business.



Cross-reference:



   Licenses and business regulations, see ch. 10



§ 5-3  REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS; BOND.



   Every person required to register at the County Building Inspector’s
office under § 5-2 shall also give sufficient evidence of license in the
state.



§ 5-4  PERMITS.



   Permits are required to be obtained through the Richmond County
Building Inspections Department. The city follows the North Carolina Building
Code.



ARTICLE II:  CODES ADOPTED



§ 5-36  MOBILE HOME CODE.



   The Mobile Homes-Modular Dwelling Units and Other Factory Built
Structures Code promulgated by the state is hereby adopted and shall be
applicable to units made after July 1, 1970.  Mobile homes allowed inside
the city limits may not be over 12 years of age.



§ 5-37  BUILDING CODE.



   The State Building Code, Volume I, General Construction, with current
amendments, is hereby adopted by reference as the Building Code of the city
to the extent the Code is applicable for safe and stable design, methods of
construction, minimum standards and use of materials in buildings hereafter
erected, enlarged, altered, repaired or otherwise constructed or
reconstructed.



§ 5-38  PLUMBING CODE.



   The State Plumbing Code (State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing),
with current amendments, is hereby adopted by reference as the Plumbing Code
for the city.



Cross-reference:



   Water and sewers, see ch. 21



§ 5-39  HEATING CODE.



   The State Plumbing Code (State Building Code, Volume III, Heating),
with current amendments, is hereby adopted by reference as the Heating Code
for the city.



§ 5-40  ELECTRICAL CODE.



   The current edition of the State Electrical Code (State Building Code,
Volume IV, Electrical), adopting by reference the current edition of the
National Fire Protection Association, with current amendments, is hereby
adopted by reference as the Electrical Code for the city.



§ 5-41  RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE.



   The State Uniform Residential Building Code, with current amendments,
as adopted by the State Building Inspectors Association and as published by
the State Building Code Council is hereby adopted by reference as the
Residential Building Code for one- and two-family residential buildings in
the city.



§ 5-42  AMENDMENTS TO CODES.



   Amendments to the regulatory Codes adopted by reference in this
article, which are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or
organizations referred to herein, shall be effective in the city at the time
the amendments are filed with the County Building Inspector’s office.



§ 5-43  COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.



   (A)   All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished or
moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards and other
provisions of either the Building Code, or the Residential Building Code,
whichever is applicable, or of both.



   (B)   Every building or structure intended for human habitation,
occupancy or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems or plumbing fixtures
installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired or reconstructed in
accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of
the Plumbing Code.



   (C)   All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and
appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other
provisions of the Heating Code.



   (D)   All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall
be erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the
minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the Electrical Code.



§ 5-44  OFFICIAL COPIES OF CODES FILED WITH COUNTY BUILDING INSPECTOR’S
OFFICE.



   An official copy of each regulatory Code adopted in this article and
official copies of all amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the County
Building Inspector’s office. These copies shall be the official copies of
the Codes and the amendments.



ARTICLE III:  INSPECTION DEPARTMENT



§ 5-66  ORGANIZATION.



   The Inspection Department shall consist of a Building Inspector, a
Plumbing Inspector, a Heating and Air Conditioning Inspector, an Electrical
Inspector and those other Inspectors or assistant Inspectors as may be
authorized by the Council as follows.



   (A)   The Council authorizes the County Building Inspections
Division to enforce the State Building Code in its city limits and
extraterritorial area.



   (B)   The Council agrees to provide the Inspections Division with
all administrative materials and assistance as it may need to properly adhere
to all local ordinances.



   (C)   The County Inspections Division will enforce all Codes of the
city.



§ 5-67  DUTIES GENERALLY.



   (A)   The Inspection Department shall enforce all of the provisions
of this chapter and to make all inspections necessary to determine whether or
not the provisions of this chapter are being met.



   (B)   The Building Code and the Residential Building Code shall be
enforced by the Building Inspector.



   (C)   The Plumbing Code shall be enforced by the Plumbing Inspector.



   (D)   The Heating Code shall be enforced by the Heating and Air
Conditioning Inspector.



   (E)   The Electrical Code shall be enforced by the Electrical
Inspector.



Statutory reference:



   Duties of Inspection Department, see G.S. § 160A-412



§ 5-68  ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT DUTIES; DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.



   The Inspection Department shall enforce any ordinances or Codes adopted
by the Council relating to the repair, closing and demolition of dwellings
unfit for human habitation pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-441 et seq. and as
specified in the minimum housing requirements as set forth in the State
Building Code.



§ 5-69  ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT DUTIES; ZONING.



   (A)   If the Inspection Department is charged with enforcing the
zoning ordinance of the city, no permit for alteration, repair or
construction of any building shall be issued unless the plans and
specifications show that the building and its proposed use will be in
compliance with applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   If the Inspection Department is not charged with enforcing the
zoning ordinance, no permit for alteration, repair or construction of any
building shall be issued unless a zoning permit has first been issued by the
appropriate official charged with enforcing the zoning ordinance.



Editor’s note:



   The zoning ordinance is kept in the office of the City Clerk.



§ 5-70  POWERS OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   Authority.  Inspectors are hereby authorized, empowered and
directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Right of entry.  Inspectors shall have the right of entry on
any premises within the jurisdiction of the regulatory Codes adopted in this
chapter at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of
the requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Stop orders.  Whenever any building or part thereof is being
demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in a hazardous
manner, or in violation of any provision of this chapter or any other city
ordinance, or in violation of any provision of any regulatory Code adopted in
this chapter, or in violation of the terms of the permit issued therefor, or
in a manner as to endanger life or property, the appropriate Inspector may
order the work to be stopped immediately. The order shall be in writing to
the owner of the property or his or her agent or to the person doing the work
and shall state the reasons therefor and the conditions under which the work
may be resumed.



§ 5-71  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   No officer or employee of the Inspection Department shall be
financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for
the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or any part thereof
or in the making of plans or specifications therefor, unless he or she is the
owner of the building. No officer or employee of the Inspection Department
shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his or her duties or with
the interests of the city.



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-415



§ 5-72  REPORTS AND RECORDS.



   The Inspection Department and each Inspector shall keep complete,
permanent and accurate records in convenient form of all applications
received, permits issued, inspections and reinspections made and all other
work and activities of the Department. Periodic reports shall be submitted to
the City Manager and to other agencies as required.



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-433



§ 5-73  INSPECTION OF WORK IN PROGRESS; REQUIRED GENERALLY.



   (A)   The Inspection Department shall inspect all buildings and work
therein for which a permit of any kind has been issued as often as necessary
in order to determine whether the work complies with this chapter.



   (B)   When deemed necessary by the appropriate Inspector, materials
and assemblies may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication,
or inspections may be made by approved and recognized inspection
organizations; provided, that no approval shall be based upon reports of
these organizations unless the same are in writing and certified by a
responsible officer of the organization.



   (C)   All holders of permits, or their agents, shall notify the
Inspection Department and the appropriate Inspector at each of the following
stages of construction so that approval may be given before work is continued:



      (1)   Foundation inspection, to be made after trenches are
excavated and the necessary reinforcement and forms are in place and before
concrete is placed. Drilled footings, piles and similar types of foundations
shall be inspected as installed;



      (2)   Framing inspection, to be made after all structural
framing is in place and all roughing-in of plumbing and electrical and
heating has been installed; after all fire blocking, chimneys, bracing and
vents are installed; but before any of the structure is enclosed or covered.
Poured-in-place concrete structural elements shall be inspected before each
pour of any structural member;



      (3)   Fireproofing inspection, to be made after all areas
required to be protected by fireproofing are lathed, but before the
plastering or other fireproofing is applied; and



      (4)   Final inspection, to be made after the building has all
doors hung and fixtures set and is ready for occupancy, but before the
building is occupied.



Cross-reference:



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-420



§ 5-74  INSPECTION OF WORK IN PROGRESS; REQUESTS.



   (A)   Requests for inspections may be made to the county building
inspection office or to the appropriate Inspector. The Inspection Department
shall make inspections as soon as practicable after a request is made
therefor; provided that the work is ready for inspection at the time the
request is made.



   (B)   Reinspections may be made at the convenience of the Inspector.
No work shall be inspected until it is in proper and completed condition
ready for inspection. All work which has been concealed before the inspection
and approval shall be uncovered at the request of the Inspector and placed in
condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the work shall be
furnished by the appropriate Inspector in the form of a notice posted on the
building or given to the permit holder or his or her agent. Failure to call
for inspections or proceeding without approval at each stage of construction
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



§ 5-75  INSPECTION OF WORK IN PROGRESS; SURVEY OF STREET LINES.



   Where the applicant for a permit proposes to erect any building or
structure on the line of any street or other public place, he or she shall
secure a survey of the line of the street or other public place, adjacent to
the property upon which the building or structure is to be erected before
proceeding with construction of the building. The Building Inspector shall
see that the building does not encroach upon the street or other public place.



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks, see ch. 18



§ 5-76  INSPECTION OF WORK IN PROGRESS; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No new building or part thereof, no addition or enlargement of
any existing building and no existing building after being altered or moved
shall be occupied and no change of occupancy shall be made in any existing
building or part thereof until the Inspection Department has issued a
certificate of occupancy therefor. A temporary certificate of occupancy may
be issued for a portion of a building which may safely be occupied prior to
final completion and occupancy of the entire building.



   (B)   Application for a certificate of occupancy may be made by the
owner or his or her agent after all final inspections have been made for new
buildings, or, in the case of existing buildings, after supplying the
information and data necessary to determine compliance with this chapter and
zoning regulations for the occupancy intended. The Inspection Department
shall issue a certificate of occupancy when, after examination and
inspection, it is found that the building in all respects conforms to the
provisions of this chapter and zoning regulations for the occupancy intended.



Editor’s note:



   The zoning ordinance is kept in the office of the City Clerk.



§ 5-77  OVERSIGHT OF INSPECTOR DOES NOT LEGALIZE VIOLATION.



   No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any Inspector or
other official or employee of the Inspection Department shall be deemed to
legalize the violation of any provision of this chapter.



ARTICLE IV:  MINIMUM HOUSING AND UNSAFE BUILDING CODE



DIVISION I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 5-101  INTENT AND FINDINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   It is hereby found and declared that the existence and
occupation of dwellings in this city’s jurisdiction that are unfit for
human habitation are inimical to the welfare and dangerous and injurious to
the health, safety and morals of the people of this city and county, and that
a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such
dwellings. Whenever this city finds that there exists in the city dwellings
that are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing
the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation,
light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering the
dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health,
safety, morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the
city; and



   (B)   It is hereby found that when there exists within the city’s
jurisdiction structures that the Board of Commissioners find to be hazardous
to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city due to the
attraction of insects and/or snakes and/or rodents, or conditions creating a
fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children, or
conditions creating frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary facilities;



   (C)   Therefore, the city is authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-426 and
160A-441 to exercise its police powers to repair, close or demolish the
dwellings in the manner herein provided. Pursuant to the authority granted by
G.S. §§ 160A-193, 160A-426 and 160A-441, it is the further intent of this
article to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of any such unsafe
or unsanitary dwellings, and abandoned structures in accordance with the
provisions as are set forth in this article for the repair, closing or
demolition of dwellings and/or structures, and to establish minimum standards
of fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for
human habitation.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-102  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is to stop, remedy and prevent the
decay and deterioration of places of habitation and to eliminate blighted
neighborhoods by providing minimum requirements for dwellings for the
protection of life, health, safety, welfare and property of the owners and
occupants of dwellings and the general public.



   (B)   Additionally, the purpose of this article is to stop, remedy
and prevent the decay and deterioration of places of nonresidential buildings
and structures for the protection of life, health, safety, welfare and
property of the owners and occupants of nonresidential buildings and the
general public.



   (C)   The provisions of this article apply to all residential
buildings, and their accessory structures, all nonresidential buildings and
structures within the city’s jurisdiction as now or may later be fixed.
Demountable buildings or structures when used, or intended to be used, for
human habitation, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this
article.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-103  OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITIES GENERALLY.



   (A)   An owner remains liable for duties imposed by the chapter,
even though:



      (1)   An obligation is also imposed on the occupants; or



      (2)   The owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant(s)
the duty of furnishing required equipment or complying with this article.



   (B)   Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition the shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof.



   (C)   ln all cases, the owner shall be responsible for the
availability of rubbish and garbage storage facilities.



   (D)   It shall be a defense to § 5-102 et seq. that violations of
this article were caused solely by a tenant(s) or tenants’ guests. Owner(s)
are responsible for ensuring that the dwelling or building is brought into
compliance with this article.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-104  OCCUPANTS’ RESPONSIBILITIES GENERALLY.



   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall:



   (A)   Cleanliness.  Keep that part of his or her dwelling and
dwelling unit and premises thereof he or she occupies and controls in a clean
and sanitary condition.



   (B)   Rubbish and garbage.   Dispose of all his or her rubbish and
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the supplied storage
facilities.



   (C)   Supplied plumbing fixtures. Keep all supplied plumbing
fixtures therein in a sanitary condition, and be responsible for the exercise
of reasonable care in the proper use and operation of same.



   (D)   Care of facilities, equipment and structure.  Not destroy,
deface or impair any of the facilities or equipment, or any part of the
structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-105  CONDITIONS RENDERING RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN
HABITATION; DECLARATION OF UNSAFE NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.



   (A)   Residential buildings.  Every dwelling and dwelling unit used
as a human habitation, or held out for use as a human habitation, shall
comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and
all other applicable requirements of this article.



      (1)   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to
another for occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling
unit that does not comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for
human habitation and all other applicable requirements of this article.



      (2)   The following standards shall constitute the minimum
standards for the structural condition of a dwelling or dwelling unit. The
Inspector will determine that a residential building is unfit for human
habitation if any of the following conditions exist:



         (a)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills,
joists, rafters or other structural members list, lean or buckle, and/or are
rotten, deteriorated or damaged, and/or have holes or cracks that might admit
rodents. Supporting members are not adequate if 33% or more are damaged or
deteriorated. Non-supporting, enclosing or outside walls or coverings are not
adequate if 55% or more are damaged or deteriorated.



         (b)   Floors or roofs have inadequate supporting members
and strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. Supporting members
are not adequate if 33% or more are damaged or deteriorated. Non-supporting,
enclosing or outside walls or coverings are not adequate if 55% or more are
damaged or deteriorated.



         (c)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other
foundation supports are deteriorated or damaged.



         (d)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches, or other parts
and appurtenances are maintained in such condition that they will fail or
collapse.



         (e)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or
panic are not provided.



         (f)   Interior wails and ceilings of all rooms, closets
and hallways are not furnished of suitable materials, which will by use of
reasonable household methods promote sanitation and cleanliness, and are not
maintained in such manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain
reasonable privacy between various spaces.



         (g)   The roof, flashing, exterior walls, floors, and
all doors and windows exposed to the weather are not constructed and
maintained so as to be weather and watertight.



         (h)   Chimneys or parts thereof are defective,
deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in such condition or location as to
constitute a fire hazard.



         (i)   The ground is used for floors, or wood floors are
on the ground.



      (3)   Irrespective of § 5-105(A)(2) above, the enforcing
agent shall find residential dwelling units to be unfit for human habitation
if a dwelling unit contains more than five separate types of violations of
any of the minimum standards set forth in this article.



   (B)   Both residential and abandoned buildings and structures1. 
Every structure within the city’s jurisdiction shall be deemed in violation
of this article whenever it constitutes a hazard to the health, safety or
welfare of the city’s citizens. The enforcing agent may declare an
abandoned and/or residential structure or building to be unsafe as a result
of:



      (1)   Vacancy or abandonment;



      (2)   Dilapidated conditions causing or contributing to
blight, disease and/or safety hazards;



      (3)   The attraction of insects and/or rodents and/or snakes,
including the collection of garbage or rubbish in or near the structure that
might attract rodents and/or snakes and/or insects, or become breeding places
for rodents and/or snakes and/or insects;



      (4)   Conditions creating a fire hazard;



      (5)   Dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children,
such as the use of the structure by children as a play area, or violations of
the State Building Code that might result in danger to children using the
structure as a play area if the structure is also vacant and abandoned. If
the structure meets the criteria of the preceding sentence and is within a
community development area, then the structure may be declared unsafe;



      (6)   Repeated use of the structure in the absence of sanitary
facilities for living, sleeping, cooking or eating;



      (7)   Violation of the State Building Code, the State
Electrical Code or the Fire Prevention Code that constitutes a fire hazard in
the structure;



      (8)   Violation of the standards established by the city in
this article.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



Statutory reference:



   1Unsafe buildings condemned in localities, see G.S. § 160A-426



§ 5-106  UNLAWFUL TO RENT OR OCCUPY PROPERTY AFTER EXPIRATION OF TIME
LIMITS UNDER ANY ORDERS ISSUED PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE.



   (A)   If any order issued and served in accordance with this article
requires that a dwelling or dwelling unit be closed and vacated, and the
order is not complied with within the time specified therein, it shall be
unlawful for any person that had knowledge of the issuance of the order to
occupy any portion of the building under order for any purpose.



   (B)   When the enforcing agent finds that a building is unfit for
human habitation within the meaning of this article, and has notified the
owner to such effect, and the time limit set by the Inspector for the
correction of defects and vacating same has expired, it shall be unlawful for
any person (including, but not limited to, the owner or owner’s agent) to
receive rentals, offer for rent, or occupy the building/dwelling unit for any
purpose.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-107  UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF ORDERS OR NOTICES.



   No person, without the written consent of the Inspector, shall remove
or permit the removal of any complaint, notice or order posted in accordance
with the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-108  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article.



   BASEMENT.  A portion of a dwelling located partly underground, having
direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of the
adjoining ground.



   CELLAR.  A portion of a dwelling located partly or wholly underground,
having adequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly
below of the adjoining ground.



   DETERIORATED.  A condition in which a dwelling may be unfit for human
habitation and can be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the
minimum standards established by this article at a cost not in excess of 50%
of its value, as determined by the Inspector.



   DILAPIDATED.  A condition in which a dwelling is unfit for human
habitation and cannot be improved, repaired or altered to comply with all of
the minimum standards established by this article, except at a cost in excess
of 50% percent of its value, as determined by the Inspector.



   DWELLING.  Any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home,
or part thereof, that is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping or habitation by human occupants, and includes any outhouses
and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, except that
it does not include any manufactured home of health care home used solely for
a seasonal vacation purpose. Temporary housing, except for a “temporary
family health care structure” as defined below, shall not be regarded as a
DWELLING. The term DWELLING shall include within its meaning the terms
“rooming house” and “rooming unit”, as hereinafter defined.



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit, with facilities used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



   EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as
their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other
recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Inspector.



   GARBAGE.  The waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.



   GENDER.  Words having a masculine gender shall include the feminine
and neuter gender.



   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communication
corridors, closets and storage spaces.



   INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants or the public.



   INSPECTOR.  The Code Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector
(including Richmond Country Building Inspectors), or his or her designee or
agent. INSPECTOR shall be synonymous with “public officer”, as that term
is used in G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 6.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING.  Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.



   OCCUPANCY.  Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking
or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit.



   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   OWNER. Any person who, alone jointly, or severally with others: (1)
shall have title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or (2) shall be a mortgagee
of record for any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit; or (3) shall have
charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, as
owner or agent of the actual owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the actual owner. Any such person thus representing
the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this
article, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same
extent as if he were the owner.



   PARTYORPARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in a nonresidential building or
structure, dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, and any persons who are
in possession thereof.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or other legal entity.



   PLUMBING.  Shall mean and include all of the following supplied
facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes,
mechanical garbage disposal units (mechanical sink grinders), sewage disposal
pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs,
shower baths, installed washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and
any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water,
sewer or gas lines.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Any officer who is in charge of any department or
branch of the government of the City of Hamlet, Richmond County, or the State
of North Carolina relating to health, fire, building regulations or other
activities concerning dwellings in the city.



   ROOMING HOUSE.  Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to
four or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or
father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.



   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living or sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   RUBBISH.  Non-food waste materials. The term shall include items such
as: paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree
branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral, glass and dust.



   SUPPLIED.  Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control
of, the owner or operator.



   TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE STRUCTURE.  A transportable residential
structure as authorized by G.S. § 160A-383.5, providing an environment
facilitating a caregiver's provision of care for a mentally or physically
impaired person that is: (1) primarily assembled at a location other than its
site of installation; (2) is limited to one occupant who shall be the
mentally or physically impaired person; (3) has no more than 300 gross square
feet; and (4) complies with applicable provisions of the State Building Code
and G.S. §143-139.1(b). These structures are deemed to be permitted
accessory structures by state law.



   TEMPORARY HOUSING.  Any tent, trailer or other structure that is: used
for human shelter,  designed to be transportable, and not attached to the
ground, to another structure, or to any utilities on the same premises for
more than 30 consecutive days.



   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.  Conditions exist in a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house or rooming unit that violate or do not comply with one or
more of the minimum standards of fitness, or one or more of the requirements
established by this article.



   WORDS HAVING CERTAIN MEANING.  Whenever the words “dwelling”,
“dwelling unit”, “rooming house”, “rooming unit” or
“premises” are used in this article, they shall be construed as though
they were followed by the words “or any part thereof”.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-109  CHAPTER SUPPLEMENTAL; ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   This article shall not be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the city to define and declare nuisances, and to cause their
abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this article by
criminal process as authorized by G.S. § 14-4, or to enforce this article by
civil action pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175. The enforcement of any remedy
provided in this article shall not prevent the enforcement of any other
remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



DIVISION II:  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 5-110  DUTIES OF CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER AND INSPECTOR.



   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer and the Inspector are hereby
designated as the city officers to enforce the provisions of this article.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Inspector to:



      (1)   Locate abandoned structures within the city and
determine which structures are in violation of this article;



      (2)   Take action pursuant to this article as may be necessary
to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of those structures;



      (3)   Keep an accurate record of all enforcement proceedings
begun pursuant to the provision of this article, and to keep a record of the
results of inspections made under this article, and an inventory of those
dwellings that do not meet the minimum standards of fitness herein
prescribed; and



      (4)   Perform other duties as may be prescribed herein or
assigned to him or her by the Council.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-111  POWERS OF CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER AND INSPECTOR.



   The Code Enforcement Officer is granted and authorized to exercise
those powers as may be necessary to carry out the intent and the provisions
of this article, including the following powers, in addition to others herein
granted:



   (A)   Investigate the condition of buildings within the city in
order to determine which structures are abandoned and in violation of this
article;



   (B)   Enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections;



   (C)   Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence;



   (D)   Designate other officers, agents and employees of the city as
he or she deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this article;



   (E)   To obtain administrative search warrant(s) pursuant to G.S. §
15-27.2;



   (F)   Investigate the conditions, and to inspect dwellings and
dwelling units located in the city, in order to determine which dwellings and
dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of
carrying out the objectives of this article with respect to such dwellings
and dwelling units; and



   (G)   To take such actions, together with other appropriate
departments and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect
rehabilitation of deteriorated housing.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-112  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a
petition is filed with the Inspector by at least five residents of the city,
charging that any structure exists in violation of this article, or whenever
it appears to the Inspector, upon inspection, that any stincture exists in
violation hereof, he or she shall, if his or her preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for the charges, issue and cause to be served, upon the
owner of and parties in interest in the structure, a complaint stating the
charges and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the
Inspector at a place therein fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days
after the serving of the complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall
have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
Notice of the hearing shall also be given to at least one of the persons
signing a petition relating to the structure. Any person desiring to do so
may attend the hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard.
The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Inspector.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing. After the notice and hearing, the
Inspector shall state in writing his or her determination whether the
structure or dwelling violates this article. If the Inspector determines that
the dwelling or structure is in violation, he or she shall state in writing
his or her findings of fact to support the determination, and shall issue and
cause to be served upon the owner thereof, an order directing and requiring
the owner to either repair, alter or improve the structure, or else remove or
demolish the same within a specified period of time not to exceed 90 days.



   (C)   Petition to Superior Court by owner. Any person aggrieved by
an order issued by the Inspector shall have the right, within 30 days after
issuance of the order, to petition the Superior Court for a temporary
injunction restraining the Inspector pending a final disposition of the
cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).



   (D)   Limitations on order.



      (1)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling
or abandoned structure can be made at a cost of no more than 50% of the value
of the dwelling or building, as determined and published most recently by the
Richmond County Tax Assessor, the order may require the owner, within the
time specified, to repair, alter or improve the building, structure or
dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation, or, in the case of
abandoned nonresidential buildings, to bring it into compliance with the
standards of this article within 90 days. The order may require that the
property be vacated and closed only if continued occupancy during the time
allowed for repair will present a significant threat of bodily harm, taking
into account the nature of the necessary repairs, alterations or
improvements; the current state of the property; and any additional risks due
to the presence and capacity of minors under the age of 18 or occupants with
physical or mental disabilities. The order shall state that the failure to
make timely repairs as directed in the order shall make the dwelling subject
to the issuance of an subsequent order to repair or demolish the structure; or



      (2)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the
dwelling, building or structure cannot be made at a cost of less than 50% of
the value of the dwelling or building, as determined and published most
recently by the Richmond County Tax Assessor, the order may require the
owner, within the time specified, to remove or demolish the structure or
dwelling within 90 days.



      (3)   Historic exception. However, notwithstanding any other
provision of law and this article, if the building, structure or dwelling is
located in the Historic Landmarks and Preservation Overlay District and the
Historic Preservation Commission determines, after a public hearing as
provided by ordinance, that the dwelling is of particular significance or
value toward maintaining the character of the District, and the dwelling has
not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be
vacated and closed consistent with G.S. § 160A-400.14(a).



   (E)   Failure to comply with order.



      (1)   Remedy. If the owner of any structure shall fail to
comply with an order of the Inspector within the time specified therein, the
Inspector may either: (a) place the matter on the agenda of the Council at
its next regular meeting; or (b) request an emergency meeting with the
Council. At the meeting, the City Council may consider an ordinance finding
that failure to comply with the order jeopardized the public health safety
and welfare of the general public and/or the occupants of the building
structure or dwelling. If the Council finds that the public’s or
occupants’ health and safety are jeopardized, the Council shall adopt an
ordinance:



         (a)   Describing the property; and



         (b)   Listing the Council’s findings; and



         (c)   Directing that the ordinance be recorded in the
Richmond County Registry and indexed in the grantor index in the name of the
property owner(s); and



         (d)   Directing that the Inspector or Officer cause the
building or dwelling to be repaired, altered and repaired or vacated and
closed. If the building or dwelling is to be closed, the ordinance will
direct the Inspector to post the property with a placard reading:



            1.   For abandoned nonresidential buildings: 
“This building is unfit for any use; the use or occupation of this building
for any purpose is prohibited and unlawful.” or



            2.   For dwellings: “This building is unfit for
human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation
is prohibited and unlawful.”



   (F)   Each ordinance shall be recorded in the Richmond County Office
of the Register of Deeds, and shall be indexed in the name of the property
owner in the grantor index.



   (G)   Any person who occupies or knowingly allows the occupancy of
an abandoned building or structure so posted shall be guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor. Any person who occupies or knowingly allows the occupancy of a
dwelling so posted shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-113  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector shall be served
upon persons, either personally or by registered or certified mail. When
service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or
order will also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient
if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular
mail is not returned by the post office within ten days after the mailing. If
the whereabouts of the persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained
by the Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if the owners
are known but have refused to accept service by registered or certified mail,
the Inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of the
complaint or order upon the person may be made by publication in a newspaper
having general circulation in the city at least once, no later than the time
at which personal service is required under § 5-112, Enforcement Procedure.
Where service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings
shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the
complaint or order.



   (B)   Whenever a determination is made pursuant to § 5-112,
Enforcement Procedure, that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed
or demolished, notice of the order shall be given by first-class mail to any
organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for affordable
housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum period
of 45 days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal or
demolition by action of the Inspector, to allow the opportunity for any
organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease or purchase
the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The Inspector
or City Clerk shall certify the mailing of the notices, and the certification
shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an organization that has
filed a written request for such notices may raise the issue of failure to
mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order requiring the
Inspector to wait 45 days before causing removal or demolition.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-114  IN REM ACTION BY INSPECTOR; DEMOLITION.



   (A)   After failure of an owner of a dwelling to comply with an
ordinance issued pursuant to the provisions of this article in one year, or
two years in the case of the owner of an abandoned nonresidential structure,
the Council may consider another ordinance if it finds that: the owner has
abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the building,
structure or dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation, or, for
abandoned nonresidential buildings, to have abandoned the intention to
repair, and that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed
status would be inimical to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the
city, in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire
and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract
persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight
and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render
unavailable property and a dwelling that might otherwise have been made
available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in
the city.



   (B)   Any ordinance enacted shall set forth the following:



      (1)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to
render it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of
the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the
owner either repair or demolish and remove the building, structure or
dwelling within 90 days; or



      (2)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to
render it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50%
of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the
owner to demolish and remove the building, structure or dwelling within 90
days.



   (C)   Any ordinance so adopted shall be served on the owner of the
property and recorded in the Richmond County Office of the Register of Deeds,
and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.



   (D)   If the owner fails to comply with this article, the Inspector
shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-115  COLLECTION OF COSTS; CREATION OF LIEN ON PREMISES.



   (A)   Creation of lien.  The expense of the action shall be paid by
the person in default. If the expense is not paid, it is a lien on the land
or premises where the nuisance occurred. A lien established pursuant to this
subsection shall have the same priority and be collected as unpaid ad valorem
taxes.



   (B)   Liens on residential and abandoned nonresidential buildings. 
The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition by the Inspector shall be a lien
against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall
be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special
assessment provided in G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10.



   (C)   Additional lien created in actions about residential
buildings.  Where the original action was brought against a dwelling(s), the
expense of the action is also a lien on any other real property owned by the
person in default within the city limits, or within one mile of the city
limits, except for the person’s primary residence. A lien established
pursuant to this subsection is inferior to all prior liens and shall be
collected as money judgment. This subsection shall not apply if the person in
default can show that the nuisance was created solely by the actions of
another. See G.S. § 160A-193.



   (D)   Notification of City Attorney.  The Inspector will notify the
City Attorney to write a notice of lien and cause it to be recorded in the
county registry and/or judgments.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-116  REMEDIES; APPEAL BY OWNER TO SUPERIOR COURT.



   (A)   The Council shall also hear any appeals from any decision or
order of the Inspector.



   (B)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Inspector may be
taken to the Board by any person aggrieved thereby, or by any officer, board
or commission of the city. Any appeal from the Inspector shall be taken
within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order,
by filing with the Office of the Inspector, a notice of appeal to the Board,
which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the
filing of any notice of appeal, the Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed
from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the Inspector, refusing
to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his or her decision
shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a
decision of the Inspector, requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the
appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing
by the Board, unless the Inspector certifies to the Board, after the notice
of appeal is filed with him or her, that, because of facts stated in the
certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the person making the
appeal), a suspension of his or her requirement would cause imminent peril to
life or property. In that case, the requirement shall not be suspended except
by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown, upon not
less than one day’s written notice to the Inspector by the Board, or by a
court of record upon petition made pursuant to subsection (F) of this section.



   (C)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals,
shall give due notice to the parties, and shall render its decision within a
reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The
Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or
order appealed from, and may make any decision and order that, in its
opinion, ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all
the powers of the Inspector. The Board shall have power also in passing upon
appeals, when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result
from carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to adapt the
application of the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that
the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare
secured, and substantial justice done.



   (D)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



   (E)   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Inspector or a
decision rendered by the Board may petition the Superior Court for an
injunction, restraining the Inspector from carrying out the order or
decision. The Court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction
restraining the Inspector, pending a final disposition of the cause. The
petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of the order or
rendering of the decision. The Court shall hear and determine the issues
raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may
require. It shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before
obtaining a temporary injunction under this subsection.



   (F)   If any building, structure or dwelling is erected,
constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained or used in violation of
this article, or any valid order or decision of the Inspector or Board made
pursuant to any ordinance or code adopted under authority of this article or
the general statutes, the Inspector or Board may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or use, to restrain, correct or abate the
violation, to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or dwelling,
or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about the premises.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-117  SUMMARY EJECTMENT IF OCCUPANTS FAIL TO OBEY ORDER OR ORDINANCE TO
VACATE.



   (A)   Notice before ejectment from dwellings only.  An action to
remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in
the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this paragraph,
unless the occupant was served with notice, at least 30 days before the
filing of the summary ejectment proceeding, that the Council has ordered the
Inspector to proceed to exercise his or her duties under § 5-112 of this
article to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling.



   (B)   Ejectment procedure for abandoned nonresidential buildings and
structures.  If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a
dwelling, the Inspector may file a civil action in the name of the city to
remove the occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature
of summary ejectment, and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as
parties-defendant any person occupying the dwelling. The Clerk of Superior
Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a
magistrate at a certain time, date and place, not to exceed ten days from the
issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint
shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be returned
according to its tenor. If on its return it appears to have been duly served,
and if at the hearing the Inspector produces a certified copy of an ordinance
adopted by the governing body pursuant to § 5-113, authorizing the Officer
to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter
judgment ordering that the premises be vacated, and that all persons be
removed. The judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced
in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S.
§ 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may
be taken as provided in G.S. § 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment
may be stayed as provided in G.S. § 7A-227.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-118  EMERGENCY ENFORCEMENT.



   The decision of the Inspector pursuant to this article shall be final
in cases of emergency, which, in his or her opinion, involve imminent danger
to human life or health. The Inspector shall promptly cause such building,
structure or portion thereof to be made safe or abated. For this purpose, the
Inspector may at once enter the structure or land on which it stands, or
abutting land or structure, with such assistance and at such cost as he or
she may deem necessary, The Inspector may vacate adjacent structures and
protect the public by appropriate fences or such other means as may be
necessary, and for this purpose, may close a public or private way.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-119  PENALTIES AND FEES.



   (A)   Civil citations. If the violation continues after the deadline
to correct a violation established after the violation hearing by the order
requiring removal or correction of a violation, and no appeal has been filed
with the Office of the Inspector, then the Inspector may issue a civil
citation, with a fine in an initial amount of $100 against the violator.
Thereafter, upon issuing a second civil citation, each day the violation
continues is an additional separate and distinct offense, and additional
citations with additional fines of $100 shall apply each day the violation
continues. Any unpaid citations and delinquency charges shall be cumulative,
and shall be recovered in a civil action in the nature of debt, as well as
any attorney fees incurred by the city incident thereto.



   (B)   Criminal citations.  If the violation continues after the
deadline to correct a violation established after the violation hearing by
the order requiring removal or correction of a violation, and no appeal has
been filed with the Office of the Inspector, then the police may issue a
criminal citation, with a fine of up to $500 against the violator.



   (C)   Multiple notices not required.  A hearing is not required for
issuance of consequent civil citations with fines after the issuance of the
first citation. This article may be enforced by the simultaneous issuance of
both a civil citation(s) and a criminal citation, in addition to any other
remedies provided in this article. See G.S. §§ 160A-175 and 160A-193.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-120  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   Neither this article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare
nuisances, and to cause their abatement by summary motion or otherwise, or to
enforce this article by criminal process. The enforcement of any remedy
provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or
remedies provided herein, or in other ordinances or laws.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-121 WILLFUL FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any final order
or direction of the Building Inspector or the Council pursuant to this
article.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 5-122  ARTICLE TO BE SUPPLEMENTARY.



   This article is in addition to, and not in substitution for, any other
provision of this Code or other ordinance affecting the same subject matter.



(Ord. 2015-09, passed 11-10-2015)



ARTICLE V:  NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES



§ 5-125  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
Nonresidential Building or Structure Code.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-126  PURPOSE.



   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and its
citizens, it is the purpose of this article to establish minimum standards of
maintenance, sanitation and safety relating to nonresidential buildings or
structures, as expressly authorized by G.S. § 160A-439. This article
provides for the repair, closing or demolition of nonresidential buildings or
structures as a result of a public necessity caused by conditions that are
dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-127  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article.



   BASIC STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS.  The parts of a building which provide the
principal strength, stability, integrity, shape and safety of the building,
including, but not limited to, plates, studs, joists, rafters, stringers,
stairs, sub-flooring, flooring, sheathing, lathing, roofing, siding, window
frames, door frames, porches, railings, eaves, chimneys, flashing, masonry
and all other essential components.



   BUILDING.  Any structure, place or any other construction built for
the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any
kind or any part of the structure, shelter or property.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT COORDINATOR OR OFFICER.  A Code Enforcement
Coordinator or Officer of the city or any agent of the Code Enforcement
Coordinator or Officer who is authorized by the Code Enforcement Coordinator
or Officer to enforce the provisions of this article.



   NONRESIDENTIAL.  Any building or structure or portion of a building or
structure occupied or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part, for a use
other than a dwelling, home, residing place, living space or sleeping space
for one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently.



   OCCUPANT.  Any person who is a tenant or has actual possession of a
nonresidential building or structure, or part thereof.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care or control of a
nonresidential building or structure, or part thereof.



   OWNER.  Any person who alone, or jointly, or severally with others:



      (1)   Shall have title in fee simple to any nonresidential
building or structure, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof; or



      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any nonresidential
building or structure as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate
of the owner. Any person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this article and of rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he or she were the owner.



   PARTIES IN INTEREST.  All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a nonresidential building or structure and
any who are in possession thereof.



   PREMISES.  Any lot or parcel of land inclusive of any building or
improvements located thereon.



   SAFE.  A condition which is not likely to do harm to humans or to real
or personal property.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or placed upon a property which is
supported by the ground or which is supported by any other structure except a
currently operable licensed vehicle.



   STRUCTURALLY SOUND.  Substantially free from flaw, defect, decay or
deterioration to the extent that the building or structure or structural
member is capable of adequately or safely accomplishing the purpose for which
it was intended or designed.



   UNSAFE.  A condition which is reasonably likely to do harm to humans
or to real or personal property if not corrected or stopped.



   VACANT INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE.  Any building or structure designed for
the storage of goods or equipment in connection with manufacturing processes,
which has not been used for that purpose for at least one year and has not
been converted for another use.



   VACANT MANUFACTURING FACILITY.  Any building or structure previously
used for the lawful production or manufacturing of goods, which has not been
used for that purpose for at least one year and has not been converted to
another use.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-128  MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   All nonresidential buildings and structures shall be free of
all conditions that are dangerous and injurious to the public health, safety
and welfare of occupants or members of the general public.



   (B)   Without limitation of the foregoing requirement, the existence
of any of the following conditions shall be deemed to be dangerous to the
public health, safety and welfare for which a public necessity exists for the
repair, closing or demolition of the building or structure and must be
corrected in accordance with the provisions of this article:



      (1)   Interior walls, vertical studs, partitions, supporting
members, sills, joists, rafters or other basic structural members that list,
lean or buckle to such an extent as to render the building unsafe, that are
rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and that have holes or cracks which might
admit rodents;



      (2)   Exterior walls that are not structurally sound, free
from defects and damages and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. Where a
wall of a building has become exposed as a result of demolition of adjacent
buildings, the wall must have all doors, windows, vents or other similar
openings closed with material of the type comprising the wall. The exposed
wall shall be painted, stucccoed or bricked and sufficiently weatherproofed
to prevent deterioration of the wall;



      (3)   Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads,
which are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably
safe for the purpose used. Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting
members and strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. Roofs shall
be kept structurally sound and shall be maintained in a manner so as to
prevent rain or other objects from penetrating into the interior of the
building;



      (4)   Damage by fire, wind or other causes as to render the
building unsafe;



      (5)   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions or disrepair,
which is dangerous to the health and safety of the occupants or members of
the general public;



      (6)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary
facilities to an extent as to endanger the health, safety or general welfare
of the occupants or members of the general public;



      (7)   Buildings and structures including their environs that
have accumulations of garbage, trash or rubbish, which creates health and
sanitation problems. All garbage and solid waste shall be in approved
containers or stored in a safe and sanitary manner;



      (8)   Buildings and structures that have loose and
insufficiently anchored overhanging objects, which constitute a danger of
falling on persons or property;



      (9)   Buildings and structures including their environs that
have insufficiently protected holes, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions and other dangerous impediments on and around walks, driveways,
parking lots, alleyways and other areas which are accessible to and generally
used by persons on or around the premises;



      (10)   Buildings and structures that have cracked or broken
glass, loose shingles, loose wood, crumbling stone or brick, loose or broken
plastic, or other dangerous objects or similar hazardous conditions. Exterior
surfaces shall be maintained in a material or treated in a manner as to
prevent deterioration and repaired or replaced with like or similar material
according to its original use;



      (11)   Buildings and structures that have objects and elements
protruding from building walls or roofs, which are unsafe or not properly
secured or which can create a hazard such as abandoned electrical boxes and
conduits, wires, sign brackets and other brackets and similar objects;



      (12)   Chimneys, flues and vent attachments thereto which are
not structurally sound. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing
equipment which are in use shall provide sufficient draft to develop the
rated output of the connected equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoke-tight and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases;



      (13)   Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs or fire
escapes, which are not structurally sound. All exterior porches, landings,
balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or
railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling,
and the same shall be kept sound, in good repair and free of defects;



      (14)   Cornices which are not structurally sound. Rotten or
weakened portions shall be repaired and/or replaced. All exposed wood shall
be treated or painted;



      (15)   Improperly attached gutters or downspouts that are
located so as to cause a hazard to pedestrian, vehicular traffic or adjacent
property;



      (16)   Advertising sign structures, attached or freestanding
awnings, marquees and their supporting members, and other similar attachments
and structures that cause a safety hazard to the occupants or members of the
general public;



      (17)   All exterior surfaces that may cause unsafe conditions
due to a lack of maintenance. Exterior surfaces shall be painted or sealed in
order to protect the underlying surface from deterioration. All exterior
surfaces that have been painted shall be maintained generally free of peeling
and flaking. Where 50% or more of the aggregate of any painted surface shall
have peeling or flaking or previous paint worn away, the entire surface shall
be repainted in order to prevent further deterioration;



      (18)   Windows containing broken or cracked broken glass that
could be in danger or falling or shattering. All windows must be tight
fitting and have sashes of proper size and design and free from rotten wood,
broken joints or broken or loose mullions;



      (19)   All openings originally designed as windows, doors,
loading docks or other means of egress or ingress which have been temporarily
closed by boarding or other manner in a non-secure manner so as to allow
unauthorized admittance. If an opening is temporarily closed by boarding to
secure the building or structure, the boarding shall be trim fit, sealed to
prevent water intrusion and painted or stained to properly conform with the
other exterior portions of the building and the building or structure shall
be maintained in a state that secures the building or structure from any
unauthorized admittance from humans, animals or birds; and



      (20)   Any combination of conditions which in the judgment of
the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer renders any building or structure
dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or general welfare of occupants
or members of the general public.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-129  DUTIES OF CODE ENFORCEMENT COORDINATOR OR OFFICER.



   (A)   The Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer is hereby
designated as the public officer to enforce the provisions of this article
and to exercise the duties and powers herein prescribed.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Coordinator or
Officer:



      (1)   To investigate the conditions of nonresidential
buildings and structures in the city and to inspect nonresidential buildings
and structures located in the city in order to determine which nonresidential
buildings and structures are not being maintained so that the health and
safety of its occupants or members of the general public are jeopardized and
for the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this article with respect
to nonresidential buildings and structures;



      (2)   To take action, together with other appropriate
departments and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect
the repair or demolition of nonresidential buildings and structures which
have not been properly maintained in compliance with minimum standards
established by this article;



      (3)   To keep record of the results of inspections made under
this article and an inventory of those nonresidential buildings and
structures which have not been properly maintained in compliance with the
minimum standards established by this article; and



      (4)   To perform those other duties as may be herein
prescribed.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-130  POWERS OF CODE ENFORCEMENT COORDINATOR OR OFFICER.



   The Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer is authorized to exercise
those powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers in
addition to others herein granted:



   (A)   To investigate nonresidential buildings and structures in the
city to determine whether they have been properly maintained in compliance
with the minimum standards established by this article so that the safety or
health of the occupants or members of the general public are not jeopardized;



   (B)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence;



   (C)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations
and inspections, provided that the entries shall be made in accordance with
law and in a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the
persons in possession; and



   (D)   To appoint and fix duties of the officers, agents and
employees as the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer deems necessary to
carry out the purposes of this article.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-131  INSPECTIONS.



   For the purpose of making inspections, the Code Enforcement Coordinator
or Officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all
reasonable times, nonresidential buildings and structures. If entry upon the
premises for purposes of investigation is necessary, the entry shall be made
pursuant to a duly issued administrative search warrant in accordance with
G.S. § 15-27.2 or with permission of the owner, the owner’s agent, a
tenant or other person legally in possession of the premises.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-132  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation.  Whenever it appears to the Code
Enforcement Coordinator or Officer that any nonresidential building or
structure has not been properly maintained so that the safety or health of
its occupants or members of the general public are jeopardized for failure of
the property to meet the minimum standards established by this article, the
Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall undertake a preliminary
investigation.



   (B)   Complaint and hearing.  If the preliminary investigation
discloses evidence of a violation of the minimum standards established by
this article, the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall issue and
cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in the
nonresidential building or structure a complaint. The complaint shall state
the charges and a place therein fixed, not less than ten days nor more than
30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in
interest shall be given the right to answer the complaint and to appear in
person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and timed fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or
equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Code Enforcement
Coordinator or Officer.



   (C)   Procedure after hearing.



      (1)   If, after notice and hearing, the Code Enforcement
Coordinator or Officer determines that the nonresidential building or
structure has been maintained in that the property meets the minimum
standards established by this article, the Code Enforcement Coordinator or
Officer shall state in writing findings of fact in support of that
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof a
copy of the determination.



      (2)   If, after notice and hearing, the Code Enforcement
Coordinator of Officer determines that the nonresidential building or
structure has not been properly maintained so that the safety or health of
its occupants or members of the general public is jeopardized for failure of
the property to meet the minimum standards established by this article, the
Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall state in writing findings of
fact in support of that determination and shall issue and clause to be served
upon the owner thereof an order in accordance with the provisions of
subsections (C)(3) and (C)(4) below and subject to the limitations set forth
in §§ 5-133 and 5-134.



      (3)   If the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer
determines that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement of the building
or structure would not exceed 50% of its then current value, then the Code
Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall state in writing the findings of
fact in support of the determination and issue an order that requires the
owner, within a reasonable time specified in the order, to either:



         (a)   Repair, alter or improve the nonresidential
building or structure in order to bring it into compliance with the minimum
standards established by this article; or



         (b)   Vacate and close the nonresidential building or
structure for any use.



      (4)   If the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer
determines that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement of the building
or structure would exceed 50% of its then current value, then the Code
Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall state in writing the findings of
fact in support of the determination and issue an order that requires the
owner, within a reasonable time specified in the order, to either:



         (a)   Remove or demolish the nonresidential building or
structure; or



         (b)   Repair, alter or improve the nonresidential
building or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards
established by this article.



   (D)   Failure to comply with order and ordinance.



      (1)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to either
repair, alter or improve the nonresidential building or structure or  vacate
and close the nonresidential building or structure, the Code Enforcement
Coordinator or Officer shall submit to the City Council an ordinance ordering
the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer to cause the nonresidential
building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved in order to bring
it into compliance with the minimum standards established by this article or
to be vacated and closed for any use. The property shall be described in the
ordinance. If City Council adopts the ordinance, the Code Enforcement
Coordinator or Officer shall cause the building or structure to be vacated
and closed for any use.



      (2)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to either
remove or demolish the nonresidential building or structure or repair, alter
or improve the nonresidential building or structure, the Code Enforcement
Coordinator or Officer shall submit to the City Council an ordinance ordering
the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer to cause the nonresidential
building or structure to be removed or demolished. No ordinance shall be
adopted to require removal or demolition of a nonresidential building or
structure until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to
bring in into conformity with the minimum standards established by the City
Council. The property shall be described in the ordinance. If City Council
adopts the ordinance, the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall cause
the building or structure to be removed or demolished.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-133  LIMITATIONS ON ORDERS AND ORDINANCES; HISTORIC LANDMARKS OR
HISTORIC DISTRICT.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if the
nonresidential building or structure is designated as a local historic
landmark, listed in the National Register of Historic Places, or located in a
locally designated historic district or in a historic district listed in the
National Register of Historic Places and the City Council determines, after a
public hearing, that the nonresidential building or structure is of
individual significance or contributes to maintaining the character of the
district, and the nonresidential building or structure has not been condemned
as unsafe, an order issued by the Code Enforcement Coordinator of Officer
pursuant to § 5-132(C) and an ordinance approved by City Council pursuant to
§ 5-132(D) may only require that the nonresidential building or structure be
vacated and closed until it is brought into compliance with the minimum
standards established by this article.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-134  LIMITATION ON ORDERS AND ORDINANCES; VACANT MANUFACTURING FACILITY
OR VACANT INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an order issued by
the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer pursuant to § 5-132(C) and an
ordinance approved by City Council pursuant to § 5-132(D) may not require
repairs, alterations or improvements to be made to a vacant manufacturing
facility or a vacant industrial warehouse to preserve the original use. The
order and ordinance may require the building or structure to be vacated and
closed, but repairs may be required only when necessary to maintain the
structural integrity or to abate a health or safety hazard that cannot be
remedied by ordering the building or structure closed for any use.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-135  VACATED AND CLOSED NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   (A)   If the City Council has adopted an ordinance or the Code
Enforcement Coordinator or Officer has issued an order requiring the building
or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or vacated and closed and
the building has been vacated and closed for a period of two years pursuant
to the ordinance in order, then if the City Council finds that the owner has
abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the building or
structure and that the continuation of the building or structure in its
vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety and welfare
of the city in that it would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire or
safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract
persons intent on criminal activities, or would cause or contribute to blight
and the deterioration of property values in the area, the City Council may,
after the expiration of the two-year period, adopt an ordinance and serve the
ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following.



      (1)   The ordinance shall require that the owner either:



         (a)   Demolish and remove the nonresidential building or
structure within 90 days; or



         (b)   Repair, alter or improve the nonresidential
building or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards
established by this article within 90 days.



      (2)   The ordinance shall require that if the owner does not
do either of the following, then the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer
shall demolish and remove the nonresidential building or structure:



         (a)   Demolish and remove the nonresidential building or
structure within 90 days; or



         (b)   Repair, alter or improve the nonresidential
building or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards
established by this article within 90 days.



   (B)   In the case of a vacant manufacturing facility or a vacant
industrial warehouse, the building or structure must have been vacated and
closed pursuant to an order or ordinance for a period of five years before
City Council may take action under this section.



   (C)   If the owner fails to comply with the requirements of the
ordinance within 90 days, the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall
demolish and remove the nonresidential building or structure.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-136  IN REM ACTION BY THE CODE ENFORCEMENT COORDINATOR OR OFFICER.



   (A)   After failure of an owner of a nonresidential building or
structure to comply with an order of the Code Enforcement Coordinator or
Officer issued pursuant to the provisions of this article and upon adoption
by the City Council of an ordinance authorizing and directing the owner to do
so, as provided by G.S. § 160A-439(f) and § 5-132(D) of this article, the
Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall proceed to cause the
nonresidential building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved to
comply with the minimum standards established by this article, or to be
vacated and closed or to be removed or demolished, as directed by the
ordinance of the City Council. The Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer
any cause to be posted on the main entrance of any nonresidential building or
structure which is to be vacated and closed a placard with the following
words:



      This building is unfit for any use: the use or occupation of this
building for any purpose is prohibited and unlawful.



   (B)   Any person who occupies or knowingly allows the occupancy of a
building or structure so posted shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-137  COSTS; A LIEN ON PREMISES.



   (A)   As provided by G.S. § 160A-439(i), the amount of the cost of
any repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal
or demolition, caused to be made or done by the Code Enforcement Coordinator
or Officer pursuant to § 5-132(D) or § 5-135 shall be a lien against the
real property upon which the costs were incurred. The lien shall be filed,
have the same priority, and be enforced and the costs collected as provided
by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10. The amount of the costs shall also be a
lien on any other real property of the owner located within the city limits
except for the owner’s primary residence. The additional lien provided in
this subsection is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a
money judgment.



   (B)   If the nonresidential building or structure is removed or
demolished by the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer, the Code
Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall offer for the sale the recoverable
materials of the building or structure and shall credit the proceeds of the
sale, if any, against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Code Enforcement
Coordinator or Officer, shall be secured in a manner directed by the Court
and shall be disbursed by the Court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or decree of the Court. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the governing body to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by
summary proceedings or otherwise.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-138  EJECTMENT.



   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a
nonresidential building or structure, the Code Enforcement Coordinator or
Officer may file a civil action in the name of the city to remove the
occupant. The action to vacate shall be in the nature of summary ejectment
and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any
person occupying the nonresidential building or structure. The Clerk of the
Superior Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before
a magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from
the issuance of the summons to answer the compliant. The summons and
complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be
returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been
duly served and if at the hearing the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer
produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the City Council
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-493(f) and § 5-132(D) to vacate the occupied
nonresidential building or structure, the magistrate shall enter judgment
ordering that the premises be vacated and all persons be removed. The
judgment ordering that the nonresidential building or structure be vacated
shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment
entered under G.S. § 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered under this
section by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. § 7A-228, and the
execution of the judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S. § 7A-227. An
action to remove an occupant of a nonresidential building or structure who is
a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment
proceeding pursuant to this section unless the occupant was served with
notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment
proceeding, that the City Council has ordered the Code Enforcement
Coordinator or Officer to proceed to exercise his or her duties G.S. §
160A-493(f) and § 5-132(D) to vacate and close or remove and demolish the
nonresidential building or structure.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-139  FILING OF ORDINANCES.



   An ordinance adopted by City Council pursuant to §§ 5-132(D) or 5-135
of this article shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds in
Richmond County and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the
grantor index, as provided by G.S. § 160A-439(f) and (g).



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-140  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   Neither this article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to
enforce this article by criminal process as authorized by G.S. § 14-4 and §
5-144 of this article, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein or
in other ordinances or laws.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-141  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT TO HEAR APPEALS.



   (A)   All appeals, which may be taken from decisions or orders of
the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer pursuant to this article, shall
be heard and determined by the Board of Adjustment. As the appeals body, the
Board shall have the power to fix the times and places of its meetings, to
adopt necessary rules of procedure and any other rules and regulations which
may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties.



   (B)   Appeals shall be subject to the following.



      (1)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Code
Enforcement Coordinator or Officer may be taken by any person aggrieved
thereby. Any appeal from the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall be
taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the
order, and shall be taken by filing with the Code Enforcement Coordinator or
Officer and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal which shall
specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any
notice of appeal, the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the
decision appealed from was made. When the appeal is from a decision of the
Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer refusing to allow the person
aggrieved thereby to do any act, the Code Enforcement Coordinator or
Officer’s decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When
any appeal is from a decision of the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer
requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the
effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board, unless
the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer certifies to the Board, after the
notice of appeal is filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the
certified (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant) a suspension of
the requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which
may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one day’s written
notice to the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer, by the Board, or by a
court of record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. § 160A-446(i) and §
5-142 of this Code.



      (2)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
all appeals, shall give notice to all the parties and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision or order appealed from, and may make the decision and order as
in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have
all the powers of the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer, but the
concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the Board shall be necessary
to reverse or modify any decision or order of the Code Enforcement
Coordinator or Officer. The Board shall have power also in passing upon
appeals, in any case when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships
would result from carrying out the strict letter of this article, to adapt
the application of the article to the necessities of the case to the end that
the spirit of the article shall be observed, public safety and welfare
secured and substantial justice done.



      (3)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review
by the Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted
within 15 days of the decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-142  TEMPORARY INJUNCTION REMEDY FOR AGGRIEVED PERSON.



   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Code Enforcement
Coordinator and Officer of a decision rendered by the Board of Adjustment
shall have the right within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering
of the decision to petition the Superior Court for a temporary injunction
restraining the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer pending a final
disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-143  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In the event any provision standard, or requirement of this article is
found to be in conflict with any other ordinance or Code of the city, the
provisions which establishes the higher standard or more stringent
requirement for the promotion and protection of health and safety of the
citizens of the city shall prevail.



(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)



§ 5-144  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential
building or structure to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve
the same, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order
of the Code Enforcement Coordinator and Officer duly made and served in the
order, and each day that any failure, neglect or refusal to comply with the
order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential building or structure, with
respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to § 5-132(C) of this
article, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time
prescribed in the order for its repair, alteration, improvement or its
vacation and closing, and each day that the occupancy continues after the
prescribed time shall constitute a separate and district offense.



   (B)   The violation of any provision of this article shall
constitute a misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of any section or subsection of this Code or ordinances for which
no other penalty is provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply
with same, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and
subject to a fine not to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days,
and each day that any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances are
violated shall constitute a separate offense.



(G.S. § 14-4(a))  (Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed
2-15-2010)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. §
160A-175



ARTICLE VI:  TOWERS



Division 1:  General Provisions



§ 5-155  TITLE.



   This article shall be known as the Tower Ordinance of the city.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-156  AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT.



   This article is adopted under the authority and provision of G.S.
Chapter 160A-174, Article 6 et seq.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-157  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City Council finds that the construction of towers may
cause unusual problems and hazards to the residents and visitors of the city.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the construction of towers to
avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure, and falling
ice or other debris, to maximize the use of existing and new towers in order
to reduce the number of towers needed, to minimize potential hazards to low
flying law enforcement and medical helicopters, to restrict towers that
adversely detract from the natural beauty of the city by discouraging visual
eyesores and to minimize the negative economic impact on tourism.



   (B)   The City Council specifically avers that this article is not
enacted with any consideration of the environmental health effects of radio
frequency emissions.



   (C)   The City Council specifically avers that this article is not
enacted for purposes of regulating or interfering with any individual’s use
of his or her personal telephone unit (mobile, analog, digital or otherwise).



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-158  JURISDICTION.



   This article, the regulations and the procedures contained herein shall
apply to and govern each and every lot, parcel or tract of land within the
city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-159  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANTENNA.  A conductor by which electromagnetic waves (telephonic,
radio, television, microwave or otherwise) are transmitted or received.



   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND PLANNING BOARD.  The Board of Adjustment and
Planning Board of the City of Hamlet.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Hamlet.



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the City of Hamlet.



   CONSTRUCTION.  Any new construction, reconstruction, alteration or
expansion of a new or existing tower.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  The person, officer or official and his or her
authorized representative, whom the City Manager has designated as the agent
for the administration and enforcement of this article VI.



   FALL AREA.  A circle whose center is the base of a telecommunications
tower and whose radius is equal to one and one-half the tower’s height. A
fall area of one-half to one will be acceptable with a signed and sealed
statement by a registered professional engineer licensed by the State of
North Carolina indicating such fall area would prevent the tower’s fall
from encroaching onto adjoining property.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint
venture, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate
body, the state and its agencies and political subdivision, or other legal
entity.



   RESIDENT.  Any person residing, doing business or maintaining an
office within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, including, but not
limited to, buildings, that requires location on the land or attachment to
something having permanent location on the land.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER.  Any tower or structure erected for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas designed to transmit or receive
signals (e.g., telephonic, radio, television or microwave).



   TOWER HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from ground to the
uppermost point of the tower and any antenna, structure or appendage fixed
thereto.



   VARIANCE.  Official permission from the Board of Adjustment to depart
from the requirement of this article VI.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed - -)



§ 5-160  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This article shall take effect and be in force on August 10, 1999.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



Division 2:  Regulation of Towers in the City



§ 5-175  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No tower over 50 feet shall be constructed, altered,
reconstructed or expanded until a city tower permit is obtained as provided
in this article VI, division 2. No tower permit shall be issued that is not
in compliance with this article. No building permit shall be issued for any
tower subject to this article that has not received a tower permit.



   (B)   Communication towers are to be placed in the following zoning
jurisdictions:



      (1)   B-1 (Central Business);



      (2)   B-2 (General Business);



      (3)   RA-20 (Residential-Agricultural); and



      (4)   I-2 (Heavy Industrial).



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-176  ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   For purposes of this article, the City Manager shall designate the
Enforcement Officer of this article. The Enforcement Officer or his or her
appointee shall administer and enforce all provisions of this article.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-177  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Tower permit applications are available from the office of the City
Manager.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-178  APPLICATION FEE.



   A fee for reviewing tower permit applications shall be established by
the City Council.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-179  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   Following his or her approval of any tower permit application not
requesting a variance, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a tower permit.
All tower permit conditions shall appear on the face of the site development
plan. The permitee shall acknowledge and agree to permit conditions approved
by the Enforcement Officer. If a building permit is not obtained within 12
months after the tower permit is issued, the tower permit shall expire.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-180  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Following the final decision by the Enforcement Officer to
deny a permit, a tower permit applicant may request that the Board of
Adjustment and Planning Board of the city grant a variance from the tower
approval standards listed in article VI, division 3.



   (B)   Before determining whether to, or not to, grant a variance,
the Board of Adjustment and Planning Board shall hold a public hearing. The
Board of Adjustment and Planning Board shall grant a variance if and only if
it concludes that:



      (1)   Adherence to article VI’s development standards will
cause extraordinary economic hardship to the applicant;



      (2)   The proposed use of the site will not substantially
diminish the public health or safety or be detrimental to the general welfare
of the city; and



      (3)   The proposed use of the site will not substantially
detract from the natural beauty of the area and the city’s future economic
growth and development.



   (C)   Should the Board of Adjustment and Planning Board grant the
requested variance, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a tower permit. The
permit applicant shall acknowledge and agree to permit conditions approved by
the Board of Adjustment and Planning Board. If a building permit is not
obtained within 12 months after the tower permit is issued, the tower permit
shall expire.



   (D)   Should the Board of Adjustment and Planning Board deny the
requested variance, the permit applicant may seek review by the courts as
provided by law.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-181  CRIMINAL SANCTIONS.



   Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Each day’s violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. A violation begins from the date of first
written notification by the Enforcement Officer or the City Manager. Further
violation shall be subject, upon conviction, to fine and/or imprisonment, as
provided by G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-182  REMEDIES.



   If a tower is constructed, reconstructed, altered, expanded or in
violation of this article, the Enforcement Officer or City Manager in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175 to prevent the unlawful use,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or expansion, and to restrain,
correct or abate the violation. The Enforcement Officer or City Manager may
bring an action as to enjoin any violations by action for injunction.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-183  APPEALS.



   Appeals of the decision of the Enforcement Officer or the Board of
Adjustment and Planning Board must be made within 30 working days of the
decision being appealed.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-184  SEVERABILITY.



   Should any section or provision of this article be decided by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, this decision
shall not affect the validity of article VI as a whole or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-185  CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.



   Whenever the regulations of this article conflict with the requirements
of another state or federal statute, or county ordinance or City Code, the
more restrictive standard shall govern.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-186  CITY PROTOCOL FOR ENTERING ONTO TOWER PROPERTIES.



   (A)   Generally.  The city adopts the following rules and
regulations for the entry onto the city’s tower properties. These rules and
regulations are intended to promote safety and protect the city’s
properties from unauthorized access. They are intended to apply not only to
the real estate on which the city’s towers are located, but also the towers
and any attachment, fixture or structure related to the towers (all of which
are hereafter referred to as “the towers” or similar designations).



   (B)   Rules and regulations.



      (1)   The city’s Public Works Department (or its successors)
shall govern its employees’ entry and movement about the city’s towers.



      (2)   Except for the City Manager, the city’s law
enforcement employees, Fire Chief or his or her designee or Public Works
Department employees acting in the course and scope of their employment, no
person shall enter onto tower properties except:



         (a)   During regular business hours;



         (b)   Upon first obtaining the express permission of the
City Manager or his or her designee;



         (c)   Upon first providing to the City Manager or his or
her designee sufficient proof (acceptable to the City Manager, or his or her
designee, in his or her sole discretion) of adequate insurance coverage of
$1,000,000 general liability coverage; and



         (d)   Upon providing to the City Manager or his or her
designee written agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its
employees, Council members and officers for any loss, damage, injury,
compensation or loss relating to the city’s tower properties.



      (3)   No person shall install or locate (or collocate) on the
towers any camera, radios or other equipment of any kind without the express,
written agreement of the city, approved by the City Council in open session.
If any equipment is found on the city’s tower properties for which there is
no agreement, the city shall remove and dispose of the equipment in whatever
ways the city in its sole discretion deems appropriate.



      (4)   Failure to comply with these rules and regulations will
result in immediate removal of any equipment from the city-owned tower.



   (C)   Protocol for entering onto tower properties.



 




CITY OF HAMLET PROTOCOL FOR ENTERING ONTO TOWER PROPERTIES



Request for entry onto the City of Hamlet’s Tower Properties



Company Name:


Contact Person:


Address:


City/State/Zip:


Business Phone:


Cell Phone:


Tower Location:


Equipment to be Placed on Tower:


I                             , certify that I am the
responsible party for the above listed business and agree to abide by the
City of Hamlet protocol for entering onto tower properties as provided to me.
Access other than regular business hours must be documented by the Hamlet
Police Department.


Office Use Only


Insurance coverage of $1,000,000 general liability coverage provided? _____
Yes _____ No


Written agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city provided? _____ Yes
_____ No


Special provisions or requirements:


Access granted for                                      
time period.


Permission granted by:                                    
 


               City Manager




 



(Ord. passed 7-14-2009)



Division 3:  Procedures



§ 5-200  APPLICATION SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCESS.



   (A)   A completed tower permit application and five copies of all
supporting documentation identified in § 5-201 shall be submitted to the
Enforcement Officer for review.



   (B)   The Enforcement Officer shall review the completed tower
permit application for compliance with § 5-201. Any application not
containing all information required by § 5-201 shall be returned to the
applicant for correction and resubmission. If the Enforcement Officer deems
it necessary, he or she may retain, at the permit applicant’s expense, one
or more professional engineers to assist him or her in reviewing any
technical requirements.



   (C)   The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for submitting a
notice to the local newspapers and to all abutting property owners within 200
feet where the proposed tower is to be located. The notice shall state the
Enforcement Officer will submit the permit application to the City Planning
and Zoning Board of Adjustments. The Planning Board will review and consider
the application at its next scheduled meeting.



   (D)   The Enforcement Officer shall either approve, approve with
conditions or disapprove. In making his or her decision, the Enforcement
Officer may include any appropriate conditions he or she deems should be
placed on issuing the permit as identified in § 5-201.



   (E)   The Enforcement Officer shall take formal action to approve,
approve with conditions or disapprove the tower permit application within 90
working days of the application. However, he or she may take up to 90
additional days, if necessary. If the action is to disapprove the tower
permit application, the Enforcement Officer shall include in his or her
notification letter to the applicant the reasons for the action and specific
reference shall be made to the requirements not met.



   (F)   The permitee or his or her agent shall record the site
development plan in the Register of Deeds’ office before obtaining a
building permit for the subject tower.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-201  REQUIREMENTS FOR SITE DEVELOPMENT AND PRELIMINARY TOWER DESIGN
PLANS.



   The site development plan and preliminary design plan shall contain the
following information and be part of the tower permit application:



   (A)   The site development plan shall be prepared by a state
registered land surveyor and contain the following:



      (1)   The tower applicant’s name and property owner’s name
and their addresses, scale, north arrow, vicinity map, tax parcel
identification number and the tower’s latitude and longitude coordinates;



      (2)   The name, address, signature and seal of the surveyor
preparing the site development plan;



      (3)   The surveyed boundary lines of the parcel(s) that will
contain the proposed tower and its fall area;



      (4)   The name, addresses and tax parcel identification
numbers of all owners of property abutting the subject property;



      (5)   All identifiable structures located on the parcel, all
private and public roads, highways and underground and overhead utilities;



      (6)   All existing towers on the property or any towers whose
fall area encroaches onto the property;



      (7)   The proposed tower’s location, the proposed fall area
and the location of all support structures and guy line anchors;



      (8)   The ground elevation of the proposed tower’s base, all
proposed support structures, property corners and a permanent site benchmark.
All elevations shall be determined by using the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929; and



      (9)   All proposed access roads, easements or rights-of-way on
or to the site, and any other improvements to the site.



   (B)   The preliminary tower design plan shall be prepared by a state
registered professional engineer and contain the following:



      (1)   The tower permit applicant’s name and address, scale,
north arrow, vicinity map and tax parcel identification number;



      (2)   The name, address, signature and seal of the engineer
preparing the preliminary tower design plan;



      (3)   A plan showing the base of the tower and the foundations
for all guy line anchors and support structures, all proposed buildings and
any other proposed improvements including access roads and utility
connections within and to the proposed site;



      (4)   A tower elevation showing the proposed lighting, all
proposed antennas and other appendages;



      (5)   An elevation of each proposed set of guy line anchors;
and



      (6)   The proposed tower design loads.



   (C)   A map and description showing the service area(s) for the
proposed tower’s antenna(s) and/or other devices;



   (D)   The applicant shall provide written statements from the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) showing that the proposed tower complies with all permit
regulations administered by that agency or evidence that the proposed tower
is exempt from those regulations;



   (E)   The applicant shall identify all other possible alternatives
considered within the service area for the proposed tower’s antenna(s)
and/or other devices and explain why the proposed tower is necessary and why
existing towers and structures (e.g., Duke Power or Carolina Power and Light
transmission towers) cannot accommodate the proposed antenna(s) and/or other
devices; and



   (F)   The applicant shall identify any variance(s) to the ordinance,
the reason(s) for seeking the variance(s) and any measures that are proposed
to mitigate possible adverse affects of the proposed variance(s).



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999)



§ 5-202  TOWER APPROVAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Any proposed tower shall provide a needed service or benefit
to the residents of the city and the surrounding area that cannot otherwise
be met.



   (B)   Towers shall be sited to contain all ice-fall or debris from
tower failure on-site. The designated fall area is one and one-half times the
tower height or a minimum of 100 feet from property lines. A fall area of
one-half to one will be acceptable with a signed and sealed statement by a
registered professional engineer licensed by the State of North Carolina
indicating such fall area would prevent the tower’s fall from encroaching
onto adjoining property.



   (C)   A tower shall be set back from other on-site and off-site
towers and supporting structures or other arrangements shall be made, such
that one tower will not strike another tower or its support structure if it
falls.



   (D)   Tower lighting shall not exceed the minimum standards of the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for a red obstruction lighting system
contained in Advisory Circular No. 70/7460-IF, dated September 27, 1978, as
amended.



   (E)   To defeat unauthorized access, the base of the tower shall be
surrounded by a fence or wall at least eight feet in height unless the tower
is constructed entirely on a building over eight feet in height.



   (F)   Any telecommunications tower shall be engineered and
constructed to accommodate two additional antennas that are at least as large
as the largest proposed antenna identified in § 5-201(B)(4).



   (G)   Tower permit approval is conditional subject to the owner(s)
agreeing to allow future collocation of other antenna(s) or transmitting
devices. This agreement shall be submitted in writing and recorded in the
Register of Deeds’ office.



   (H)   No tower shall exceed 200 feet in height.



   (I)   Towers shall be blended with the natural surroundings as much
as possible. Colors and materials shall be used that are compatible with the
surrounding area, except when otherwise required by applicable federal or
state regulations.



   (J)   The tower and equipment shall be located, designed and/or
screened to blend with the existing natural, or built surroundings to reduce
the visual impacts as much as possible, and to be compatible with neighboring
land uses and the character of the community.



   (K)   Any tower not in use for two continuous years shall be removed
within 120 days after the tower owner and the current property owner have
received written notice by the Enforcement Officer or the City Manager. The
written notice, mailed return receipt requested, shall be delivered to both
the tower owner identified on the tower permit application and the current
property owner.



   (L)   Property located within the tower’s fall area shall not be
subdivided as long as the tower is standing.



   (M)   A sign identifying the owner(s) and/or operator(s) of the
tower and an emergency telephone number shall be displayed in a clearly
visible location on the tower’s premises.



(Ord. passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 6:  CEMETERIES



Section



   6-1   Interments to made only in cemeteries



   6-2   Cemetery lot prices



   6-3   Injuring, defacing and the like graves



   6-4   Injury to monuments, shrubs and the like



   6-5   Disturbing floral vases, ornaments and the like



   6-6   Destruction of flowers



   6-7   Playing in cemeteries



   6-8   Discharge of firearms



   6-9   Cemetery not to be used as thoroughfare



   6-10   Dogs not allowed



Charter reference:



   Cemetery regulations, see § 19.4



   Interments within city, see § 19.5



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



   Driving through funeral procession, see § 11-65



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



   Noise, see ch. 13



Statutory reference:



   Cemeteries, G.S. Chapter 65



   Inscription on gravestone or monument charging commission of crime, see
G.S. § 14-401.3



   Municipal cemeteries, see G.S. §§ 160A-341 et seq.



   Practice of funeral service, see G.S. §§ 90-210.18A et seq.



   Protection of unmarked human skeletal remains, see G.S. Chapter 70



   State maintenance of cemetery entrances and exits, see G.S. §
136-18(20)



§ 6-1  INTERMENTS TO MADE ONLY IN CEMETERIES.



   No person shall bury or inter a human corpse except in the cemeteries.



(1972 Code, § 6-3)



§ 6-2  CEMETERY LOT PRICES.



   Cemetery lot prices shall be as provided in the schedule on file in the
City Clerk’s office.



(1972 Code, § 6-5)



§ 6-3  INJURING, DEFACING AND THE LIKE GRAVES.



   No person shall disturb any grave; deface, pull up or remove anything
put or placed to mark a grave or for the ornamentation thereof, or any paling
or wall around a grave; or remove any plant, post or timbers in a cemetery,
except by order or with the permission of the person in charge of the
cemetery or of the owner of the grave.



(1972 Code, § 6-7)



§ 6-4  INJURY TO MONUMENTS, SHRUBS AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb,
monument, gravestone or other thing placed in the cemeteries or any fence,
railing or other work for the protection or ornamentation of any tomb,
monument, gravestone or other structure in any cemetery. No person shall
unlawfully and willfully destroy, cut, break, remove or injure any tree,
shrub or plant in any cemetery, or commit any other depredation within the
limits of any cemetery.



(1972 Code, § 6-8)



Statutory reference:



   Desecrating, plowing over or covering up graves, see G.S. § 14-149



§ 6-5  DISTURBING FLORAL VASES, ORNAMENTS AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall unlawfully and willfully disturb or remove any vase,
jardiniere or other receptacle for flowers or shrubs, or other thing placed
on or by any grave for the ornamentation thereof.



(1972 Code, § 6-9)



§ 6-6  DESTRUCTION OF FLOWERS.



   No person shall wantonly or willfully injure or destroy any flowers,
either wild or cultivated, in any cemetery.



(1972 Code, § 6-10)



§ 6-7  PLAYING IN CEMETERIES.



   No person shall use any part of a cemetery as a playground.



(1972 Code, § 6-11)



§ 6-8  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.



   No person shall discharge any firearm in any cemetery except for
honorary burial purposes.



(1972 Code, § 6-12)



§ 6-9  CEMETERY NOT TO BE USED AS THOROUGHFARE.



   No person shall use any cemetery as a common thoroughfare or public
walk, and all traveling through or across any cemetery, except for cemetery
purposes or for the purpose of visiting a burial lot, is prohibited.



(1972 Code, § 6-17)



§ 6-10  DOGS NOT ALLOWED.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to allow his or her dog to be upon
the property of Mary Love Cemetery or to walk a dog or dogs upon the property
known as Mary Love Cemetery or to be in possession of a dog within the area
known as Mary Love Cemetery.



(Ord. passed 9-11-1984)



Cross-reference:



   Animals, see ch. 4



CHAPTER 7:  EMERGENCIES



Section



Article I:  In General



   7-1 through 7-25   Reserved



Article II:  Local Emergencies



   7-26   Existence of state of emergency



   7-27   Proclamation authorized



   7-28   Limitations and exceptions to emergency restrictions



   7-29   Enumeration of authorized restrictions



   7-30   Extension, alteration and the like of proclamation; duty to
obey



   7-31   Proclamation of end of emergency



   7-32   Emergency evacuation plan



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



   Parades, picketing and demonstrations, see ch. 15



Editor’s note:



   An emergency evacuation plan has been established by contract with the
county.



Statutory reference:



   States of emergency in municipalities, see G.S. Ch. 166A



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§§ 7-1 THROUGH 7-25  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II:  LOCAL EMERGENCIES



§ 7-26  EXISTENCE OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.



   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of
great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public
emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to
maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property.



(1972 Code, § 7-2)



§ 7-27  PROCLAMATION AUTHORIZED.



   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people of the city
or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all
persons the existence of a state of emergency and, in order to more
effectively protect the lives and property of people within the city, to
place in effect any of the restrictions authorized by this article.



(1972 Code, § 7-3)



§ 7-28  LIMITATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS TO EMERGENCY RESTRICTIONS.



   The Mayor may limit by the proclamation the application of any part of
the restrictions to any area specifically designated or described within the
city limits and to specific hours of the day or night. He or she may exempt
from any part of the restrictions law enforcement officers, firefighters and
other public employees; doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other
medical facilities; on-duty military personnel, whether state or federal;
on-duty employees of public utilities, public transportation companies;
newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting and television broadcasting
corporations operated for profit; and any other classes of persons as may be
essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to
serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people of the city.



(1972 Code, § 7-4)



§ 7-29  ENUMERATION OF AUTHORIZED RESTRICTIONS.



   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may
impose by proclamation any of the following restrictions prohibiting or
regulating:



   (A)   The possession off one’s own premises of explosives,
firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind and the purchase, sale,
transfer or other disposition thereof;



   (B)   The buying or selling of beer, wine or intoxicating beverages
of any kind and their possession or consumption off one’s own premises;



   (C)   Any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or participation
therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any public
property;



   (D)   The sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha or any other explosive
or inflammable fluids or substances;



   (E)   The travel upon any public street or upon any other public
property, except by those in search of medical assistance, food or other
commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves or
their families; and



   (F)   The participation in or carrying on of any business activity
and the keeping open of places of business, places of entertainment and any
other places of public assembly.



(1972 Code, § 7-5)



§ 7-30  EXTENSION, ALTERATION AND THE LIKE OF PROCLAMATION; DUTY TO OBEY.



   (A)   Any proclamation may be extended, altered or repealed in any
particular during the continued or threatened existence of a state of
emergency by the issuance of a subsequent proclamation.



   (B)   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, no
person shall violate any restriction imposed by a proclamation authorized by
this article.



(1972 Code, § 7-6)



§ 7-31  PROCLAMATION OF END OF EMERGENCY.



   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of a declared state of emergency or of
the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to
do so by the Council.



(1972 Code, § 7-7)



§ 7-32  EMERGENCY EVACUATION PLAN.



   The emergency evacuation plan of the city is hereby adopted as a part
of this section as if set out at length herein.



CHAPTER 8:  FINANCE AND TAXATION



Section



Article I:  In General



   8-1   Payment for tax sale expenses



Article II:  Depositories



   8-26   Designation



   8-27   Authorization to accept, release and the like securities



   8-28   Withdrawal of funds



   8-29   Approval by Council required prior to charging account



   8-30   Not to honor known defective instrument



   8-31   No duty of inquiry



   8-32   Payment and verification of checks



Article III:  Tax on Gross Receipts Derived From Short-Term Lease or Rental
of Vehicles



   8-45   Definitions



   8-46   Levy of tax



   8-47   Collection of the tax



   8-48   Report and payment of tax



   8-49   Taxpayer to keep records



   8-50   Tax Collector to provide forms



   8-51   Situs



   8-52   Penalties and remedies



   8-53   Administration



   8-54   Severability



   8-55   Authority



   8-56   Effective date



Article IV:  Franchise Tax on Electric Power Companies



   8-70   Citation



   8-71   Definitions



   8-72   Ratification of existing permits



   8-73   Levy of tax



   8-74   Period for which tax due



   8-75   Report and payment of tax



   8-76   Refunds



   8-77   Penalties and remedies



   8-78   Administration



   8-79   Confidentiality of records



   8-80   Article as cumulative



   8-81   Severability



   8-82   Service upon electric power companies



   8-83   Effective date



Charter reference:



   Assessments for street improvements, see art. IX



   Taxation, see art. VIII



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



   Buildings, see ch. 5



   Funding of Planning Board, see § 2-125



   Licenses and business regulations, see ch. 10



Statutory reference:



   Collection and foreclosure of taxes, see G.S. §§ 105-349 et seq.



   Judicial sales, see G.S. §§ 1-339.1 et seq.



   Local government finance, see G.S. Chapter 159



   Municipal taxation, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.



   Public contracts, see G.S. §§ 143-128 et seq.



   Selection of depository, deposits to be secured, see G.S. § 159-31



   Special assessments, see G.S. §§ 160A-216 et seq.



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 8-1  PAYMENT FOR TAX SALE EXPENSES.



   The City Manager is hereby authorized to pay foreclosure, advertising
and land sale expenses in connection with tax sales when conducted by the
City Attorney.



(1972 Code, § 8-8)



Statutory reference:



   Charges for legal advertising, see G.S. § 1-596



ARTICLE II:  DEPOSITORIES



§ 8-26  DESIGNATION.



   The City Manager or any other officer designated by the Council is
hereby authorized, empowered and directed to deposit those funds belonging to
the city with those banks, savings and loan associations or trust companies
as may be designated from time to time by the Council.



(1972 Code, § 8-2)



§ 8-27  AUTHORIZATION TO ACCEPT, RELEASE AND THE LIKE SECURITIES.



   The City Manager shall have authority to accept and release deposit
insurance, surety bonds and investment securities deposited by the official
depository of the city to secure deposits of the city therein, upon approval
of the Council. A specimen of the signature of the City Manager shall be
affixed below the acceptance or release.



(1972 Code, § 8-1)



§ 8-28  WITHDRAWAL OF FUNDS.



   Except as other provided by law, all checks or drafts on an official
depository shall be signed by the Finance Officer or a properly designated
deputy finance officer and countersigned by another official of the local
government or public authority designated for this purpose by the governing
board.



(G.S. § 159-25(b)) (1972 Code, § 8-3)



§ 8-29  APPROVAL BY COUNCIL REQUIRED PRIOR TO CHARGING ACCOUNT.



   Any other obligation of the city shall not be charged to the city
depository account until after the same is approved by the Council.



(1972 Code, § 8-4)



§ 8-30  NOT TO HONOR KNOWN DEFECTIVE INSTRUMENT.



   The official depository shall at no time pay any ordered obligation
when there appears, to its knowledge, any defect in either the instrument or
the parties executing the same or the parties presenting the same for payment.



(1972 Code, § 8-5)



§ 8-31  NO DUTY OF INQUIRY.



   The official depository shall not be required to inquire into any check
drawn on the account other than to see that the same is drawn on the regular
check form of the city and signed as above set forth. It shall not be the
duty of the depository to make any inquiry relating to any check unless the
circumstances connected therewith are openly in conflict with the usual
practices of the city. The depository shall have the discretion to refuse
payment of any checks concerning which there may be any doubt as to their
legality or to withhold payment thereof until the depository has time to make
full and complete investigation thereof.



(1972 Code, § 8-6)



§ 8-32  PAYMENT AND VERIFICATION OF CHECKS.



   The official depository shall not pay any checks that do not meet the
requirements of this article, and it shall be the duty of the depository to
verify any changes in checks differing from that set forth herein before
paying the same.



(1972 Code, § 8-7)



ARTICLE III:  TAX ON GROSS RECEIPTS DERIVED FROM SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL
OF VEHICLES



§ 8-45  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the common meanings of words, the following definitions
shall be applicable herein.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person that leases or rents a vehicle on a short-term
lease or rental basis.



   GENERAL STATUTES.  The North Carolina General Statutes and any
reference to a particular section thereof shall include the same as may be
from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or superseded.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  The amount that is or would be reported as gross
receipts on a businesses state income tax return, or on the federal income
tax return filed with the state income tax return if the state return does
not separately state gross receipts for the most recently completed tax year.
Taxes collected hereunder are not subject to the tax herein imposed and are
not included in GROSS RECEIPTS.



   LEASE or RENTAL.  A transfer, for consideration, of the use but not
the ownership of property to another for a period of time.



(G.S. § 105-164.3(7a))



   LONG-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL.  A lease or rental made under a written
agreement to lease or rent property to the same person for a period of at
least 365 continuous days.



(G.S. § 105-187.1(3))



   PERSON.  Any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary,
corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship,
company, firm or other legal entity.



   SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL.  Any lease or rental of a vehicle that is
not a long-term lease or rental.



(G.S. §§ 105-187.1(5), 160A-215.1(e)(2))



   TAX COLLECTOR.  The individual appointed by the governing body
pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Charter to collect taxes on
behalf of the city and any other person authorized to carry out the duties
and functions of that individual.



   TAXPAYER.  Any person liable for the taxes imposed by this article III.



   VEHICLE.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A motor vehicle of the private passenger type, including
a passenger van, mini van or sport utility vehicle;



      (2)   A motor vehicle of the cargo type, including a cargo
van, pickup truck or truck with a gross vehicle weight of 26,000 pounds or
less used predominantly in the transportation of property for other than
commercial freight, and that does not require the operator to possess a
commercial driver’s license; and/or



      (3)   A trailer or semitrailer with a gross vehicle weight of
6,000 pounds or less.



(G.S. § 160A-215.1(e)(1))



(Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-46  LEVY OF TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to 1.5% of the
gross receipts derived from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at
retail to the general public. This tax on gross receipts is in addition to
the privilege taxes authorized by G.S. § 160A-211.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-47  COLLECTION OF THE TAX.



   Every person engaged in the business of the short-term lease or rental
of vehicles at retail to the general public shall collect at the time of the
lease or rental the tax herein levied, place the tax so collected in a
segregated account and thereafter remit the tax to the Tax Collector in
accordance with the provisions of this article. The taxpayer shall include a
provision in each retail short-term lease or rental agreement stating that
the percentage amount enacted by this article of the total lease or rental
price, excluding sales tax, is being charged as a tax on gross receipts. The
amount of the tax shall be stated separately from the lease or rental and
shown separately on the taxpayer’s records. The tax shall be paid by the
customer to the taxpayer as trustee for and on account of the city. The
taxpayer shall be liable for the collection thereof and for its payment to
the Tax Collector and the taxpayer’s failure to charge or to collect the
tax from the customer shall not affect the liability.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-48  REPORT AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   Taxes levied under this article are due when a return is required to be
filed. Every taxpayer shall, within the time specified, submit a return to
the Tax Collector on the form prescribed by the Tax Collector. A return must
be signed by the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s agent. Returns of taxpayers are
due to the Tax Collector each month on or before the fifteenth day of the
month following the month in which the tax accrues. As provided in G.S. §
160A-208.1, a return shall not be considered a public record, and information
contained in a return shall not be considered a public record and information
contained in a return may be disclosed only in accordance therewith.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-49  TAXPAYER TO KEEP RECORDS.



   The taxpayer shall keep and preserve suitable records of the gross
receipts received by the taxpayer in the conduct of business and those other
books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax for
which the taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this article. It shall
be the duty of the taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of three years
all records of gross receipts and other books and accounts described. All
records, books and accounts herein described shall be open for examination at
all reasonable hours during the day by the Tax Collector or his or her duly
authorized agent.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-50  TAX COLLECTOR TO PROVIDE FORMS.



   The Tax Collector shall design, prepare, print and make available to
all taxpayers operating within the municipal boundaries of the city forms and
instructions for filing returns to ensure a full collection of and an
accounting for taxes due. The failure of any taxpayer to obtain or receive
forms shall not relieve that taxpayer from the payment of the tax at the time
and in the manner provided.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-51  SITUS.



   The transaction giving rise to the tax herein levied shall be deemed to
have occurred at the location of the entity from which the customer takes
delivery of the vehicle.



(G.S. § 160A-215.1(b))  (Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-52  PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.



   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to
G.S. Chapter 105, Subchapter VIII (Local Government Sales and Use Tax), as
contained in G.S. Chapter 105, Subchapter 1, Articles 5 and 9 thereof, shall
be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized to be levied and collected
under this article, to the extent that the same are not inconsistent with the
provisions hereof. The governing body of the city may exercise any power the
Secretary of Revenue may exercise in collecting sales and use taxes.



(G.S. § 160A-215.1(f))  (Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-53  ADMINISTRATION.



   In addition to the provisions herein, the levy and collection of the
taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the same manner as
the Sales and Use Tax as provided in G.S. Chapter 105, Subchapter 1, Article
5.



(G.S. § 160A-215.1(d))  (Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-54  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause or provision of this article shall be found to
be invalid, the validity of the remaining sections, clauses or provisions
shall not be affected thereby.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-55  AUTHORITY.



   This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S. §
160A-215.1.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



§ 8-56  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This article and the taxes thereby levied and imposed shall become
effective July 1, 2000.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2000)



ARTICLE IV:  FRANCHISE TAX ON ELECTRIC POWER COMPANIES



§ 8-70  CITATION.



   This article IV shall be known and may be cited as the city’s
Franchise Tax on Electric Power Ordinance, and shall be codified as chapter
8, article IV.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-71  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the common meanings of words, the following
definitions shall be applicable herein.



      CITY.  The City of Hamlet.



      CITY FRANCHISE TAX.  The franchise enacted by this article IV.



      REVENUE ACT.  G.S. Chapter 105, Subchapter I.



      SECRETARY OF REVENUE.  The Secretary of Revenue of the state.



      STATE FRANCHISE TAX.  The franchise or privilege tax imposed on
an electric power company engaged in the business of furnishing electricity,
electric lights, current or power as provided in G.S. Chapter 105, Article 3,
entitled Franchise Tax.



      STATE FRANCHISE TAX ACT.  G.S. Chapter 105, Article 3.



      TAX COLLECTOR.  The department of the city government or the
official agency of the state designated by law and authorized by law to
administer the collection of the tax herein levied.



      TAXPAYER(S).  Any electric power company liable for the taxes
imposed by this article IV.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, the
definitions of words, terms and phrases as set forth and/or applied in G.S.
Chapter 105, Article 3 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof.



      (2)   Reference to any provision of provisions in the General
Statutes shall include the same as may be from time to time amended,
modified, supplemented, revised or superseded.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-72  RATIFICATION OF EXISTING PERMITS.



   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Secretary
of Revenue pursuant to the Revenue Act are for the purposes of this article
hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional city permit for the same purpose.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-73  LEVY OF TAX.



   A franchise tax is hereby levied and imposed for the period(s)
designated in § 8-74 upon the electric power companies engaged in the
business of furnishing electricity, electric lights, current or power within
the corporate limits of the city. The tax shall be 3.09% of the companies’
taxable gross receipts from the business of furnishing electricity, electric
lights, current or power. It is intended that taxable gross receipts
hereunder shall be the same as those taxable under the State Franchise Tax
Act.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-74  PERIOD FOR WHICH TAX DUE.



   When a distribution to the city as required under the State Franchise
Tax Act shall not be made, the city franchise tax shall be levied for the
periods herein described. A period for which the tax shall be due shall begin
on the first of the first calendar month following the month during which a
distribution under the State Franchise Tax Act was due, but not made, to the
city and shall continue from month to month until a time as a distribution as
required under the State Franchise Tax Act shall be made. The city shall
notify taxpayers within a reasonable time after a required distribution is or
is not made by the Secretary of Revenue.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-75  REPORT AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   The tax shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time and in the form
and manner provided for the payment of sales and use taxes pursuant to and in
accordance with G.S. § 105-164.16 as the same applied to a taxpayer who is
consistently liable for more than $100 but less than $10,000 a month. As
applicable to sales and use taxes, the taxpayer must file a return and pay
the taxes due on a monthly basis. The tax shall be due and payable when a
return is required to be filed.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-76  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Upon the resumption of distributions by the Secretary of
Revenue as required under the State Franchise Tax Act, a refund may be due to
a taxpayer as specified in this section.



   (B)   A refund in the amount indicated herein below shall be due to
a taxpayer within 30 days after presentation to the city by the taxpayer of a
written certification made by the Secretary of Revenue stating that portion
of the city’s percentage distribution amount of the state franchise tax
that was paid by the taxpayer and allocable to the calendar quarter for which
the most recent distribution was made.



   (C)   The amount of a refund shall equal the portion of the
percentage distribution amount designated by the Secretary of Revenue.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-77  PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.



   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to the
State Franchise Tax Act as contained in G.S. Chapter 105, Subchapter 1,
Article 9 shall be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized to be
levied and collected under this article, to the extent that the same are not
inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The governing body of the city may
exercise any power the Secretary of Revenue may exercise in collecting the
state franchise tax.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-78  ADMINISTRATION.



   In addition to the provisions herein and to the extent that the same
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the levy and
collection of taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the
same manner as the State Franchise Tax Act as contained in G.S. Chapter 105,
Subchapter 1, Article 9.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-79  CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS.



   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files
concerning the administration of the city franchise tax is legislatively
recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provision of G.S.
Chapter 105 are adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable
to administration of the tax levied herein as if set forth in full.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-80  ARTICLE AS CUMULATIVE.



   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and
all other taxing provisions of city ordinances.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-81  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any
section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article IV is for any reason
held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, this
decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause
hereof.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-82  SERVICE UPON ELECTRIC POWER COMPANIES.



   The city shall serve a copy of this article upon the registered agent
for any electric power companies affected hereby.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



§ 8-83  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This article shall become and be effective on the date and time as
passed by the City Council, June 10, 2002.



(Ord. passed 6-10-2002)



CHAPTER 9:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section



Article I:  In General



   9-1   Displays, sale of pyrotechnics, fireworks



   9-2   Deposit of ashes, matter subject to spontaneous combustion



   9-3   Open burning



Article II:  Fire Department



   9-36   Command at scene of fire



   9-37   Authority to summon assistance



   9-38   Department vehicles answering alarm shall have right-of-way



   9-39   Interfering with firefighters or apparatus



   9-40   Congregating near fire



   9-41   Riding on Department vehicles



   9-42   Calls outside city limits; fee



   9-43   Compensation for volunteer firefighters



Article III:  Fire Inspection



   9-55   Title



   9-56   Intent of article



   9-57   Fire inspector to enforce



   9-58   Adoption of technicals and standards by reference; copies on
file



   9-59   Inspection of buildings and premises



   9-60   Inspection fees



   9-61   Fee schedule



   9-62   Service of orders or notices



   9-63   Violations and penalties



   9-64   Emergency entry



   9-65   Inspection schedule



Cross-reference:



   Accumulation of rubbish, see § 14-16



   Administration, see ch. 2



   Administration of abandoned vehicle ordinance, see § 11-197



   Buildings, see ch. 5



   Emergencies, see ch. 7



   Exemptions from traffic rules for authorized emergency vehicles, see §
11-6



   False fire report, see § 14-15



   Fire hydrants, see § 21-18



   Inspection of construction work, see § 5-73



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



   Municipal lakes, parks and recreation, see ch. 12



   Nuisances, declaration of, see § 17-61



   Solid waste and vegetation, see ch. 17



   Unsafe buildings, see §§ 5-101 through 5-111



   Water and sewers, see ch. 21



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see G.S. § 160A-76(b)



   Fire protection generally, see G.S. Chapter 69



   Fire protection in municipalities, see G.S. §§ 160A-291 et seq.



   Fire protection outside city limits, see G.S. §§ 58-83-1, 160A-293



   Firemen’s pension fund, see G.S. § 160A-163



   Insurance laws relating to fires, see G.S. Chapter 58, Article 78 et
seq.



   Regulation of explosive, corrosive, inflammable or radioactive
substances, see G.S. § 160A-183



   Setting fires unlawfully, see G.S. §§ 14-136 et seq.



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 9-1  DISPLAYS, SALE OF PYROTECHNICS, FIREWORKS.



   No pyrotechnical display of any kind shall be permitted, except under
the supervision of the Fire Chief, and the sale, giving away, bartering,
exchanging or sale of firecrackers and the like, is strictly prohibited.



(1972 Code, §§ 9-3, 15-13)



Statutory reference:



   Sale and the like of pyrotechnics, see G.S. §§ 14-410 et seq.



§ 9-2  DEPOSIT OF ASHES, MATTER SUBJECT TO SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION.



   Ashes, smoldering coals or embers, greasy or oily substances and all
other matter which is subject to spontaneous combustion, unless kept in
metallic or noncombustible receptacles, may not be deposited within 15 feet
of any wooden or plastered wall, partition or fence, wooden floor, lumber,
rubbish or other combustible material. These receptacles, unless resting on
the ground outside a building, shall be placed on noncombustible stands and
kept apart from any wall or partition by at least two feet. Nothing in this
section shall prohibit the deposit of cold or wet ashes and cinders for
purposes of improving an unpaved alley or walkway.



(1972 Code, § 9-4)



§ 9-3  OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   It shall be illegal for anyone to burn, or cause to be burned,
any trash, refuse, shavings, paper, leaves, litter, tires, shingles, paints
or other material of any kind outside any house or in or on any street,
sidewalk, lot or yard within the city limits of the city.



   (B)   Contractors, developers or corporations involved in the
clearing of land, rights-of-way or easements for development purposes may
burn only upon submitting to the Fire Chief a permit from the appropriate
state authorities authorizing specific burnings.



   (C)   Campfires, outdoor barbecues, bonfires for festive occasions
and fires for training firefighting personnel are exempt from the provisions
of this section.



(1972 Code, § 9-7)  (Ord. 2001-04, passed 6-12-2001)



ARTICLE II:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 9-36  COMMAND AT SCENE OF FIRE.



   The Fire Chief or his or her designated agent shall be the officer in
command at the scene of a fire, and his or her commands shall be promptly
obeyed.



(1972 Code, § 9-9)



§ 9-37  AUTHORITY TO SUMMON ASSISTANCE.



   (A)   The officer in command at a fire shall have authority to
summon aid, and no citizen so summoned shall refuse to help in extinguishing
a fire or in protecting exposed property.



   (B)   During the continuance of a fire, the Fire Chief, his or her
assistant or the City Manager shall be authorized to call upon any citizen to
render assistance in pulling down or demolishing any building or in removing
goods or furniture from a building on fire or in danger of fire; provided,
that no building may be pulled down or destroyed by anyone without the
consent of the officer of the Fire Department or the Police Department who is
in charge.



(1972 Code, § 9-10)



§ 9-38  DEPARTMENT VEHICLES ANSWERING ALARM SHALL HAVE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   In the event of a fire alarm, the apparatus of the Fire Department
responding to it shall have the right-of-way in and upon all streets.



(1972 Code, § 9-11)



Cross-reference:



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



§ 9-39  INTERFERING WITH FIREFIGHTERS OR APPARATUS.



   No person shall interfere with the activities of the firefighting crew,
nor shall anyone use or damage any apparatus of the Fire Department,
including fire hydrants.



(1972 Code, § 9-12)



Statutory reference:



   Blocking firefighting equipment, see G.S. § 20-157



§ 9-40  CONGREGATING NEAR FIRE.



   No person shall congregate on the streets or public places near a fire
in a manner which would interfere with the activities of the Fire Department.



(1972 Code, § 9-13)



§ 9-41  RIDING ON DEPARTMENT VEHICLES.



   No person other than a member of the Fire Department shall ride on any
truck, vehicle or apparatus of the Fire Department, except by permission of
the Fire Chief.



(1972 Code, § 9-14)



§ 9-42  CALLS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS; FEE.



   Fees for calls outside the city limits are collected by Richmond County
per their fee schedule on file. (1972 Code, § 9-17)



§ 9-43  COMPENSATION FOR VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS.



   Volunteer firefighters shall be compensated as provided by the Council;
provided, that no volunteer firefighter shall receive any compensation for
any fire call unless he or she performs as much as 30 minutes’ service at
the immediate fire or at the fire station after the fire, except in cases of
false alarm. (1972 Code, § 9-18)



ARTICLE III:  FIRE INSPECTION



§ 9-55  TITLE.



   This article shall be known as the Fire Prevention, Protection and
Inspection Ordinance of the city, and may be cited as such and referred to
herein as the Fire Inspection Ordinance.



(1972 Code, § 9-61)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993)



§ 9-56  INTENT OF ARTICLE.



   (A)   It is the intent of this article to prescribe regulations
consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding of
life and property within the jurisdiction of the city from the hazards of
fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices and from hazardous conditions in the use or
occupancy of buildings or premises.



   (B)   This article shall not be construed to hold the city
responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection
or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect.



(1972 Code, § 9-62)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993)



§ 9-57  FIRE INSPECTOR TO ENFORCE.



   The fire prevention, protection and inspection ordinance of the city
shall be enforced by the City Fire Inspector and his or her authorized
representatives or as otherwise provided herein.



(1972 Code, § 9-63)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993)



§ 9-58  ADOPTION OF TECHNICALS AND STANDARDS BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE.



   (A)   There is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein
that a certain code, known as and entitled International Fire Code, most
recent edition. Copies of the city fire prevention, protection and inspection
ordinance and all technicals and standards adopted by reference, shall be
filed with, and available for public inspection in the offices of the City
Clerk and the Fire Inspector.



   (B)   Amendments to codes and standards adopted by reference herein
which are adopted and published by the State Building Code Council shall be
effective in the city at the time those amendments become a part of the most
recent International Fire Code.



(1972 Code, § 9-64)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993)



§ 9-59  INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS AND PREMISES.



   Subject to the limitations and conditions stated in the State Building
Code, it shall be the duty of the Fire Inspector to inspect or cause to be
inspected, as often as he or she may deem necessary or appropriate, all
buildings, structures and premises within his or her jurisdiction for the
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition which may
cause fire or explosion, endanger life from fire or explosion, or any
violations of the provisions of this article, or any other ordinances
pertaining to fire or explosion hazards.



(1972 Code, § 9-65)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993)



§ 9-60  INSPECTION FEES.



   The State Fire Prevention Code, Chapter 1, § 105 states: There shall
be two types of permits as follows:



   1. Operation Permits. An operational permit allows the applicant to
conduct an operation or a business for which permit is required by Section
105.6 of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code for either:



      1.1   A prescribed period



      1.2   Until renewed or revoked



   2.   Construction permit. A construction permit allows the applicant
to install or modify system and equipment for which a permit is required by
Section 105.7 of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code.



      1.1   A prescribed period



      1.2   Until renewed or revoked



(1972 Code, § 9-66)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993)



§ 9-61  FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Listed below are mandatory operational permits that the City
Fire Department must issue.



 


Mandatory Operational Permits

 

Fee





Amusement buildings
 

$25



Carnivals and fairs
 

$25



Covered mall buildings
 

$25



Exhibits and trade shows
 

$25



Explosives
 

$25



Flammable and combustible liquids
 

$25



Fumigation and thermal insecticdal fogging
 

$25



Hazardous materials
 

$25



Liquid or gas fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings
 

$25



Private fire hydrants
 

$25



Pyrotechnic special effects material
 

$25



Spraying and dipping
 

$25



Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies
 

$25





 



   (B)   Listed below is a list of mandatory construction permits that
the City Fire Department must issue.



 


Mandatory Construction Permits

 

Fee





Automatic fire extinguishing systems
 

$100



Compressed gases
 

$50



Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment
 

$100



Fire pumps and related equipment
 

$100



Flammable and combustible liquids
 

$50



Hazardous materials
 

$50



Industrial ovens
 

$50



Private fire hydrants
 

$50



Spraying and dipping
 

$50



Standpipe systems
 

$100



Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies
 

$50





 



(1972 Code, § 9-67)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993)



§ 9-62  SERVICE OF ORDERS OR NOTICES.



   (A)   The service of orders or notices for the correction of
violations of the Code shall be made upon the owner, occupant or other person
responsible for the conditions, either by personally delivering a copy of the
same to that person or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any
person in charge of the premises or by sending a copy of the order or notice
by certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address.



   (B)   When buildings or other premises are occupied by other than
the owner under a lease or other agreement, the orders of notices issued to
correct violations of the Code shall apply to the occupant thereof provided
that where the orders or notices require the making of additions to or
changes in the premises themselves which may become part of the real property
of the owner, then in those cases, the orders or notices shall also be issued
to the owner of the premises or real property. Failure to deliver an order or
notice to the owner, if other than an occupant, shall not invalidate the
order or notice.



(1972 Code, § 9-68)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993)



§ 9-63  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article adopted or who shall fail to comply with any judicial warrant, lawful
order or regulation made thereunder or any permit issued thereunder, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. In the name of the city, the City Fire
Inspector, through the City Attorney, may enjoin the construction or erection
of any facility, building or structure which does not conform to the
provisions of this article.



   (B)   This article may be enforced by any of the remedies set forth
in G.S. § 160A-175, in addition to others specifically set out herein or in
the city.



   (C)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a civil penalty for each violation in the amount
established by ordinance of the City Council. The civil penalty schedule
shall be filed with the City Clerk and in the Fire Inspector’s office for
public inspection. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.



   (D)   Civil penalties must be paid within the number of days
specified in the billing or notice after a citation has been issued by the
Fire Inspector for a violation.



   (E)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article
hereby adopted or who shall fail to comply with any notice of violation
issued by the City Fire Inspector shall be issued a civil penalty as listed
below. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.



 


Violation

 

Fee





Locked - blocked unmarked exits


   First offense
 

No charge



   Second offense
 

$200



   Third offense
 

$400



All other violations


   First offense
 

No charge



   Second offense
 

$50



   Third offense
 

$75



Failure to obtain a permit
 

$50





 



(1972 Code, § 9-69)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993; Ord. passed 6-12-2007)



§ 9-64  EMERGENCY ENTRY.



   The City Fire Inspector or his or her authorized representatives shall
have the right to enter any building or premises without permission or
warrant in the event of any emergency situation constituting a threat to
human life, property or the public safety, for the purpose of eliminating,
controlling or abating the dangerous condition or situation.



(1972 Code, § 9-70)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993)



§ 9-65  INSPECTION SCHEDULE.



   (A)   In order to preserve and to protect public health and safety,
and to satisfy the requirements of G.S. §§ 153A-364 and 160A-424, political
subdivision assuming inspection duties, as set out in G.S. §§ 153A-351 and
160A-411, shall have a periodic inspection schedule for the purpose of
identifying activities and conditions in buildings, structures and premises
that pose dangers of fire, explosion or related hazards. The inspection
schedule shall be approved by the local governing body and shall be submitted
to the Division of Engineering of the Department of Insurance by January
1,1993. In no case may inspections be conducted less frequently than
described in the schedule below:



 


Inspection Frequency

 

Facilities



Once every 6 months
 
Schools


Once every year
 
Hazardous, institutional, high rise, assembly and residential (only interior
common areas) except one- and two-family dwelling units of multi-family
occupancies and day care


Once every 2 years
 
Educational (except public schools) and industrial


Once every 3 years
 
Business, mercantile, storage, churches and synagogues



 



   (B)   Frequency rates for inspections of occupancies as mandated by
the General Statutes shall supersede this schedule. Nothing in this section
is intended to prevent a jurisdiction from conducting more frequent
inspections than the schedule listed above or the schedule filed with the
Engineering Division of the State Department of Insurance.



(1972 Code, § 9-71)  (Ord. 93-005, passed 4-13-1993)



CHAPTER 9.5:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



Article I:  General Provisions



   9.5-1   Statutory authorization



   9.5-2   Findings of fact



   9.5-3   Statement of purpose



   9.5-4   Objectives



Article II:  Definitions



   9.5-16   Definitions



Article III:  General Provisions



   9.5-26   Lands to which this chapter applies



   9.5-27   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   9.5-28   Establishment of development permit



   9.5-29   Compliance



   9.5-30   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   9.5-31   Interpretation



   9.5-32   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   9.5-33   Penalties for violation



Article IV:  Administration



   9.5-51   Designation of Floodplain Administrator



   9.5-52   Floodplain development application, permit and
certification requirements



   9.5-53   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



   9.5-54   Corrective procedures



   9.5-55   Variance procedures



Article V:  Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   9.5-66   General standards



   9.5-67   Specific standards



   9.5-68   Standards for floodplains without established base flood
elevations



   9.5-69   Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE but without
established floodways or non- encroachment areas



   9.5-70   Floodways and non-encroachment areas



Article VI:  Legal Status Provisions



   9.5-85   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood
damage prevention ordinance



   9.5-86   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits



   9.5-87   Effective date



ARTICLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 9.5-1  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   The Legislature of the state has in G.S. Chapter 143, Article
21, Part 6; Chapter 160A, Article 19, Parts 3, 5 and 8; and Chapter 160A,
Article 8 delegated to local governmental units the responsibility to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   Therefore, the city does ordain as follows.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-2  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the city are
subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities
and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or
other hazards.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-3  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging
increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
that serve those uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction:



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and all other development
that may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-4  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Protect human life, safety and health:



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public:



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions:



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e.,
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets and
bridges) that are located in flood prone areas:



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood prone areas; and



   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a
special flood hazard area.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



ARTICLE II:  DEFINITIONS



§ 9.5-16  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE).  A structure located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and
storage sheds are common urban ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Pole barns, hay sheds
and the like qualify as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be
located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING).  An extension or increase in the
floor area or height of a building or structure.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  A determination of the water surface
elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When
the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be
obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state or other
source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when
combined with the freeboard, establishes the REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION
ELEVATION.



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.



   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY.  A building, portion of a building or
exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or
chemically reactive products.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   DISPOSAL.  As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge,
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste
into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part
of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including groundwaters.



   ELEVATED BUILDING.  A non-basement building which has its lowest
elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings or columns.



   ENCROACHMENT.  The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION.  A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the initial effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.



   FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD INSURANCE.  The insurance coverage provided under the National
Flood Insurance Program.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are
delineated.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if
appropriate), flood hazard risk zones and other flood data in a community
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY
REPORT includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and
floodway maps (FBFMs), if published.



   FLOOD PRONE AREA.  See FLOODPLAIN.



   FLOOD ZONE.  A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map
or flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in
the area.



   FLOODPLAIN.  Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.  The individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.  Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodplain management regulations and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances and other applications of police power. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.



   FREEBOARD.  The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to
account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The base flood
elevation plus the FREEBOARD establishes the REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION
ELEVATION.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.  A facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water,
limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading
of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY.  As defined in G.S. Chapter 130A,
Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment,
recycling, recovery or disposal of hazardous waste.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG).  The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls
of the structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.



      (1)   Any structure that is:



         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places (a listing maintained by the United States Department of
Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



         (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of
historic landmarks in communities with a certified local government (CLG)
program; or



         (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical
significance of a historic district designated by a community with a
certified local government (CLG) program.



      (2)   Certified local government (CLG) programs are approved
by the United States Department of the Interior in cooperation with the State
Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation
Officer as having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966, as amended in 1980 being 16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG).  The elevation of the ground, sidewalk or
patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after
completion of the building.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that
the enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MARKET VALUE.  The building value, not including the land value and
that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET
VALUE may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost
depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash
value); or adjusted tax assessed values.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of this chapter, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) as corrected in 1988 or other vertical control datum used as a
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which
base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each
FIRM panel to determine datum used.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management
regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to those structures.



   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA.  The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot as designated in the flood insurance study report.



   POST-FIRM.  Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.



   PRE-FIRM.  Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.



   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND.  At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure is above ground.



   PUBLIC SAFETY and/or NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to the
safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable
number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the
customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or
basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV).  A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



   REFERENCE LEVEL.  The top of the lowest floor for structures within
special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1-A3, AE, A, A99 or AO.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  The base flood elevation plus
the freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations
(BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus one foot of
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.



   REMEDY A VIOLATION.  To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of
the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations or reducing
federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.



   SALVAGE YARD.  Any nonresidential property used for the storage,
collection and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including, but not
limited to, vehicles, appliances and related machinery.



   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY.  Any facility involved in the disposal
of solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).



   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE.  As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any
place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary
landfill or any other method.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  The land in the floodplain subject
to a 1% or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined
in § 9.5-27.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued; provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a
gas, liquid or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.



      (1)   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.



      (2)   See definition of SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



      (3)   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period
for which the cost of repairs at the time of each flood event, on the
average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



      (1)   Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.



      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any correction of existing violations of state or
community health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Community Code Enforcement Official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as a historic structure.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications or other evidence of compliance required in §§ 9.5-51
through 9.5-55 and 9.5-66 through 9.5-70 is presumed to be in violation until
a time as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE).  The height, in relation to mean sea
level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains or
riverine areas.



   WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



ARTICLE III:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 9.5-26  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extraterritorial jurisdictions (ETJs) if applicable,
of the city and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose
governing body agrees, by resolution, to the applicability.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-27  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   (A)   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
cooperating technical state (CTS) agreement between the state and FEMA in its
flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRM), for Richmond County dated October 16, 2007, which are adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.



   (B)   The initial flood insurance rate maps are as follows for the
jurisdictional areas at the initial date:



      (1)   Richmond County unincorporated area, dated March 13,
1983; and



      (2)   City of Hamlet, dated July 2, 1987.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-28  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with
the provisions of § 9.5-27.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-29  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, convened,
altered or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-30  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-31  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-32  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within those
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-33  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.



   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special
exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more
than $50 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.



   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking
any other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



ARTICLE IV:  ADMINISTRATION



§ 9.5-51  DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The City Manager or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-52  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application requirements.  Application for a floodplain
development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any
development activities located within special flood hazard areas. The
following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply
for a floodplain development permit:



      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed
floodplain development:



         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of
the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures,
utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas,
drainage facilities and other development;



         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as
delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in § 9.5-27 or a
statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;



         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed
development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined
in § 9.5-27;



         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or
non-encroachment area(s) as determined in § 9.5-27:



         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided, as
set forth in §§ 9.5-27, 9.5-53 or 9.5-69;



         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and



         (g)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered
land surveyor or professional engineer.



      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all
development within a special flood hazard area, including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;



         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any nonresidential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be floodproofed; and



         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.



      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form
81-65) with supporting data and an operational plan that includes, but is not
limited to, installation, exercise and maintenance of floodproofing measures;



      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include
details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this
chapter are met. These details include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable
(i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation,
open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and



         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with § 9.5-67(D)(3) when
solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE and A1-30.



      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest
floor;



      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems to
be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;



      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal
permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been
received;



      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles
and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions
of § 9.5-67(F) and (G) of this chapter are met; and



      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects
of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if
not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation.



   (B)   Permit requirements.  The floodplain development permit shall
include, but not be limited to;



      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit;



      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the
proposed development in accordance with available data specified in § 9.5-27;



      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the reference level and all attendant utilities;



      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the protection of all public utilities;



      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;



      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development
shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse,
as applicable.



      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE
or A1-30; and



      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if applicable)
(i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only).



   (C)   Certification requirements.



      (1)   Elevation certificates.



         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean
sea level. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by the
permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny
a floodplain development permit.



         (b)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form
81-31) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate
of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance
of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.



      (2)   Floodproofing certificate.  If nonresidential
floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting
data, an operational plan and an inspection and maintenance plan are required
prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of
the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification
of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or
architect and certified by the same. The Floodplain Administrator shall
review the certificate data, the operational plan and the inspection and
maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by
the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification
or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified
design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.



      (3)   Engineered foundation certification.  If a manufactured
home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30 and the elevation of the
chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered
foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of §
9.5-67(C)(2).



      (4)   Watercourses.  If a watercourse is to be altered or
relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation; a professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of
the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map
showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation
shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit.



      (5)   Certification exemptions.  The following structures, if
located within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the
elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in subsections
(C)(1) and (C)(2) above:



         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
9.5-67(F)(1):



         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
9.5-67(G); and



         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet
meeting requirements of § 9.5-67(H).



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-53  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:



   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue
permits for all proposed developments within special flood hazard areas to
assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



   (B)   Review all proposed developments within special flood hazard
areas to assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been
received;



   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Crime
Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of the notification to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);



   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
maintained;



   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment
areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
9.5-70 are met;



   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new
and substantially improved structures, in accordance with § 9.5-52(C);



   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of § 9.5-52(C);



   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities in accordance with the provisions of § 9.5-52(C);



   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure,
obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 9.5-52(C) and 9.5-67(B).



   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, floodways or non-encroachment
areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article;



   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with § 9.5-67, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation (BFE) data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area
data available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 9.5-69(B), in order to administer the provisions of
this chapter;



   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no
floodway or non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with
§ 9.5-27, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data or
non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter;



   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a
structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood
hazard area is above the base flood elevation, advise the property owner of
the option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain
a copy of the letter of map amendment (LOMA) issued by FEMA in the floodplain
development permit file;



   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this chapter and make these records available for public
inspection, recognizing that the information may be subject to the Privacy
Act of 1974, as amended;



   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work
pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain
Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary
to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the
local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the
Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action;



   (P)   Issue stop work orders as required. Whenever a building or
part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in
violation of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to
be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and directed
to the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop work order shall state
the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage and
the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop
work order constitutes a misdemeanor;



   (Q)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The
Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the
reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans and specifications; for
refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any
floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable
state or local law may also be revoked;



   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard
areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator
and each member of his or her Inspections Department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the Department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;



   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of § 9.5-54;



   (T)   Review, provide input and make recommendations for variance
requests;



   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited
to, the FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with § 9.5-27, including any revisions thereto including letters
of map change, issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs; and



   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including
letters of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision
(LOMR).



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-54  CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Violations to be corrected.  When the Floodplain
Administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall
be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the
violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the
violations of law cited in the notification.



   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action.  If
the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective
action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by
certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by
personal service, stating:



      (1)   The building or property is in violation of the
floodplain management regulations;



      (2)   A hearing will be held before the Floodplain
Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after
the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard
in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to
the matter; and



      (3)   Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may
issue an order to alter, vacate or demolish the building or to remove fill as
applicable.



   (C)   Order to take corrective action.  If, upon a hearing held
pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall
find that the building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or
she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to
remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than 60
calendar days, nor more than 180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain
Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property,
he or she may order that corrective action be taken in a lesser period as may
be feasible.



   (D)   Appeal.  Any owner who has received an order to take
corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by
giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the
Clerk within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the absence
of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The
local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may
affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.



   (E)   Failure to comply with order.  If the owner of a building or
property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no
appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished at the discretion of the court.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-55  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustments as established by the city,
hereinafter referred to as the Appeal Board, shall hear and decide requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may
appeal the decision to the court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A.



   (C)   Variances may be issued for:



      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon
the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and
that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure;



      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet
the definition as stated in § 9.5-16, provided provisions of subsection
(I)(2), (I)(3) and (I)(5) below have been satisfied, and the facilities are
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety; and



      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the
requirements of this section.



   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location
as defined under § 9.5-16 as a functionally dependent facility, where
applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets
and bridges.



   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.



   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach those conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives of this chapter.



   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation
(BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built; and that the
construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and
property; and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. The notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.



   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the state upon request.



   (I)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will
make the structure in violation of other federal, state or local laws,
regulations or ordinances.



      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway or non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development
permit approval.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



ARTICLE V:  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 9.5-66  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required.



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
and lateral movement of the structure.



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.



   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These
include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes,
utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters and electric outlets/switches.



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.



   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair,
reconstruction or replacement of a building or structure existing on the
effective date of this chapter and located totally or partially within the
floodway, non-encroachment area or stream setback; provided there is no
additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in
the floodway, non-encroachment area or stream setback, and provided that the
repair, reconstruction or replacement meets all of the other requirements of
this chapter.



   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage facilities shall
not be permitted. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental
to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or
wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area
only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least
the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with
the provisions of § 9.5-52(C).



   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies
for which approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.



   (O)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood
hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new
construction and substantial improvements.



   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or
in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the
provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest
base flood elevation shall apply.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-67  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data
has been provided, as set forth in § 9.5-27 or § 9.5-69, the following
provisions, in addition to the provisions of § 9.5-66 are required.



   (A)   Residential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in § 9.5-16.



   (B)   Nonresidential construction.  New construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no
lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
9.5-16. Structures located in A, AE, AO and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed
to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation, provided
that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy.



   (C)   Manufactured homes.



      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated
so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in § 9.5-16.



      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance
with the most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for
Manufactured Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S.
§ 143-143.15. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation
of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis
shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the
elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineering
certification is required.



      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall
meet the requirements of  subsection (D) below.



      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of
all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas.
This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator
and the local Emergency Management Coordinator.



   (D)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed areas, of new construction
and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:



      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but
shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access
to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of
vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The
interior portion of the enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned
into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;



      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant
materials;



      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE and A1-30, flood
openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the
openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or
meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:



         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides
of each enclosed area subject to flooding;



         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be
at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding:



         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area,
each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to
automatically enter and exit;



         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be
no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade;



         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
flow of floodwaters in both directions; and



         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not
considered enclosures for regulatory purposes and, therefore, do not require
flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural
status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined
above.



   (E)   Additions/improvements.



      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more nonconforming than the existing structure; and



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications
to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.



      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; and



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



   (F)   Recreational vehicles.  Recreational vehicles shall either:



      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be
fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect type utilities and has no permanently attached
additions); or



      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.



   (G)   Temporary nonresidential structures.



      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit
for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the Floodplain
Administrator a plan for the removal of the structure(s) in the event of a
hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning notification.



      (2)   The following information shall be submitted in writing
to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:



         (a)   A specified time period for which the temporary
use will be permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable
up to one year;



         (b)   The name, address and phone number of the
individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure:



         (c)   The time frame prior to the event at which a
structure will be removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a
hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification);



         (d)   A copy of the contract or other suitable
instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure;
and



         (e)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a
location outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary
structure will be moved.



   (H)   Accessory structures.



      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages and
the like) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following
criteria shall be met:



         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human
habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);



         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be
temperature-controlled;



         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low
flood damage potential;



         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters;



         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with the provisions of § 9.5-66(A);



         (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be
installed in accordance with the provisions of § 9.5-66(D); and



         (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory
flood protection elevation in conformance with the provisions of subsection
(D)(3) above.



      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150
square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an
elevation or floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing
certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance
with § 9.5-52(C).



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-68  STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD
ELEVATIONS.



   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A
and established in § 9.5-27, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the
provisions of § 9.5-66, shall apply:



   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a
distance of 20 feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the
stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical
data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.



   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria.



      (1)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from
other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within those
areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and
shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in §§ 9.5-66
and 9.5-67.



      (2)   When floodway data is available from a federal, state or
other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within
floodway areas shall also comply with the requirements of §§ 9.5-67 and
9.5-70.



      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other
development proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if
development is greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured
home sites. The base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference
in accordance with § 9.5-27 and utilized in implementing this chapter.



      (4)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available
from a federal, state or other source as outlined above, the reference level
shall be elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in § 9.5-16. All other applicable
provisions of § 9.5-67 shall also apply.



(Ord. passed 3-10-1992; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-69  STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BFE BUT WITHOUT
ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.



   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is
available from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas
are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS
report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within
those areas:



   (A)   Standards of §§ 9.5-66 and 9.5-67; and



   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is
designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or other development, shall be permitted unless certification
with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-70  FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.



   (A)   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are
located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 9.5-27. The
floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the
velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and
potential projectiles.



   (B)   The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in
§§ 9.5-66 and 9.5-67 shall apply to all development within these areas.



      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted, unless:



         (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of
the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain
Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or



         (b)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has
been approved by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained
upon completion of the proposed encroachment.



      (2)   If subsection (B)(1) above is satisfied, all development
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this
chapter.



      (3)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except
replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, provided the following provisions are met:



         (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
9.5-67(C); and



         (b)   The no encroachment standard of subsection (B)(1)
above.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



ARTICLE VI:  LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS



§ 9.5-85  EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.



   (A)   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of
the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted May 12, 1987,
as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of those existing provisions, so
that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and
may be enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action,
suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage
prevention ordinance of the city enacted on May 12, 1987, as amended, which
are not reenacted herein, are repealed.



   (B)   The date of the initial flood damage prevention ordinance for
each municipal jurisdiction within this county is as follows:



      (1)   County Initial Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance: June
1, 1987; and



      (2)   City Initial Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance: May 12,
1987.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-86  EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under an
outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 9.5-87  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall become effective October 16, 2007.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



CHAPTER 10:  LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Section



Article I:  In General



   10-1 through 10-25   Reserved



Article II:  Business License



   10-26   Definitions



   10-27   Required generally



   10-28   Required for each separate business



   10-29   Required for each location; new license upon moving or
selling business



   10-30   License tax; generally



   10-31   License tax; abatement of refund



   10-32   Term



   10-33   Display



Article III:  Billiard Rooms and Poolrooms



   10-56   License; issuance; scope



   10-57   License; revocation



   10-58   Restriction on games



   10-59   Minors; prohibited from entering or participating



   10-60   Minors; duty of owner, manager and the like



   10-61   Rear doors, windows and the like must be closed



   10-62   Unobstructed front view of interior



Article IV:  Peddlers, Solicitors and Vendors



   10-86   License required



   10-87   Entry upon private property



Article V:  Garage Sales



   10-111   Rules for conducting



   10-112   Permit



   10-113   Violation; penalty



   10-114   Exempt sales



Article VI:  Adult Establishments and Related Businesses



   10-126   Definitions



   10-127   Scope



   10-128   Massage of private parts for hire prohibited



   10-129   Restrictions as to adult establishments



   10-130   Licensing of massage business operators



   10-131   Licensing of massagists



   10-132   Employer to use only licensed employees



   10-133   Posting of license



   10-134   Notice and hearing



   10-135   Hours of operation



   10-136   Patronage of massage businesses by minors; employment of
minors



   10-137   Privilege license annual



   10-138   Exposure of female breasts prohibited



   10-139   Conflict



   10-140   Penalties and enforcement



Article VII:  Yard Sales and Flea Markets



   10-155   Purpose of article



   10-156   Definitions



   10-157   Standards; yard sales



   10-158   Standards; flea markets



   10-159   Penalties and enforcement



Cross-reference:



   Advertising, see §§ 14-1 through 14-3



   Alcoholic beverages, see ch. 3



   Animals, see ch. 4



   Buildings, see ch. 5



   Finance and taxation, see ch. 8



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



   Registration of contractors, see §§ 5-2, 5-3



   Solid waste and vegetation, see ch. 17



   Vehicles for hire, see ch. 20



Statutory reference:



   Commerce and business, see G.S. Chapter 66



   Discrimination in business, see G.S. Chapter 75B



   License taxes, see G.S. §§ 105-33 et seq., 160A-194, 160A-211 et seq.



   Licensing and regulation of peddlers, itinerant merchants and the like,
see G.S. § 160A-178



   Municipal regulation of places of amusement, see G.S. § 160A-181



   Municipal taxation, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.



   Occupational licensing boards, see G.S. Chapter 93B



   Occupational Safety and Health Act of North Carolina, see G.S. §§
95-126 et seq.



   Regulation of places of amusement, see G.S. § 160A-181



   Sunday closing ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-191



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§§ 10-1 THROUGH 10-25  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II:  BUSINESS LICENSE



§ 10-26  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   AGENT.  The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer or
distributor.



   BUSINESS.  Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or
calling of any kind, subject by the provisions of this article to a license
tax.



   ENGAGED IN BUSINESS.  Engaged in the business as owner or operator.



   FISCAL YEAR.  The period beginning with July 1 and ending with June 30
next following.



   QUARTER.  Any three consecutive months.



(1972 Code, § 5-1)



Cross reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



Statutory reference:



   Fiscal year, see G.S. § 159-8(b)



§ 10-27  REQUIRED GENERALLY.



   No person shall engage in or carry on a business in the city for which
a license is required without having obtained a license in compliance with
this article.



(1972 Code, § 5-2)



Statutory reference:



   Engaging in business without license, see G.S. § 105-109



   License prerequisite to conduct of business, see G.S. § 105-103



§ 10-28  REQUIRED FOR EACH SEPARATE BUSINESS.



   The payment of any particular tax imposed by this article shall not
relieve the person paying the same from the payment of any tax imposed by
this article for any other business he or she carries on, unless so provided
by the section imposing the tax. License taxes prescribed by various sections
of this article shall be cumulative except where otherwise specifically
provided.



(1972 Code, § 5-3)



Statutory reference:



   Separate businesses, see G.S. § 105-105



   Separate places of business, see G.S. § 105-33(b)



§ 10-29  REQUIRED FOR EACH LOCATION; NEW LICENSE UPON MOVING OR SELLING
BUSINESS.



   (A)   A license issued for the privilege of conducting a business is
valid only for the business conducted at the place and by the person named
therein.



   (B)   Every person doing business in more than one place shall
secure a separate license for each place of business, unless those places are
contiguous, communicate directly with and open into each other and are
operated as a unit.



   (C)   If the business is moved or is sold to another, a new license
shall be necessary, unless a special permit to continue under the original
license is obtained from the Council.



(1972 Code, § 5-4)



§ 10-30  LICENSE TAX; GENERALLY.



   (A)   In addition to the tax on property and under the power and
authority conferred by state law, there shall be levied and collected at
least annually a privilege tax on trades, professions, agencies, business
operations, circuses and all subjects authorized to be licensed.



   (B)   All licenses shall be personal privilege and shall not be
transferable.



   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
Council from imposing license taxes which are not specifically herein defined
or from increasing or decreasing the amount of any special license tax.



(1972 Code, § 5-5)



Editor’s note:



   The schedule of licenses is on file in the City Clerk’s office.



Statutory reference:



   Privilege license schedule, see G.S. §§ 105-33 et seq.



   Remedies for collecting taxes, see G.S. § 160A-207



§ 10-31  LICENSE TAX; ABATEMENT OF REFUND.



   No license tax shall be abated or refunded where the licensee
discontinues his or her business before the end of the period for which the
license was issued.



(1972 Code, § 5-6)



§ 10-32  TERM.



   (A)   All taxes provided for in this article shall be for 12 months,
unless otherwise specified, and shall so remain for each year to come until
changed by the Council.



   (B)   All licenses shall date from July 1 and shall expire on June
30 of each year; provided, that where the license is issued after January 1
and prior to June 30, the licensee shall pay one-half the tax prescribed,
unless otherwise specifically provided or unless the tax is levied on a gross
receipts or percentage basis.



(1972 Code, § 5-7)



Statutory reference:



   Duration, expiration of licenses, when license tax pro-rated, see G.S.
§ 105-33(c)



§ 10-33  DISPLAY.



   Every business license must be kept prominently displayed at the place
of business of the licensee where it can be inspected at any time by the
proper municipal official.



(1972 Code, § 5-8)



ARTICLE III:  BILLIARD ROOMS AND POOLROOMS



§ 10-56  LICENSE; ISSUANCE; SCOPE.



   The Council may grant a license to operate a poolroom or billiard room
within the city. Only the games of billiards, straight pool, rotation
(French) pool, eight ball and nine ball shall be played within. (1972 Code,
§ 5-10)



§ 10-57  LICENSE; REVOCATION.



   At any time after the granting of a license under this article, the
Council may revoke the license for any cause deemed by it to be sufficient.



(1972 Code, § 5-11)



§ 10-58  RESTRICTION ON GAMES.



   No person shall operate a poolroom or billiard room in the city for
games other than those set out in § 10-56.



(1972 Code, § 5-12)



§ 10-59  MINORS; PROHIBITED FROM ENTERING OR PARTICIPATING.



   No person under the age of 16 years shall enter into a poolroom or
billiard room in the city or shall participate in any games conducted or
played in the poolroom or billiard room.



(1972 Code, § 5-13)



§ 10-60  MINORS; DUTY OF OWNER, MANAGER AND THE LIKE.



   No person who owns, controls, manages or is in charge of a poolroom or
billiard room shall permit any person under the age of 16 years to enter the
poolroom or billiard room while games are being played therein.



(1972 Code, § 5-14)



§ 10-61  REAR DOORS, WINDOWS AND THE LIKE MUST BE CLOSED.



   Every person who owns, controls, manages or is in charge of a poolroom
or billiard room in the city shall keep the rear doors, windows and screens
closed at all hours that the poolroom or billiard room is being operated.



(1972 Code, § 5-15)



§ 10-62  UNOBSTRUCTED FRONT VIEW OF INTERIOR.



   All places in which a poolroom or billiard room are operated in the
city shall be so constructed and maintained as to present a clear and
unobstructed view of the whole of the interior of the building from the
sidewalk at all times that the room is being operated; provided, that a blind
or obstructed front may be constructed and maintained with a height of not
more than 42 inches from the sidewalk in front of the place of business.



(1972 Code, § 5-16)



ARTICLE IV:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND VENDORS



§ 10-86  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Every peddler shall obtain the appropriate privilege license in
accordance with state law.



§ 10-87  ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, agent or
transient vendor of merchandise shall go upon any private residence in the
city for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise or of peddling or hawking the same, without having been requested
or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of the residence.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale of
milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden
produce being sold by the growers thereof.



(1972 Code, § 5-9)



ARTICLE V:  GARAGE SALES



§ 10-111  RULES FOR CONDUCTING.



   All garage sales, lawn sales, yard sales and other sales involving the
offering for sale of multiple items of personal property on property occupied
as a residence or zoned residential shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations.



   (A)   No person shall accept or take in for sale any goods from any
commercial business or enterprise on a consignment basis.



   (B)   No signs shall be posted anywhere in the city advertising the
sales, except that the property owner may install on the residential lot on
which the sale is to be held one sign, not larger than two feet by three
feet, advertising the sale. The signs shall be erected not sooner than one
day prior to the date of the sale and shall be removed at the end of the last
day upon which the sale is held.



   (C)   Not more than two sales per annum shall be held at the
premises if occupied by the same family or any member of the family.



   (D)   Any sale conducted pursuant to the provisions hereof shall be
confined to the period between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day and shall
not extend in excess of two days. All items shall be removed on the final day
of the sale.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1981)



Editor’s note:



   The zoning ordinance is kept in the office of the City Clerk.



§ 10-112  PERMIT.



   Any person conducting a garage sale or other sale involving the
offering for sale of multiple items of personal property on property occupied
as a residence shall be required to obtain a permit therefor from the city.
Applications for a permit shall be made to the City Tax Collector and there
shall be no charge for the permit.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1981)



§ 10-113  VIOLATION; PENALTY.



   Violation of any provision of this article shall subject the offender
to a civil penalty in the amount of $5, and $25 on each subsequent offense,
to be recovered by the city. Violators shall be issued a written citation
which must be paid within 72 hours.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1981)



§ 10-114  EXEMPT SALES.



   The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect persons
selling goods pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction or
persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1981)



ARTICLE VI:  ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS AND RELATED BUSINESSES



§ 10-126  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms
shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE.  A bookstore having as a preponderance of its
publications, books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined in this section.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.  An adult bookstore, adult motion picture
theater, adult motel or hotel, adult mini motion picture theater or a massage
business, as defined in this section.



   ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  An enclosed building with a
capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting motion pictures, a
preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section, for observation by
patrons therein.



   ADULT MOTEL OR HOTEL.  A place where motion pictures not previously
submitted to or not rated by the Motion Picture Association of America are
shown in rooms designed primarily for lodging, which the motion pictures have
as the dominant or primary theme matters depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  An enclosed building with a capacity of
50 or more persons used for presenting motion pictures, a preponderance of
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein.



   BUSINESS OR PROFESSION OF MASSAGE.  The massage or treatment of any
person for a fee or in expectation of a gratuity from the person massaged.



   EXPOSURE OF THE FEMALE BREASTS.  The revealing of the female breast or
breasts with less than a fully opaque covering on any portion or portions
thereof of any part of the areola, or the exposure of any part of the areola.



   MASSAGE.  The manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing,
stroking, kneading or tapping, by hand or mechanical device.



   MASSAGE BUSINESS.  Any establishment or business wherein massage is
practiced, including establishments commonly known as health clubs, physical
culture studios, massage studios and massage parlors.



   MASSAGIST.  Any person engaged in the business or profession of
massage.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED DEVICES.  Without limitation, any artificial or
simulated specified anatomical area or other device or paraphernalia that is
designed in whole or in part for specified sexual activities.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Less than completely and opaquely covered:



      (1)   Human genitals, pubic region;



      (2)   Buttock; or



      (3)   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; or



      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-127  SCOPE.



   To protect public health, safety, welfare and morals, the following
privilege license provisions and regulations are ordained for the privilege
of carrying on the business, trade or profession of massagist and for the
operation or carrying on of the businesses, trades or professions commonly
known as massage parlor, health salon, physical culture studios or similar
establishment wherein massage or physical manipulation of the human body is
carried on or practiced. The provisions of this article shall not apply to a
regularly established and licensed hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, nor to
an office or clinic operated and regularly used by a duly qualified and
licensed medical practitioner, osteopath or chiropractor in connection with
the practice of medicine, chiropractic or osteopathy.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-128  MASSAGE OF PRIVATE PARTS FOR HIRE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to massage or to offer to massage
the private parts of another for hire. MASSAGE means the manipulation of body
muscle or tissue by rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping, by hand or
mechanical device. PRIVATE PARTS means the penis, scrotum, mons veneris,
vulva or vaginal area. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
licensed medical practitioners, osteopaths or chiropractors, or persons
operating at their direction, in connection with the practice of medicine,
chiropractic or osteopathy.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-129  RESTRICTIONS AS TO ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.



   No building, premises, structure or other facility that contains any
adult establishment shall contain any other kind of adult establishment. No
building, premises structure or facility in which sexually oriented devices
are sold, distributed, exhibited or contained shall contain any adult
establishment.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-130  LICENSING OF MASSAGE BUSINESS OPERATORS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a massage business as herein defined
unless the person shall have first applied for and received the privilege
license provided by this section.



   (B)   Every application for the privilege license prescribed herein
shall be upon a form approved by the City Manager and shall be filed with the
City Clerk. Every application shall be made under oath and shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   If the applicant is a person, the name and address of
that person. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or association,
the name and residence address of each person having any legal or beneficial
interest in the applicant;



      (2)   The address of the premises where the massage business
shall be located;



      (3)   A complete statement of all convictions of any person
whose name is required to be given in subsection (B)(1) above, for any
felony, or prostitution or any violation of the law relative to prostitute;



      (4)   A complete statement of any revocation, by any
governmental unit, of any license to operate a massage business or to engage
in the business or profession of massage held by any person whose name is
required to be given in subsection (B)(1) above;



      (5)   A complete statement of any conviction of any person
whose name is required to be given in subsection (B)(1) above; for violation
of any statute, law, ordinance or regulation of any government concerning the
operation of a massage business or the business or profession of massage;



      (6)   The name and address of any massage business or other
establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be
given in subsection (B)(1) above, wherein the business or profession of
massage is carried on; and



      (7)   A description of any other business to be operated on
the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the
Police Department for an investigative report; to the County Building
Inspector to determine with all zoning and building regulations and
ordinances; the Police Department shall determine compliance with any law
relating to fire protection. The Police Department shall, within a reasonable
time, not to exceed 45 days, report the results of its examinations to the
City Clerk.



   (D)   An application in proper form, accompanied by all reports
required by this section, shall be submitted to the City Manager, who shall
approve the application if the officer determines that:



      (1)   The application contains no misstatement of fact;



      (2)   The applicant, or any person having any legal or
beneficial ownership interest in the applicant, has not been convicted of any
crime involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to, G.S. §§
14-177 through 14-202.1 and 14-203 through 14-208, or any federal statute
relating to prostitution, or of any violation of any law or ordinance of any
governmental unit concerning or related to the business or profession of
massage;



      (3)   The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable
Zoning, Building and Fire Prevention Codes; and



      (4)   The applicant or any person having a legal or beneficial
ownership interest in the applicant has not, for the three-year period
preceding the application, had a previously issued license for engaging in
the business or profession of massage revoked.



   (E)   Upon approval of the application by the City Manager, and upon
receipt of a $1,000 license fee, the Collector of Revenue shall issue a
privilege license to applicant.



   (F)   A license issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by
action of the City Council if the City Council determines that:



      (1)   The license has violated any provisions of this article;



      (2)   The licensee, or any agent of the licensee, employs or
permits to be on the premises of the applicant’s massage business any
person practicing the business or profession of massage who has not been
issued the privilege license required by § 10-131 hereof, or whose license
under § 10-131 has been revoked;



      (3)   The licensee, or the legal or beneficial owner of any
interest in the licensee, is convicted of any crime involving sexual
misconduct, including, but not limited to, the sections of the General
Statutes indicated in subsection (D)(2) above;



      (4)   Any employee of the licensee is convicted of any felony
in connection with his or her employment, or is convicted of any crime
involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to, sections of the
General Statutes indicated in subsection (D)(2) above; or



      (5)   The licensee violates any zoning, building or fire
prevention ordinance.



   (G)   A license issued pursuant to this section is void if the
licensee moves or ceases operating a massage parlor at the location required
to be stated in the application for license pursuant to subsection (B)(2)
above.



   (H)   Any person whose application for a license is denied by the
City Manager pursuant to subsection (D) above may appeal from the decision to
the City Council. An appeal is taken by filing written notice of the appeal
with the City Clerk within ten days following the date of the decision. The
City Council shall set the appeal for hearing in the manner provided by §
10-134 of this article. The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the
City Manager’s decision.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-131  LICENSING OF MASSAGISTS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business or profession of
massage unless the person shall have first applied for and received the
privilege license provided by this section.



   (B)   The application for the license required by this section shall
be upon a form approved by the City Manager and shall be filed with the City
Clerk. The application shall be given under oath and shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   The name, age and residence address of the applicant;



      (2)   A complete statement of the previous business or
occupation of the applicant for the two years immediately preceding the date
of application, including any massage establishment experience;



      (3)   A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant
for any felony or misdemeanor or violation of a local ordinance;



      (4)   A complete statement of any revocation of any license
granted by a governmental unit to the applicant to engage in the business or
profession of massage; and



      (5)   The date and place of applicant’s birth, the names of
applicant’s parents and the residence address or addresses of the applicant
for the five years immediately preceding the date of application.



   (C)   (1)   The applicant shall submit, as part of the
application required in subsection (B) above, the following:



         (a)   Fingerprints of the applicant taken by the Police
Department;



         (b)   Two recent photographs of the applicant’s head
and shoulders, of a size and quality prescribed by the City Manager; and



         (c)   A medical certificate signed by a physician,
licensed to practice in this state, within seven days of the date of the
application. The certificate shall state that the applicant was examined by
the certifying physician and that the applicant is free from communicable
disease.



      (2)   The additional information required by this subsection
shall be provided at the applicant’s expense.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the
Police Department for an investigative report. The Police Department shall,
within a reasonable time, not to exceed 45 days, report the results of its
investigation to the City Clerk.



   (E)   An application in proper form shall be submitted to the City
Manager together with all reports required by this section. The City Manager
shall approve the application if the officer determines that:



      (1)   The applicant is at least 18 years of age;



      (2)   The application contains no misstatement of fact;



      (3)   The applicant has not been convicted of any crime
involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to, sections of
General Statutes cited in § 10-130(D)(2) or of § 10-128 or § 10-129, or of
any federal statute relating to prostitution, or for violation of any law or
ordinance of any governmental unit concerning or related to the business or
profession of massage;



      (4)   The applicant has not, for the three-year period
preceding the application, had a previously issued license for engaging in
the business or profession of massage revoked;



      (5)   The applicant is free from communicable disease as
evidenced by the medical certificate required herein; and



      (6)   The applicant has not been previously convicted of any
violation of any provision of this article.



   (F)   Upon approval of the application by the City Manager, and upon
receipt of a $1,000 license fee, the Collector of Revenue shall issue a
privilege license to the applicant.



   (G)   The City Council shall have authority to direct that any
person licensed under this section submit to a medical examination by a
licensed physician approved by the City Council. This authority shall be
exercised only when the Council has reason to believe that any person has
contracted a communicable disease. Refusal to submit to an examination shall
be grounds for revocation of the license as provided in subsection (H) below.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, every person licensed
under this section shall file and continue to file with the City Clerk a new
medical certificate with each application for renewal of the license
prescribed by this section. Failure to file the updated certificates shall be
grounds for revocation of the license as provided in subsection (H) below.



   (H)   A license issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by
action of the City Council if the City Council determines:



      (1)   The licensee has violated any provision of this article;



      (2)   The licensee is afflicted with a communicable disease;



      (3)   The licensee has failed to be examined by a licensed
physician when required by the City Council pursuant to subsection (G) above,
or has failed to file any medical certificate required by subsection (G)
above; or



      (4)   The licensee has been convicted of a felony or any crime
involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to, sections of the
General Statutes referred to in subsection (E)(3) above, or of violating §
10-128 or § 10-129 of this article or under any federal statute relating to
prostitution, or for violation of any laws or ordinance of any governmental
unit related to the business or profession of massage.



   (I)   Any person whose application for a license is denied by the
City Manager pursuant to subsection (H) above may appeal from the decision to
the City Council. An appeal is taken by filing written notice of the appeal
with the City Clerk within ten days following the date of the decision. The
City Council shall set the appeal for hearing in the manner provided by §
10-134. The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the City Manager’s
decision.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-132  EMPLOYER TO USE ONLY LICENSED EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   No person licensed under § 10-130 hereof shall allow or
permit any person to massage or treat any person upon the premises operated
by the licensee unless the person giving the massage or treatment has
complied with all requirements of licensing under § 10-131, including
periodic medical examinations by a licensed physician. Violation of this
section shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued to the violator
pursuant to this article.



   (B)   While a licensed massagist is administering a massage to a
customer, no other unlicensed person shall be in the room utilized by the
massagist and customer.



   (C)   No licensed massagist shall administer any massage to a member
of the opposite sex, it being the intent of this section to require massagist
and client to be of the same sex.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-133  POSTING OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Every massagist shall post the license required by this
article in his or her work area.



   (B)   Every person licensed under § 10-130 hereof shall display the
license in a prominent place.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-134  NOTICE AND HEARING.



   Before the City Council revokes a license issued pursuant to this
article, or if an appeal is taken, pursuant to § 10-130(H) or § 10-131(I),
from a decision of the City Manager denying an application for a license, the
City Council shall cause a written notice to be sent by certified mail to the
licensee affected or applicant affected, at the address stated in the license
or application. This notice shall advise the affected party of a right to
appear before the City Council, with or without legal counsel, at a stated
time and place, for the purpose of presenting any evidence relevant to the
revocation or denial, and for the purpose of hearing all evidence submitted
and examining or cross-examining any person provided the evidence.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-135  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   No person licensed as a massagist under § 10-131 shall
massage or treat any person or engage in the business or profession of
massage, before 8:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight, prevailing time.



   (B)   No person licensed under § 10-130 shall admit customers or
prospective customers, or remain open for business, or allow, or permit or
condone any massage or treatment of any person upon the premises before 8:00
a.m. or after 12:00 midnight, prevailing time.



   (C)   No person in charge of managing a massage business upon the
premises shall allow, permit or condone any massage or treatment of any
person before 8:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight, prevailing time.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-136  PATRONAGE OF MASSAGE BUSINESSES BY MINORS; EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.



   No person licensed as a masseur or masseuse under § 10-131 hereof
shall massage or treat any person under the age of 18 upon the licensed
premises, except upon written order by a licensed physician, osteopath,
chiropractor or registered physician therapist, the order being dated and in
the possession of the massagist giving the massage or treatment. A violation
of this subsection shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued to
the violator pursuant to this article.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-137  PRIVILEGE LICENSE ANNUAL.



   The licenses required under this article are annual privilege licenses.
The licenses shall be due and payable in the same manner as prescribed for
other privilege licenses issued by the city pursuant to the license and
privilege tax ordinance of the city.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-138  EXPOSURE OF FEMALE BREASTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any female, over age 14, or any other
physically developed female, to expose her breast or breasts in a manner that
they may be seen from any adult establishment, street or highway, any place
of entertainment, including any restaurant, club or any other public place of
any kind by a member or members of the opposite sex.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any adult
establishment, place of entertainment, including restaurant, club, dance hall
or any other public establishment of any kind to allow or permit any
waitress, dancer, entertainer or other employee or invitee of the
establishment to publicly expose her breast or breasts as used herein to
members of the opposite sex.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-139  CONFLICT.



   All ordinances or portions of ordinances in conflict with this article
are hereby repealed.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-140  PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Violation of any part of this article will constitute a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in G.S. § 14-4. This article may also be enforced by
an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from the General Court of Justice as
provided by G.S. § 153A-123.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 7-14-1992)



ARTICLE VII:  YARD SALES AND FLEA MARKETS



§ 10-155  PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.



   To define and differentiate between normal home and neighborhood yard
sales and flea markets. In addition, to set standards, frequency and location
of the activity within the jurisdiction of the city. The regulations found
within this section do not purport to regulate those sales or activities
already regulated by other state or county laws or regulations.



(Ord. passed 1-9-2007)



§ 10-156  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FLEA MARKET.  An open-air market for the sale of new and/or secondhand
articles and goods by one or more merchants, which is conducted on an open
nonresidential lot.



   YARD SALE (GARAGE SALE, ATTIC SALE, RUMMAGE SALE).  An occasional sale
conducted by a household or a group of households or by a nonprofit
organization on its own premises, at which surplus and primarily used
household goods and/or clothing are sold. YARD SALES conducted by a household
or group of households shall be those conducted on residential premises or
one or more of those households.



(Ord. passed 1-9-2007)



§ 10-157  STANDARDS; YARD SALES.



   (A)   Yard sales shall be a permitted use in zoning districts
defined as residential by the city zoning ordinance, so long as they are
conducted on a tract of land that has an occupied dwelling.



   (B)   Each yard sale shall be limited to the daylight hours of two
consecutive days.



   (C)   Yard sales shall be limited to a maximum of two per calendar
year per property.



   (D)   The yard sale operator shall provide parking for his or her
yard sales so as to not impede the normal flow of traffic the roadways in the
area around the yard sale.



   (E)   Yard sales shall not include items purchased elsewhere
expressly for resale.



   (F)   Goods intended for sale shall not be stored or displayed in
the front or side yards of a dwelling except on the day(s) of the sale.



   (G)   Commercial outdoor sales activities are prohibited at yard
sales.



(Ord. passed 1-9-2007)



Editor’s note:



   The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the City Clerk.



§ 10-158  STANDARDS; FLEA MARKETS.



   (A)    Flea markets shall be permitted uses only in nonresidential
zoning districts or as conditional uses in the Business-2 Districts as
defined by the city zoning ordinance.



   (B)   Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of two spaces
per vendor table, exhibit, display or area. Absolutely no off-site parking or
parking or parking in the right-of-way shall be permitted.



   (C)   Flea market operators must have the appropriate business
licenses and permits from the city zoning and business license offices.



   (D)   Flea market operators shall provide sanitary conditions at all
times. Permanent restrooms or port-a-johns shall be provided. Running water
must be available. Any food vendors shall apply for and receive all
appropriate health permits from the County Health Department.



   (E)   Flea market operators shall maintain at all times a current
list of vendors that are renting space within the flea market area. This list
shall include name, address and phone number of the vendor, location (or
booth) at which vendor is located and type of products or material being sold
by vendor. This information shall be kept by the flea market operator for a
period of one year. The flea market operator shall make the list available to
inspection by the Zoning Officer as well as law enforcement agencies at any
time during hours of operation.



   (F)   Flea markets are allowed to operate only three days a week.



   (G)   Flea markets shall operate only during daylight hours.



   (H)   Flea markets shall comply at all times with all state and
local law and regulations, including, but not limited to, Health Department
regulations.



(Ord. passed 1-9-2007)



Editor’s note:



   The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the City Clerk.



§ 10-159  PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violation of this article will constitute a misdemeanor
punishable for a fine of $500 as provided in G.S. § 14-4. This article may
be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from the State General
Court of Justice as provided by G.S. § 153A-123. Furthermore, any act
constituting a violation of the provisions of this article or a failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall also subject the offender to a
civil penalty as authorized in G.S. § 153A-123.



   (B)   The city has the right to enjoin immediately any flea market
or yard sale operating in violation of this article.



(Ord. passed 1-9-2007)



CHAPTER 11:  MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC



Editor’s note:



   For the location of various parking zones, speed zones, traffic control
devices and the like authorized in this chapter, see the official map books
in the City Clerk’s office.



Section



Article I:  In General



   11-1   Definitions



   11-2   Compliance with chapter



   11-3   Obedience to police



   11-4   Authority of police in special cases



   11-5   Public employees to obey traffic regulations



   11-6   Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles



   11-7   Bicycles, pushcarts and the like subject to regulations



   11-8   Boarding or alighting from public conveyances



   11-9   Riding on vehicle not intended for passengers



   11-10   Entering, jumping on or riding vehicle without permission



   11-11   Persons riding in vehicle must stay inside



Article II:  Local Vehicle License



   11-36   Required



   11-37   Term



   11-38   Fee



Article III:  Operation of Vehicles



Division 1:  Generally



   11-61   Stopping before entering through street



   11-62   Stopping before entering certain street intersections



   11-63   Stopping when intersections, crosswalks obstructed



   11-64   One-way streets



   11-65   Driving through funeral procession



   11-66   Left turn prohibited



   11-67   U-turns restricted



   11-68   Limitations on backing



   11-69   Emerging from alley or private driveway



   11-70   Clinging to moving vehicles



   11-71   Riding bicycles and motorcycles; carrying person on
handlebars, frame and the like



   11-72   Riding bicycles and motorcycles; on sidewalks; without hands
on handlebars



   11-73   Coasters, roller skates and the like restricted



   11-74   Lights on parked vehicle



   11-75   Moving cars from parked positions



   11-76   Driving within designated lanes



   11-77   Response upon approach of emergency vehicle



   11-78   Compression brakes prohibited



Division 2:  Speed



   11-91   Speed limit generally



   11-92   Charlotte Street



   11-93   Hylan Avenue



   11-94   Lakeside Drive



   11-95   McDonald Avenue



   11-96   North Carolina Highway 38



Division 3:  Truck Routes



   11-106   Required use



   11-107   Trucks prohibited on certain streets



   11-108   Routes to be marked



   11-109   Designation



Article IV: Stopping, Standing and Parking



Division 1:  Generally



   11-131   Violation; penalty



   11-132   Vehicles shall not stop in streets; exceptions



   11-133   Obstructing passage of other vehicles



   11-134   Parking parallel to curb



   11-135   Vehicles backing to curb



   11-136   Stopping with left side of vehicle to curb prohibited



   11-137   Parking within lines required



   11-138   Angle parking



   11-139   Moving vehicle of another person into restricted area
prohibited



Division 2:  Prohibited Parking



   11-151   Obedience to signs, markings



   11-152   Henderson Street



   11-153   Rice Street



   11-154   Spring Street



   11-155   Vance Street



   11-156   Parking for certain purposes prohibited



Division 3:  Restricted Parking



   11-171   Posting of signs



   11-172   Handicap areas



   11-173   Oversize vehicles, trailers



Article V:  Abandoned, Nuisance and Junked Vehicles



   11-196   Definitions



   11-197   Administration and enforcement



   11-198   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   11-199   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   11-200   Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized



   11-201   Towing notice requirements prior to removal



   11-202   Exceptions to prior notice requirements



   11-203   Post-towing notice requirements



   11-204   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final
disposition of vehicle



   11-205   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings



   11-206   Sale, disposition of unclaimed vehicle



   11-207   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property



   11-208   Protection against criminal or civil liability



   11-209   Exceptions



   11-210   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle



Article VI:  Wrecker and Tow Service



   11-230   Definitions



   11-231   Policy



   11-232   Duties and requirements of licensees under this article



   11-233   Heavy duty wreckers



   11-234   Application for license



   11-235   Licensing



   11-235.1   Mandatory refusal of application



   11-235.2   Conditions precedent to issuance of license



   11-236   Insurance



   11-236.1   Hold harmless provision



   11-237   Office created, Wrecker Inspector; Vehicle State Inspection



   11-237.1   Duties generally



   11-238   Cost and inspections



   11-239   Wreckers called by the police



   11-240   Storage of vehicles



   11-241   Other regulations



   11-242   Solicitation of business



   11-243   Suspension or revocation of license



   11-244   Notification of suspension or revocation by Wrecker
Inspector



   11-245   Appeal to the City Manager



   11-246   Action pending appeal; lapse of time; waiver



   11-247   Hearing; action of City Manager



   11-248   Hearing procedures



   11-249   Applicability to previous licensees; noncompliance



   11-250   Persons prohibited from holding a license



   11-251   Severability



Charter reference:



   Parking and parking facilities, see art. XII



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic beverages, see ch. 3



   Animals, see ch. 4



   Cemeteries, see ch. 6



   Emergencies, see ch. 7



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



   Licenses and business regulations, see ch. 10



   Noise, see ch. 13



   Operation of taxicabs, see §§ 20-81 through 20-85



   Parades, picketing and demonstrations, see ch. 15



   Riding or driving animals over sidewalks, see § 4-5



   Right-of-way of Fire Department vehicles, see § 9-38



   Streets and sidewalks, see ch. 18



   Vehicles for hire, see ch. 20



   Vehicular traffic in cemeteries, see § 6-9



Statutory reference:



   Abatement of public health nuisances and public safety nuisances, see
G.S. § 160A-193



   Junked and abandoned motor vehicles, see G.S. §§ 160A-303, 160A-303.2



   Local vehicle license, see G.S. §§ 20-97, 160A



   Motor vehicles, see G.S. Chapter 20



   Municipal powers as to parking, see G.S. §§ 160A-301, 160A-302



   Powers of local authorities, see G.S. § 20-169



   Stopping, standing and parking, see G.S. §§ 20-161 et seq.



   Streets, traffic and parking, see G.S. §§ 160A-296 et seq.



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 11-1  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Vehicles of the Fire and Police
Departments and ambulances designated or authorized by the Chief of Police.



   BLOCK.  The length of the portion of any street which is located
between two street intersections.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to a highway when 50% or
more of frontage thereon, for a distance of 300 feet or more, is occupied by
buildings which are in use for business purposes.



   COMPRESSION RELEASE ENGINE BRAKE. Any engine retarding brake system,
transmission brake, or any other retarding brake that alters normal engine
compression to slow a vehicle. Common names for this type of brake include
compression brake, Jake Brake, Jacobs Brake, C-Brake, and Paccar brake.



   CROSSWALK.  The portion of a roadway which lies between the
prolongation of the lateral sidewalk or boundary lines over an intersection.
Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing, by
lines or other markings on the surface.



   DRIVER.  A person in actual physical control of a vehicle which is in
motion or which has the engine running.



   INTERSECTION.  The area embraced within the prolongation of the
lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral edge of roadway lines of two
or more highways which join one another at any angle, whether or not one
highway crosses the other.



   MOPED.  Vehicles having two or three wheels and operable pedals and
equipped with a motor which does not exceed 50 cubic centimeters piston
displacement and cannot propel the vehicle at a speed greater than 20 mph on
a level surface.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle designed to run upon the highways which is pulled by a self-propelled
vehicle. This shall not include mopeds.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.  All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of
the Council or an official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS.  Any device, whether manually or
automatically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.



   PARK.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than
temporarily for the purpose of loading or unloading.



   PARKING METER.  Any mechanical device or meter placed or erected for
the regulation of parking, which upon deposit of a coin of the United States
of America will indicate legal parking. Each parking meter installed shall
indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the city.
When operated, it shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking
time, and at the expiration of the period, it shall indicate illegal or
overtime parking.



   PARKING METER SPACE.  Any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent
to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single
vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the
surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.



   PARKING METER ZONE.  Any restricted street upon which parking meters
are installed and are operating.



   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.



   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer of the city Police Department or any
officer authorized to direct traffic or to make arrests for violation of
traffic regulations.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.  Every road or driveway not open to the use
of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular traffic.



   PUBLIC CONVEYANCE.  Any vehicle which is engaged in the business of
transporting persons for fare.



   RAILROAD.  A carrier of persons or property, other than street cars,
with cars operated on stationary rails.



   RAILROAD TRAIN.  A steam engine, electric or other locomotive, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, not including street cars.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to a highway not
comprising a business district, when the frontage on that highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more, is mainly occupied by residential dwellings but
also by dwellings and buildings which are in use for business purposes.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway not
inconsistent with regulations and conditions.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall refer to
any ROADWAY separately but not to all those ROADWAYS collectively.



   SAFETY ZONE.  Traffic island or other space officially set aside
within a highway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is so plainly
marked or indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times
while set apart as a SAFETY ZONE.



   SIGNS.  See TRAFFIC SIGNS.



   STANDING.  Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.



   STOP.  When required, means complete cessation of movement.



   STOP or STOPPING.  When prohibited means any stopping of a vehicle,
except when conflict with other traffic is imminent or when otherwise
directed by a police officer.



   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars
and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for
purposes of travel.



   TRAFFIC SIGNS.  Authorized signs or markers which are assumed to be
permanently or temporarily placed, erected or installed at certain places and
which purport to give notice of direction or to convey a prohibition or
warning. The presence of these signs, though not compulsory, is generally
dictated by necessity or common sense, with a view to furtherance of public
safety.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks; provided, that
for the purposes of this chapter, bicycles shall be deemed VEHICLES and every
rider of a bicycle upon a highway shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter applicable to the driver of a VEHICLE except those which by their
nature can have no application. This term shall not include a device which is
designed for and intended to be used as a means of transportation for a
person with a mobility impairment, is suitable for use both inside and
outside a building, and whose maximum speed does not exceed 12 mph when the
device is being operated by a person with a mobility impairment.



(1972 Code, § 12-1)  (Ord. 2017-08, passed 11-14-2017)



Cross-reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



Statutory reference:



   Definitions, see G.S. § 20-4.01



§ 11-2  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.



   No person shall do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act
required in this chapter.



(1972 Code, § 12-2)



§ 11-3  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.



   No person shall refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of
a police officer.



(1972 Code, § 12-7)



§ 11-4  AUTHORITY OF POLICE IN SPECIAL CASES.



   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when it is necessary to
expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct
traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter.



(1972 Code, § 12-8)



§ 11-5  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state,
county or city.



(1972 Code, § 12-9)



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



§ 11-6  EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation,
parking and standing of vehicles shall also apply to authorized emergency
vehicles, except that unless otherwise directed by a police officer, a driver
when operating the vehicle in an emergency may:



      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he or she
does not endanger life or property; and



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions, so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property.



   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the
driver of any vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard
for the safety of others.



(1972 Code, § 12-10)



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department, see §§ 9-36 through 9-43



§ 11-7  BICYCLES, PUSHCARTS AND THE LIKE SUBJECT TO REGULATIONS.



   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal
upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter which are applicable to any driver
of any vehicle, except for those provisions which by their very nature can
have no application.



(1972 Code, § 12-11)



Cross-reference:



   Animals, see ch. 4



Statutory reference:



   Bicycle and Bikeway Act of 1974, see G.S. §§ 136-71.6 et seq.



§ 11-8  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM PUBLIC CONVEYANCES.



   No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other
vehicle while the conveyance is in motion.



(1972 Code, § 12-12)



§ 11-9  RIDING ON VEHICLE NOT INTENDED FOR PASSENGERS.



   (A)   No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle not
designated or intended for the use of passengers.



   (B)   This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty, nor to persons riding within truck bodies in
spaces intended for merchandise.



(1972 Code, § 12-13)



§ 11-10  ENTERING, JUMPING ON OR RIDING VEHICLE WITHOUT PERMISSION.



   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle
without the consent of the owner or driver.



(1972 Code, § 12-14)



§ 11-11  PERSONS RIDING IN VEHICLE MUST STAY INSIDE.



   (A)   No person shall allow any part of his or her body to protrude
beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he or she is riding, except to give
those signals as are required by law.



   (B)   No person shall hang on to any vehicle whatsoever.



(1972 Code, § 12-15)



ARTICLE II:  LOCAL VEHICLE LICENSE



§ 11-36  REQUIRED.



   Every person living or residing in the city who owns a motor vehicle
shall annually procure from the Tax Collector a city license tag which shall
be prominently displayed on the motor vehicle at all times.



(1972 Code, § 12-3)



§ 11-37  TERM.



   The local vehicle license shall be issued to extend for the period from
January 1 to December 31 of each year, and all licenses shall expire on
December 31 following the issuance of the tag.



(1972 Code, § 12-4)



§ 11-38  FEE.



   The Tax Collector shall collect a license fee for each license sold
under this article as authorized by state law and set by the Council.



(1972 Code, § 12-5)



ARTICLE III:  OPERATION OF VEHICLES



Division 1:  Generally



§ 11-61  STOPPING BEFORE ENTERING THROUGH STREET.



   (A)   Those streets and parts of streets designated on the official
map are hereby declared to be through streets for the purpose of this section.



   (B)   When stop signs are placed upon highways which intersect a
through street, the driver shall bring his or her vehicle to a stop before
entering the intersection, and he or she shall not proceed into or across the
through street until he or she has first determined that no conflict with
traffic will ensue.



(1972 Code, § 12-34)



§ 11-62  STOPPING BEFORE ENTERING CERTAIN STREET INTERSECTIONS.



   Certain intersections designated on the official map are hereby
declared to be stop intersections when entered from the streets first named.
When stop signs are placed at those intersections, every driver of a vehicle
shall stop before entering the intersections, and he or she shall not proceed
into or across the through street until he or she has first determined that
no conflict with traffic will ensue.



(1972 Code, § 12-35)



§ 11-63  STOPPING WHEN INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OBSTRUCTED.



   No driver shall move his or her vehicle across an intersection or a
marked crosswalk unless he or she knows that there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate his or her vehicle
without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians although a
traffic control signal may be indicating his or her right to proceed.



(1972 Code, § 12-36)



§ 11-64  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   Upon certain streets designated on the official map, vehicular traffic
shall move only in the direction indicated by traffic signs.



(1972 Code, § 12-37)



Statutory reference:



   One-way traffic, see G.S. § 20-165.1



§ 11-65  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSION.



   No vehicle may be driven through a funeral procession, except Fire
Department vehicles, police patrols and ambulances, and only if they are
responding to calls.



(1972 Code, § 12-38)



Cross-reference:



   Cemeteries, see ch. 6



Statutory reference:



   Operation of vehicles, see G.S. §§ 20-138.1 et seq.



§ 11-66  LEFT TURN PROHIBITED.



   No operator of any motor vehicle while operating the vehicle in the
eastbound or westbound lane of Main Street between its intersection with
Bridges Street and its intersection with Rice Street shall make a lefthand
turn across the centerline of Main Street, except to make proper turns onto
Henderson, Champlain and Lackey Streets; or into alleyways or business
driveways.



(Ord. passed 4-11-1989; Ord. passed 12-12-2000)



§ 11-67  U-TURNS RESTRICTED.



   No driver shall turn any vehicle and proceed in the opposite direction
within the business district, except at a street intersection. No vehicle,
however, shall make such a turn at certain street intersections designated on
the official map.



(1972 Code, § 12-41)



§ 11-68  LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back it into any intersection or over
a crosswalk, nor shall he or she back it otherwise unless the movement can be
made in safety and unless ample warning has been given by hand and horn or
other signals.



(1972 Code, § 12-42)



§ 11-69  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to reaching the sidewalk or the
sidewalk areas extending across any alley and, upon entering the roadway, he
or she shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.



(1972 Code, § 12-43)



Statutory reference:



   Exceptions to right-of-way rule, G.S. § 20-156



   Right-of-way of pedestrians and persons riding bicycles, see G.S. §
20-173



§ 11-70  CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.



   No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any
public conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.



(1972 Code, § 12-45)



§ 11-71  RIDING BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES; CARRYING PERSON ON HANDLEBARS,
FRAME AND THE LIKE.



   No operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall carry
any person upon the handlebars, frame or tank of his or her vehicle, nor
shall any person so ride upon any vehicle.



(1972 Code, § 12-46)



§ 11-72  RIDING BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES; ON SIDEWALKS; WITHOUT HANDS ON
HANDLEBARS.



   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without
having his or her hands on the handlebars, nor shall any person ride a
bicycle upon any sidewalk or walkway within the city.



(1972 Code, § 12-47)



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks, see ch. 18



§ 11-73  COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE RESTRICTED.



   No person on roller skates or riding in any coaster, skateboard, toy
vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, unless to cross a street
at a crosswalk or intersection.



(1972 Code, § 12-48)



§ 11-74  LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLE.



   During the times mentioned in G.S. § 20-129, no lights need be
displayed upon any vehicle when parked in accordance with this chapter upon a
highway where there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a
distance of 200 feet upon the highway.



(1972 Code, § 12-49)



Statutory reference:



   Lights on parked vehicles, see G.S. § 20-134



§ 11-75  MOVING CARS FROM PARKED POSITIONS.



   Parked cars shall move out in the direction headed or, if they are
parked at an angle with the curb, they shall back out at that angle until
they have cleared the other cars and shall then proceed in the direction they
are most nearly headed in.



(1972 Code, § 12-50)



§ 11-76  DRIVING WITHIN DESIGNATED LANES.



   All vehicles operated on any roadway which has been clearly marked with
traffic lanes shall be driven, as nearly as is practical, entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved out of the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.



(1972 Code, § 12-52)



§ 11-77  RESPONSE UPON APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLE.



   The drivers of vehicles, upon the approach of an authorized emergency
vehicle, shall immediately bring their vehicles to a stop on the right side
of the street in the direction in which they are facing and shall not move
their vehicles until the emergency vehicle has passed.



(1972 Code, § 9-11)



§ 11-78  COMPRESSION  BRAKES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use,
operate, or cause to be used or operated any compression release engine brake
within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   Exception. Compression release engine brakes may be used in an
emergency to avoid imminent danger.



(Ord. 2017-08, passed 11-14-2017)



Division 2: Speed



§ 11-91  SPEED LIMIT GENERALLY.



   Unless the Council establishes specific speed limits, as designated by
ordinance, the provisions of state law shall govern.



(1972 Code, § 12-51)



Statutory reference:



   Speed, see G.S. §§ 20-141 et seq.



§ 11-92  CHARLOTTE STREET.



   The speed limit on Charlotte Street from its intersection with N.C.
Highway No. 177 West to the dead end of Charlotte Street shall be 25 mph.



(Ord. passed 10-9-1989)



§ 11-93  HYLAN AVENUE.



   The speed limit on Hylan Avenue (SR 1909) from the western corporate
limit at the intersection with McDonald Avenue (SR 1903) going eastward to
Carl Martin Avenue shall be 45 mph.



(Ord. passed 10-9-1984)



§ 11-94  LAKESIDE DRIVE.



   The speed limit from Spring Street (U.S. 74) northward on Lakeside
Drive (SR 1608) to the northern corporate limit shall be 35 mph.



(Ord. passed 10-9-1984)



§ 11-95  MCDONALD AVENUE.



   (A)   The speed limit on McDonald Avenue (SR 1903) from the western
corporate limit at Hylan Avenue (SR 1909) going eastward to a point .05 mile
west of Fieldcrest Lane shall be 45 mph.



   (B)   The speed limit on McDonald Avenue from a point .05 mile west
of Fieldcrest Lane to N.C. Highway No. 177 shall be 35 mph.



(Ord. passed 10-9-1984)



§ 11-96  NORTH CAROLINA HIGHWAY 38.



   The speed limit on N.C. Highway No. 38 from Hamlet Avenue (U.S. 74) to
the southern corporate limits approximately .05 mile south of Crestwood Lane
shall be 45 mph.



(Ord. passed 10-9-1984)



Division 3:  Truck Routes



§ 11-106  REQUIRED USE.



   All trucks and trailers entering the city destined to any point outside
the city and not taking on or discharging any goods, wares or merchandise
within the city limits shall travel exclusively on the truck routes
established in § 11-109, and over that part of the truck routes as shall
constitute the shortest and most direct route from the point of entrance into
the city and departure from the city.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1987)



§ 11-107  TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   All trucks and trailers are prohibited from all streets other than
designated truck routes in the city, except trucks and trailers may travel on
those parts of streets to reach or to return from a destination upon the
street. This section specifically prohibits travel on all streets except
those as set out in § 11-109. (Ord. passed 9-8-1987)



§ 11-108  ROUTES TO BE MARKED.



   The Chief of Police shall cause to be erected and maintained at points
where through truck routes enter the city, and at all junction points and
turns where necessary, signs of dimensions and at those locations as shall be
approved by him or her, directing truck traffic in accordance with the
provisions of this division.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1987)



§ 11-109  DESIGNATION.



   The designated truck routes for the city are as follows:



   (A)   U.S. Highway 74;



   (B)   N.C. Highway No. 38; and



   (C)   N.C. Highway No. 177.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1987)



ARTICLE IV: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Division 1:  Generally



§ 11-131  VIOLATION; PENALTY.



   Any person who parks a motor vehicle in violation of city parking
regulations without being lawfully entitled thereto, shall be fined per the
state statutes. Any vehicle in violation of this subchapter may be towed at
the discretion of the authorizing official determining that the immediate
removal of the vehicle is necessary. Any vehicle that has been towed for a
parking violation is to be held until the towing fee and penalties related to
all outstanding parking tickets and penalties owed to the city are paid in
full or a bond is posted in the amount of the towing fee and all outstanding
parking tickets and penalties. Payment of the towing fee and all outstanding
parking tickets and penalties shall not constitute a waiver of a person's
right to contest the towing or the outstanding parking tickets and penalties.



(Ord. passed 6-10-1980; Ord. passed 12-11-1984; Ord. 2016-03.2, passed
4-12-2016)



§ 11-132  VEHICLES SHALL NOT STOP IN STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.



   No vehicle shall stop in any street, except for the purpose of parking
as prescribed in this chapter, unless the stop is made necessary by the
approach of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other procession
which is given right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the
lowering of railway gates, by being given countermanding traffic signals, by
the passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian or by some emergency. In
all cases covered by these exceptions these vehicles shall stop so as not to
obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing or street
intersection if possible.



(1972 Code, § 12-20)



§ 11-133  OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.



   No vehicle shall stand on any street in a manner as to interrupt or
interfere with the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles.



(1972 Code, § 12-21)



§ 11-134  PARKING PARALLEL TO CURB.



   Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter, all vehicles shall park
parallel to the curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom.



(1972 Code, § 12-26)



§ 11-135  VEHICLES BACKING TO CURB.



   In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to the curb, except when
actually loading or unloading.



(1972 Code, § 12-27)



§ 11-136  STOPPING WITH LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLE TO CURB PROHIBITED.



   No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in the city.



(1972 Code, § 12-28)



§ 11-137  PARKING WITHIN LINES REQUIRED.



   On any street that is marked off with lines indicating the parking
spaces for cars, the same shall be parked between those lines.



(1972 Code, § 12-29)



§ 11-138  ANGLE PARKING.



   Automobiles and other vehicles shall be parked at an angle with the
curb on certain streets. The angle shall be as specified by the Council.



(1972 Code, § 12-30)



§ 11-139  MOVING VEHICLE OF ANOTHER PERSON INTO RESTRICTED AREA PROHIBITED.



   No person shall move a vehicle not owned by that person into any
prohibited area or sufficiently away from a curb to make the distance
unlawful.



(1972 Code, § 12-32)



Division 2:  Prohibited Parking



§ 11-151  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNS, MARKINGS.



   When signs are placed which prohibit parking or when the curbing has
been painted yellow in lieu of those signs, no person shall park a vehicle at
any time upon any of the streets so marked.



(1972 Code, § 12-22)



§ 11-152  HENDERSON STREET.



   Parking is prohibited:



   (A)   On the west side of Henderson Street from the library entrance
74 feet to the intersection of Main Street; and



   (B)   From the corner of Jefferson and Henderson Streets and
continuing north on the east side of Henderson Street to Vance Street.



(Ord. passed 10-10-1983; Ord. passed 3-10-1987; Ord. passed 1-9-1990; Ord.
2016-03.2, passed 4-12-2016)



§ 11-153  RICE STREET.



   Parking is prohibited:



   (A)   On the west side of Rice Street beginning at the intersection
of Jefferson and Rice Streets and running to the Rice Street bridge;



   (B)   On the west side of Rice Street from Main Street to Charlotte
Street;



   (C)   On the east side of Rice Street an area of 35 feet directly in
front of the ancillary entrance to the new building;



   (D)   On the 50 feet of both sides of Rice Street at the
intersection of Rice Street and Jefferson Street; and



   (E)   On both sides of Rice Street for a distance of 50 feet in
front of the First Presbyterian Church at the intersection of Jefferson and
Rice Streets.



(Ord. passed 1-11-1977; Ord. passed 9-13-1983; Ord. passed 10-10-1983; Ord.
2016-03.2, passed 4-12-2016)



§ 11-154  SPRING STREET.



   Parking is prohibited on either side of Spring Street between N.C.
Highway No. 177 and Williams Street.



(Ord. passed 2-8-1983)



§ 11-155  VANCE STREET.



   Parking is prohibited on the north side of Vance Street from Rice
Street westward to the dead end of Vance Street.



(Ord. passed 1-11-1977)



§ 11-156  PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall impede the flow of traffic or park in a municipally
owned or leased parking lot for the principal purpose of:



   (A)   Displaying it for sale;



   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency;



   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons;



   (D)   Storage of any vehicle with attached or detached trailer or
van when the towing unit has been disconnected;



   (E)   Transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to
another;



   (F)   Advertising merchandise, wares and the like;



   (G)   Storage of any commercial vehicle with three axles or more; and



   (H)   Overnight purposes, except for Amtrak travelers parking in the
designated parking areas



(1972 Code, § 12-31)  (Ord. 2016-03.2, passed 4-12-2016)



Division 3:  Restricted Parking



§ 11-171  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   Zones of time limit parking or other restricted parking shall be as
indicated on the official traffic map of the city and shall be posted with
appropriate signs.



(1972 Code, § 12-23)



§ 11-172  HANDICAP AREAS.



   Pursuant to §§ 11-151 and 11-171 of this Code, public vehicular
parking in parking spaces designated for handicapped persons, this
designation being by a wheelchair symbol or insignia, shall be prohibited
except for vehicles bearing a license plate, placard or other evidence of
handicap or visual impairment, as authorized by law.



(Ord. passed 6-10-1980)



Statutory reference:



   Handicapped parking, see G.S. §§ 20-37.5 et seq.



§ 11-173  OVERSIZE VEHICLES, TRAILERS.



   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicles in excess of 80 inches
in width or in excess of 30 feet in length, or any trailer, on the streets
within the corporate limits of the city at any time except when engaged in
loading and unloading, for emergency services or for temporary use at
construction sites during the period of active construction.



(Ord. passed 9-13-1988)



ARTICLE V:  ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED VEHICLES



§ 11-196  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.  As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, one
that:



      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of
a law or ordinance prohibiting parking;



      (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than
seven days;



      (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the city for
longer than 24 hours; or



      (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the
owner, occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two hours.



   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL.  The supervisory employee of the Police
Department or the City Manager, respectively, designated to authorize the
removal of vehicles under the provisions of this article.



   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE.  As authorized and defined in G.S. §
160A-303.2, a vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully
upon the vehicle and that:



      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;



      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which
it originally was intended to move; or



      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less
than $500.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE.  All machines designed or intended to travel
over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.



   NUISANCE VEHICLE.  A vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance
and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other
insects, rats or other pests;



      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious
vegetation over eight inches in height;



      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;



      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil
or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;



      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be
operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods and the like;



      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it
falling or turning over;



      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food
waste, animal waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;



      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or
contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or



      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and
safety hazard and a public nuisance by the Council.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



Cross-reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



§ 11-197  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The Police Department and the City Manager or his or her designee shall
be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The
Police Department shall be responsible for administering the removal and
disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public streets and
highways within the city and on property owned by the city. The City Manager
shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles located on private property. The
city may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or
towing businesses to remove, store and dispose of abandoned vehicles,
nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this article
and applicable state laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the Police Department and
Fire Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their
duties.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990; Ord. 2016-03.2, passed 4-12-2016)



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



§ 11-198  ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow the vehicle to be
abandoned.



   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the city
may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle
removed.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-199  NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or
occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a
nuisance vehicle.



   (B)   Upon investigation, the City Manager may determine and declare
that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle and order
the vehicle removed.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-200  JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner,
lessee or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is
located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the
vehicle has been ordered removed.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor
vehicle on the premises of public or private property. Single, permitted
junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location and concealment
requirements of this section.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the
possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of
the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to
comply with the locational requirements or the concealment requirements of
this section.



   (D)   Subject to the provisions of subsection (E) below, upon
investigation, the City Manager may order the removal of a junked motor
vehicle after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the
vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. These
findings shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent
owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing
the community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following, among other
relevant factors, may be considered:



      (1)   Protection of property values;



      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development
opportunities;



      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;



      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the
community; and



      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional
stability of area residents.



   (E)   Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicle.



      (1)   One junked motor vehicle.



         (a)   One junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, can be
located in the rear yard as deemed by the city’s zoning ordinances if the
junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public
street and from abutting premises by an acceptable covering.



         (b)   The City Manager has the authority to determine
whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this
provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to
deteriorate. The covering or enclosure must be compatible with the objectives
of this section.



      (2)   More than one junked motor vehicle.  Any other junked
motor vehicle(s) must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides
a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle(s) cannot be seen from
a public street or abutting property. A garage or building structure means
either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected
pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been
constructed in accordance with all Zoning and Building Code regulations.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-201  TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO REMOVAL.



   (A)   Except as set forth in § 11-202, an abandoned, nuisance or
junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to the
registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case
of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and mailing
addresses of the registered owner, lessee or occupant of the real property
upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail. The
person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to show the
name(s) and address(es) to which mailed and the date mailed. If the names and
addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an
abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield
or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the
vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date (no sooner than seven
days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state that the vehicle
will be removed by the city on a specified date, no sooner than seven days
after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the
legal owner or legal possessor prior to that time.



   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property,
nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be
given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not
remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle
is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle
that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, the
appeal shall be made to the Council in writing, heard at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Council, and further proceedings to remove the
vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-202  EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of
an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a
special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to
otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. These findings
shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the
appropriate daily records.



   (B)   Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior
notice includes:



      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets.  For vehicles left
on the public streets and highways, the Council hereby determines that
immediate removal of those vehicles may be warranted when they are:



         (a)   Obstructing traffic;



         (b)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or
restricting parking;



         (c)   Parked in a no stopping or standing zone;



         (d)   Parked in loading zones;



         (e)   Parked in bus zones; and/or



         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking
restrictions imposed under sections of this Code.



      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles.  With respect to
abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on city owned property other than the
streets and highways, and on private property, the vehicles may be removed
without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing
official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the
public health, safety and welfare. By ways of illustration and not of
limitation, these circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing
ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in a location
or manner as to pose a traffic hazard and vehicles causing damage to public
or private property.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-203  POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been
ordered removed may, as directed by the city, be removed to a storage garage
or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform
those services for the city. Whenever a vehicle is removed, the authorizing
city official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the
vehicle, the notice to include the following:



      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;



      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;



      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;



      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the
vehicle; and



      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a
probable cause hearing on the removal.



   (B)   The city shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in subsections (A)(1) through
(A)(5) above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner’s last known
address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his
or her agent.



   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be
given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice
shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of
the vehicle.



   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is
removed, and the vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates,
the authorizing city official shall make reasonable efforts, including
checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known
registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him or her of the information
set forth in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(5) above.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-204  RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION
OF VEHICLE.



   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked
motor vehicle, the owner or any person entitled to possession is entitled to
a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for
removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the
County Magistrate designated by the Chief District Court Judge to receive the
hearing requests. The Magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of
receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-205  REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.



   At any stage in the proceedings under this article, including before
the probable cause hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed
vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by
posting a bond for double the amount of the fees and charges to the tow truck
operator or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon
regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the
possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violations of
this article.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-206  SALE, DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.



   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by
the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the
tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle.
Disposition of the vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the city
and in accordance with G.S. Chapter 44A, Article I.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-207  CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   As a general policy, the city will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of the property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the city from private property without a written
request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a
vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been
ordered removed by the City Manager. The city may require any person
requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from
private property to indemnify the city against any loss, expense or liability
incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-208  PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.



   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to
any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of the vehicle as provided in
this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-209  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this article shall apply to any vehicle:



   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or
junkyard as defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard
Control Act, G.S. §§ 136-141 et seq.;



   (B)   Which is in an enclosed building;



   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being
operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the
operation of the enterprise; or



   (D)   Which is an appropriate storage place or depository maintained
in a lawful place and manner by the city.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



§ 11-210  UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from
any storage facility designated by the city any vehicle which has been
impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of those fees, have been paid.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1990)



ARTICLE VI:  WRECKER AND TOW SERVICE



§ 11-230  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed herein.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The executive head of the Police Department of the
city or anyone designated by him or her.



   CITY.  The City of Hamlet.



   HEAVY DUTY WRECKER.  A truck chassis having a minimum gross vehicular
weight of 24,000 pounds and a boom assembly having a minimum lifting power of
32,000 pounds, as rated by the manufacturer and any additional safety
equipment as specified by the Chief of Police, and incorporated by reference
as if set forth herein.



   LICENSEE or APPLICANT.  A person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of or offering the services of a vehicle wrecker or towing service
whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise removed from one
place to another by the use of a motor vehicle manufactured and designed for
the primary purpose of removing and towing disabled motor vehicles.



   LIGHT DUTY WRECKER.  A truck chassis having a minimum gross vehicular
weight of 10,000 pounds and a boom assembly having a minimum lifting power of
8,000 pounds, as rated by the manufacturer and any additional safety
equipment as specified by the Chief of Police, and incorporated by reference
as if set forth herein.



   ROTATION LIST.  A list maintained by the Police Department containing
the names of those wreckers licensed by the city to respond to requests for
the towing of vehicles made by the Police Department.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-231  POLICY.



   In order to protect citizens who operate motor vehicles inside the city
limits, it is desirable and necessary to ensure proper regulations and other
controls over persons and firms licensed to provide wrecker service.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001; Ord. passed 11-10-2009)



§ 11-232  DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS OF LICENSEES UNDER THIS ARTICLE.



   (A)   The licensee shall provide a light duty wrecker or heavy duty
wrecker and a rollback vehicle of sufficient size and weight as defined in §
11-230; all vehicles used to provide wrecker services must be owned by the
business licensed to provide the service.



   (B)   All wreckers shall be equipped with warning lights required
under state law.



   (C)   The licensee shall provide continuous 24-hour-a-day service
each day of the year, and there shall be an attendant on duty at the storage
lot during regular business hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.), Monday through
Friday, except for emergencies and wrecker service calls. The daytime calls
for the daytime rate will be for calls received from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00
p.m. Monday through Friday. The nighttime call rate will be for calls
received from 5:01 p.m. until 7:59 a.m. Monday through Friday. The night rate
will be charged for all calls received on weekends and holidays.



   (D)   The licensee shall assume all liability and shall indemnify
and save the city harmless from liability for damages sustained by vehicles
while being towed or stored and for all personal injuries occurring to any of
the firm’s employees or other persons, and shall maintain the required
insurance policies.



   (E)   The licensee shall not release any vehicle directly impounded
by the city without authorization by the Police Department.



   (F)   The licensee shall charge for his, her or its services those
rates as may be fixed by the City Council.



   (G)   Wrecker services shall perform towing service for the city on
a rotation basis.



   (H)   No licensee shall intercept police calls by short-wave radio
for the purpose of soliciting business.



   (I)   The licensee shall provide:



      (1)   Available space for properly accommodating and
protecting a minimum of 15 disabled motor vehicles to be towed or otherwise
removed from the place where they are disabled. The storage space for
vehicles shall be enclosed by a minimum six-foot chain link fence or a fence
of similar strength and shall have all entrances and exits secure from public
access; the storage space for vehicles shall be located within the city
limits; and



      (2)   A storage vault or storage room on the storage lot or
premises which is adequate to secure and protect personal property which may
be left in vehicles towed to a private wrecker.



   (J)   Regulations for wrecker operators:



      (1)   The operator must have a valid Class C operator’s
license issued by the State Department of Motor Vehicles, G.S. § 20-7;



      (2)   Wrecker operators will be responsible for clearing
debris from highway caused by the accident, and will remove any parts from
highway that are torn or come off any vehicle as the result of an accident;



      (3)   Wreckers must arrive at scene within 30 minutes upon
notification of a request for wrecker; if not, the next wrecker on rotation
will be dispatched;



      (4)   Wrecker operators or owners of wreckers will not argue
or show disrespect toward any officer or other wrecker operator at the scene
of accident; and



      (5)   Any complaints by wrecker operators or owners will be
investigated by the Wrecker Inspector when they are properly documented and
signed.



   (K)   Regulations concerning wrecker facilities:



      (1)   The name of the wrecker company must be clearly printed
on both sides of the wrecker with day and night telephone numbers. Magnetic
signs are permissible;



      (2)   Wrecker facilities, safety and service equipment will be
subject to inspection by the Wrecker Inspector any time;



      (3)   Only one day and night telephone number will be accepted
for rotation calls;



      (4)   Each wrecker company must have individual storage lots
and/or facilities for inside storage; and



      (5)   In emergency circumstances an officer may bypass the
rotation list.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001; Ord. passed 11-10-2009)



§ 11-233  HEAVY DUTY WRECKERS.



   (A)   A large rotation list will be maintained for the purpose of
handling large truck wrecks and unusual situations where other wreckers could
not adequately handle the task. Under no circumstances will several wreckers
be used to handle a particular task when one large wrecker could adequately
handle the situation.



   (B)   The officer at the scene of accident will request a regular or
large wrecker based on his or her evaluation of the situation.



   (C)   Large rotation wreckers will be governed by the same rules and
regulations as § 11-232, plus:



      (1)   Each large wrecker must be equipped with at least a 600
holmes boom or equivalent, approved by the City Police Department;



      (2)   Each operator must possess a valid Class A operator’s
license issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles; and



      (3)   A separate braking system to control the towed vehicle.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-234  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person desiring to perform towing work at police request
shall submit an application for a wrecker service license in duplicate to the
Chief of Police. Application forms shall be obtained from the office of the
Chief of Police.



   (B)   These forms shall state:



      (1)   The name of the applicant/owner and name of business if
different from name of owner, home and business address and telephone;



      (2)   The storage lot on which towed vehicles will be stored
is located within the city limits or approved by the Chief of Police, and
additional information concerning the size and security features of the lot;



      (3)   The towing equipment available, its size and capacity;



      (4)   A complete listing of the insurance policies, complying
with § 11-236, and the carriers and agents the wrecker applicant would place
into effect upon license approval; and



      (5)   Any other information as the Chief of Police may find
reasonably necessary to determine whether or not the requirements of this
article will be complied with and that it is in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare to issue a license to the applicant.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-235  LICENSING.



   Within 30 days after receiving an application for wrecker service
license, the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation to determine if
the applicant has complied with the necessary standards and criteria of this
article, and that it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare that a license shall be issued to the applicant after having complied
with the provisions of § 11-235.1. If approved, the applicant’s name shall
be placed at the end of rotation list; provided, if an applicant is refused a
license by the Chief of Police, the applicant shall have the right to appeal
the denial to the City Manager for a determination concerning the issuance of
license to the applicant. The appeal shall be in accordance with § 11-245.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-235.1  MANDATORY REFUSAL OF APPLICATION.



   If an applicant has been convicted, entered a plea of nolo contendere
or received a prayer continued for judgment, within the last three years for
a felony involving moral turpitude or the offense of driving under the
influence of an intoxicating liquor or drug, or is an habitual offender of
traffic laws, it is the finding of the City Council that it is not in the
best interest of the public health, safety or welfare to issue a license
under this article to the applicant and therefore the application shall be
denied.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-235.2  CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   When an application is approved, a license will be issued when:



   (A)   Insurance policies required by this article have been procured
and a copy of each given to the Chief of Police. Each policy shall be written
by a company licensed to do business in the state, and issued in the name of
the licensee;



   (B)   The requirements of this article and all other governing laws
and ordinances have been met. This is to include that each licensee shall
operate and maintain a business within the city limits; and



   (C)   For purposes of determining whether an applicant operates and
maintains a business within the city limits, it is the public policy of this
city that businesses (whether sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation
or otherwise) that have staff on site within the city’s limits are better
able than those without staff within the city’s limits to provide
sufficiently prompt and convenient service to those affected by this article.
The city finds that, in the past, some wrecker businesses sought to evade the
article’s intent by enclosing fenced areas and having no staff on site
within city limits. The result of these practices was to frustrate the
purposes of this article. Also, the city finds that the expenses of enforcing
this article increased with the distance of wrecker business staff from the
city limits. In determining whether to grant or deny any application
hereunder, the Chief of Police, in conjunction with the City Manager, shall
assess whether the applicant has sufficient staff within the city’s limits
to perform the services required by this article in a sufficiently timely
manner and to permit enforcement of this article without an undue burden on
the city’s financial ability to enforce the same.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-236  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Insurance.  The following are the minimum insurance
requirements to be kept and maintained by any licensee under this article at
all times the license is in effect.



      (1)   Garage liability policy.  A garage liability policy
covering the operation of the licensee’s business, equipment or other
vehicles for any bodily injury or property damage. This policy shall be in
the minimum of $100,000 for any one person injured or killed, and a minimum
of $750,000 for more than one person killed or injured in any accident and an
additional $50,000 for property damage.



      (2)   Garage keeper’s policy.  A garage keeper’s legal
liability policy for each storage premises covering fire, theft, windstorm,
vandalism and explosion in the amount of $100,000 ($10,000 per claim per
vehicle).



   (B)   Notice of change.  Each policy required under this section
must contain an endorsement by carriers providing ten days’ notice to both
the city and the insured in the event of any change in coverage under the
policy.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-236.1  HOLD HARMLESS PROVISION.



   Any licensee shall indemnify, save and hold harmless the city, its
officers, agents and employees, from any and all claims, actions, defenses,
suits and proceedings arising out of any negligent act on the part of a
licensee, employee or part-time employee of the licensee, which negligent act
is the proximate cause of damage to any vehicle while in tow, or stored in a
lot authorized under the terms of this article.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-237  OFFICE CREATED, WRECKER INSPECTOR; VEHICLE STATE INSPECTION.



   There is hereby created the Office of Wrecker Inspector, who shall be
appointed by the Chief of Police with approval of the City Manager. The
Wrecker Inspector shall come from the personnel of the Police Department and
shall hold the rank of sergeant or higher.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-237.1  DUTIES GENERALLY.



   The Wrecker Inspector shall be responsible for:



   (A)   The practical administration of the wrecker ordinances and
regulations and the safety and welfare of the public in connection with the
operation and use of rotation wreckers;



   (B)   The inspection of wreckers;



   (C)   Advising the Chief of Police and the City Manager with respect
to matters governed or incidentally involved in the operation of
administration of the wreckers and the rotation wrecker regulations;



   (D)   Making recommendations for submission to the City Manager and
to the City Council with respect to the adequacy of wrecker service in the
city to serve the public convenience and necessity;



   (E)   Making studies and recommendations as he or she may deem
advisable looking towards more efficient operation of wreckers and rotation
wreckers to the end that the public safety and welfare will be served and
proper and adequate wrecker service to the general public will be promoted;
and



   (F)   All other duties as required by this article.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-238  COST AND INSPECTIONS.



   Except as provided in § 11-239, all costs incident to towing and
storage shall be paid by the owner, or person in charge or possession of the
towed and stored vehicle, to the licensee and a receipt for payment shall be
issued to the person. The city shall assume no liability or responsibility
for any vehicle removed from any place without the authority of the Police
Department. Each licensee shall maintain approved records and claim check
system to assure release of vehicles to the rightful owner or authorized
person. These records shall be open to the Police Department for
investigation of specific complaints (in writing) and for compiling surveys
under this article. Any licensee shall permit any person appointed by the
Chief of Police to inspect his or her wreckers, vault, security room or
storage area at those reasonable times as the Chief of Police shall deem
appropriate.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-239  WRECKERS CALLED BY THE POLICE.



   The Police Department shall ensure that wreckers are called to the
scene of an accident or to impound vehicles on a rotation basis, distributing
the calls from the rotation list. The Chief of Police shall not call or cause
to be called any wrecker not on the rotation list unless all the wreckers are
unavailable, or unless the owner of the vehicle to be towed requests that a
specific wrecker be called; any wrecker called by the Police Department not
on the rotation list shall comply with statutory insurance requirements. It
is specifically permitted for the Police Department to call a wrecker out of
sequence where due to an emergency or life threatening situation proximity to
the wreck and estimated response time make it more necessary to do so.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-240  STORAGE OF VEHICLES.



   It shall be the responsibility of any licensee to secure in a safe
manner any vehicle or personal property contained in the vehicle that is
placed in the custody of the licensee as a result of being called by the City
Police Department to perform a tow. The area within which the vehicle and/or
personal property shall be stored shall meet the minimum requirements of §
11-232(I). If, at the time the vehicle was towed the storage area provided by
the licensee is full, then the licensee shall secure the vehicle and/or
personal property elsewhere as permitted by the Police Department. In the
event that the vehicle or personal property placed in his or her custody is
the subject of a police investigation for evidentiary purposes, and the
storage area is full, then the licensee shall immediately contact the Wrecker
Inspector or the Desk Sergeant on duty and make arrangements to secure the
vehicle and/or personal property in a safe manner.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-241  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of Police, subject to approval by the City Manager, shall
establish and cause the enforcement of reasonable rules and regulations for
licensees as from time to time he or she deems appropriate for the safety,
well-being and protection of citizens within his or her jurisdiction and
their property.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-242  SOLICITATION OF BUSINESS.



   No licensee may respond to the scene of an accident or emergency for
the purpose of towing vehicles unless specifically called there by the police
or person involved in the accident or emergency. This section is intended to
prohibit licensees from soliciting business at the scenes of accidents and
emergencies and shall not be construed to prohibit any licensees from
contracting with any person, firm or corporation, provided the licensee, his
or her agents and employees do not solicit towing contracts at the scene of
accidents or emergencies.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-243  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of
license issued under this article:



      (1)   The license was secured by fraud or by the concealment
of a material fact by the licensee and the fact, if known, would have caused
a refusal to issue a license;



      (2)   The licensee has violated any of the requirements of the
regulations established by the Chief of Police under this article;



      (3)   Past services rendered by a licensee are shown to be
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare (this includes
overcharging of wrecker fees or false charging of items done by the wrecker
business);



      (4)   The licensee paid in the form of a gratuity any third
person for information as to the location of the accident;



      (5)   The licensee has violated the fee schedule by overcharge
or false charges;



      (6)   Failure to operate the wrecker specified in a manner as
to serve the public adequately and efficiently;



      (7)   Failure to maintain wrecker and vehicle in good repair;



      (8)   Failure to pay the city privilege license fee imposed
upon wreckers;



      (9)   Failure to report accidents while towing city rotation
call vehicles or to furnish other records and reports as may be required by
this chapter and/or the Wrecker Inspector; or



      (10)   Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter,
ordinance or state laws relating to the operation or wreckers.



   (B)   If the Wrecker Inspector determines that any of the above
violations have occurred, he or she shall have the authority to revoke or
suspend a license as follows:



      (a)   For violation of subsection (A)(1) above, revocation;



      (b)   For a first time violation of subsections (A)(2) through
(A)(10) above, suspension up to 30 days;



      (c)   For a second violation of subsections (A)(2) through
(A)(10) above, within a period of two years from the date of the first
suspension, up to 60 days; and



      (d)   For a third violation of subsections (A)(2) through
(A)(10) above, within a period of two years from the date of the first
violation, revocation.



   (C)   Any licensee who has his or her license revoked, shall be
eligible to apply for a new license one year from the date of the revocation.
For purposes of this section, the date of suspension or date of revocation
shall be the date of the notification by the Wrecker Inspector pursuant to §
11-244, or if an appeal is made, the date of the final action by the City
Manager.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-244  NOTIFICATION OF SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION BY WRECKER INSPECTOR.



   The revocation or suspension shall be in writing and notify the
licensee of the following:



   (A)   The nature of the violation;



   (B)   The Wrecker Inspector’s recommendation as to whether the
licensee should remain on the rotation wrecker list, should be suspended or
his or her license revoked; and



   (C)   The licensee has a right to an appeal of the action to the
City Manager.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-245  APPEAL TO THE CITY MANAGER.



   Whenever any provision of this chapter shall provide for an appeal or a
decision of the Wrecker Inspector to the City Manager, the following
procedure shall be followed.



   (A)   The appellant shall give written notice of appeal to the City
Clerk within ten days of receiving the notice of the action he or she is
appealing.



   (B)   The City Manager shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 30
days of receipt of the written notice of appeal.



   (C)   The written notice of appeal shall state whether or not the
appellant wants an open or closed hearing before the City Manager.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-246  ACTION PENDING APPEAL; LAPSE OF TIME; WAIVER.



   (A)   Whenever a provision of this article states a specific time
within which an appeal must be taken, and regardless of the level of
authority from which the appeal may be taken, if the appeal is not taken
within the time prescribed, then the action of the Wrecker Inspector from
which the appeal may have been taken is deemed to be final.



   (B)   The action of the Wrecker Inspector suspending or revoking any
rights granted under the authority of this article shall be effective upon
receipt of notice by the licensee; provided, that if the licensee files a
timely appeal, then any right under this article heretofore existing shall
continue in effect during the pendency of any appeal(s) or 30 days, whichever
is sooner.



   (C)   Any hearing may be continued upon 48 hours’ written notice
prior to the date of the hearing; provided, that if the new date for the
hearing is more than 30 days from the date of the original notice of appeal,
then the rights of the appellant pursuant to subsection (B) above may only be
extended upon a showing of good cause.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-247  HEARING; ACTION OF CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   The purpose of the hearing before the City Manager shall be to
determine whether or not the action of the Wrecker Inspector in suspending or
revoking the rights and privileges of the appellant was in the best interests
of the public health, safety and welfare of the city. The appellant shall be
permitted to present any evidence relevant to the subject matter of the
appeal. The hearing shall be administrative in nature, and the action of the
City Manager shall be final.



   (B)   If the action of the City Manager is to affirm the action of
the Wrecker Inspector, then the effective date of the action shall be on the
date of the hearing. Any period of actual suspension as the result of a
continuance prior to the hearing shall be counted toward any period of
suspension approved by the City Manager.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-248  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   Any hearing before the City Manager shall use the following procedures.



   (A)   The hearing shall be open, unless specifically requested by
appellant prior to the hearing.



   (B)   The appellant shall be entitled to make any statements either
by an attorney or someone of his or her own choosing.



   (C)   The appellant shall be entitled to make any statements or
present any witnesses on his or her behalf that he or she desires.



   (D)   The hearing shall be administrative in nature, there shall be
a right to cross-examination.



   (E)   The appellant shall be entitled to transcribe the proceedings
at his or her own cost.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-249  APPLICABILITY TO PREVIOUS LICENSEES; NONCOMPLIANCE.



   Whenever this article VI of chapter 11 is amended from time to time by
the City Council and the amendments shall render any current approved
licensee in noncompliance with the ordinance as amended, the noncomplying
licensee shall have a period of one year from the effective date of the
amendment of the ordinance in which to comply.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-250  PERSONS PROHIBITED FROM HOLDING A LICENSE.



   No City Council member or employee directly involved with the
administration of this article shall be permitted to hold a license under the
terms of this article.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001)



§ 11-251  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence or clause of this article is
adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, the adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portion of this article. It is hereby declared
that this article would have been passed, and each section, sentence or
clause thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences or clauses might be adjudged to be unconstitutional or
for any other reason invalid.



(Ord. passed 10-9-2001), Parks and Recreation



CHAPTER 12:  MUNICIPAL LAKES, PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



Article I:  In General



   12-1   Definition



   12-2   Custodian; issuance of permits



   12-3   Council approval may be required for permit



   12-4   Fees for use of ballpark, fairground



   12-5   Closing hours



Article II:  Municipal Lakes



   12-31   Use subject to regulations



   12-32   Posting of notices, signs



   12-33   Permit; required



   12-34   Permit; revocation



   12-35   Applicability of state fishing regulations



   12-36   Taking minnows from lake; limited



   12-37   Taking minnows from lake; sale prohibited



   12-38   Ban of motorized boats from city lake



   12-39   Swimming, wading and diving prohibited



   12-40   Construction permit required



   12-41   Permission required for commercial use



   12-42   Compliance with regulations; liability for damage



   12-43   Contamination, pollution and the like prohibited



   12-44   Minors restricted



   12-45   Night fishing prohibited



   12-46   Fishing with jugs, trotlines, nets



   12-47   Fishing prohibited in city water reservoir



   12-48   Enforcement



Article III:  Conduct in Public Parks



   12-71   Definitions



   12-72   Park property



   12-73   Sanitation



   12-74   Traffic



   12-75   Recreational activities



   12-76   Behavior



   12-77   Merchandising, advertising and signs



   12-78   Park operating policy



   12-79   Enforcement



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



   Parades, picketing and demonstrations, see ch. 15



   Swimming pools, see ch. 19



Statutory reference:



   Boating and water safety, see G.S. Chapter 75A



   Conservation of marine and estuarine and wildlife resources, see G.S.
§§ 113-127 et seq.



   Municipal parks and recreation, see G.S. §§ 160A-350 et seq.



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 12-1  DEFINITION.



   As used in this chapter, CITY LAKE means the lake located north of
Hamlet Avenue between Veteran’s Drive and Second Street.



(Ord. passed 7-1-1975)



Cross-reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



§ 12-2  CUSTODIAN; ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   The Council or person duly authorized by the Council shall be made
custodian of the city lake, the ballpark and fairground and have the
authority to grant permits for the use of the same.



(1972 Code, § 13-1)



§ 12-3  COUNCIL APPROVAL MAY BE REQUIRED FOR PERMIT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall give the City Manager the right to issue
permits to any person to use the facilities when a provision of this Code or
an ordinance of the city requires approval of the Council before a permit can
be issued.



(1972 Code, § 13-3)



§ 12-4  FEES FOR USE OF BALLPARK, FAIRGROUND.



   The fees for the use of the city ballpark and fairground shall be set
by the Council.



(1972 Code, § 13-2)



§ 12-5  CLOSING HOURS.



   (A)   All public parks and public recreational facilities within the
city limits shall be closed to the public between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and
daylight except for organized and duly scheduled recreational activities.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person except for law enforcement
officers and duly authorized city employees to go upon the grounds of any
public park, playground or recreational facility within the city limits
within the times prohibited in this section, and all persons not excepted by
this subsection found to be upon the premises at prohibited times shall be
deemed trespassers and prosecuted under the laws of the state for trespassing.



(Ord. passed 7-14-1981)



ARTICLE II:  MUNICIPAL LAKES



§ 12-31  USE SUBJECT TO REGULATIONS.



   The city lake shall be closed to fishing, boating or other uses, except
as permitted in this chapter.



(1972 Code, § 13-4)



§ 12-32  POSTING OF NOTICES, SIGNS.



   Proper notices and signs shall be posted in conspicuous places on city
lake property warning the public that the property has been posted and use is
prohibited except in the manner described in this chapter.



(1972 Code, § 13-5)



§ 12-33  PERMIT; REQUIRED.



   Any person who desires to use the city lake in accordance with the
terms and conditions of this chapter shall first secure from the City Manager
or his or her designated agent a permit and pay the charges as provided in
this chapter.



(1972 Code, § 13-6)



§ 12-34  PERMIT; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Council shall have the right to revoke any permit issued
under this chapter for any reason deemed sufficient by the Council for
revocation of the same, and the decision of the Council shall be final.



   (B)   Upon the revocation of any permit, the City Manager or his or
her designated agent shall refund the proportionate share of the cost of the
permit.



(1972 Code, § 13-8)



§ 12-35  APPLICABILITY OF STATE FISHING REGULATIONS.



   No person shall fish in the city lake in any manner that violates the
laws of the state or of the rules and regulations of the State Department of
Environment, Health and Natural Resources.



(1972 Code, § 13-9)



§ 12-36  TAKING MINNOWS FROM LAKE; LIMITED.



   No person shall catch more than 50 minnows from the city lake during
any 24-hour period.



(1972 Code, § 13-10)



§ 12-37  TAKING MINNOWS FROM LAKE; SALE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall sell or offer for sale any minnows caught from the city
lake.



(1972 Code, § 13-11)



§ 12-38  BAN OF MOTORIZED BOATS FROM CITY LAKE.



   All gasoline powered motors (motorized boats) are banned from the city
lake with the exception of purposes for local, state or governmental agencies
as permitted.



(1972 Code, § 13-12)  (Ord. passed 3-1-2008)



§ 12-39  SWIMMING, WADING AND DIVING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall use the city lake for wading, swimming or diving
purposes.



(1972 Code, § 13-13)



§ 12-40  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No construction of piers, of rafts or of any other nature shall be
permitted on the city lake except by the express permission of the Council.



(1972 Code, § 13-14)



§ 12-41  PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR COMMERCIAL USE.



   No person shall make commercial use of the city lake except by specific
permission given by the Council, and no license for any commercial purpose
shall be issued until the application has been made in writing to the Council.



(1972 Code, § 13-15)



§ 12-42  COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS; LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE.



   Any person using the city lake shall do so under the provisions
provided in this article and shall assume all risk in connection with any
injuries or damage to boats, skiers or occupants of boats.



(1972 Code, § 13-16)



§ 12-43  CONTAMINATION, POLLUTION AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall be allowed to contaminate, pollute or otherwise damage
the city lake property.



(1972 Code, § 13-17)



§ 12-44  MINORS RESTRICTED.



   No person under 18 years of age shall be allowed to use or operate a
boat on the city lake; but parents, guardians or other persons having custody
and control of minors under 18 years of age may take their own children or
wards with them, and any other person over 18 years of age, with written
permission of a minor’s parent, guardian or custodian, may carry minors
under 18 years of age with them.



(1972 Code, § 13-18)



§ 12-45  NIGHT FISHING PROHIBITED.



   Fishing at the city lake shall be prohibited at night between sunset
and sunrise.



(Ord. passed 7-1-1975)



§ 12-46  FISHING WITH JUGS, TROTLINES, NETS.



   It shall be unlawful to fish with jugs, trotlines and nets in the city
lake.



(Ord. passed 7-1-1975)



§ 12-47  FISHING PROHIBITED IN CITY WATER RESERVOIR.



   All types of fishing are hereby prohibited in the city water reservoir
located between Wellington Road and Boyd Lake Road, approximately two miles
north of the city limits, and in and upon the streams entering and exiting
the reservoir located on city property.



(1972 Code, § 13-20)



§ 12-48  ENFORCEMENT.



   The police officers of the city and all of the game wardens operating
under the supervision of the state or any other lawful officer may enforce
the provisions of this article.



(1972 Code, § 13-19)



ARTICLE III:  CONDUCT IN PUBLIC PARKS



§ 12-71  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   PARK.  A park, reservation, playground, community center, recreation
center, stadium or any other area or structure in the city, owned, leased or
used by the city or the Council and devoted to active or passive recreation,
including property owned by others and devoted to park purposes under the
jurisdiction of the city.



   VEHICLE.  Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-operated, animal-drawn
or self-propelled; except wheelchairs and similar vehicles, baby carriages
and vehicles in the service of the city parks. (Ord. passed 9-17-1991)



Cross-reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



§ 12-72  PARK PROPERTY.



   (A)   Buildings and other property.  No person in a park shall:



      (1)   Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, adulterate, injure,
tamper with, displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches,
fireplaces, railings, swimming pools or wading pools, paving or paving
material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances
thereof, fences, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent,
receptacles, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers or other
structures, improvements or equipments, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal;



      (2)   Force entry into any restroom or washroom that is locked
or bolted; and no person over the age of five years shall use any restroom,
washroom or locker room designated for the opposite sex;



      (3)   Dig, or remove any soil, rock or stones (except in areas
designated for that purpose) or any trees, shrubs, plants, planting, grass,
down-timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means of or agency; or



      (4)   Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever
kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any
public service utility into, upon or across those lands, except on special
written permit issued under this article.



   (B)   Trees, shrubbery, lawns.  No person in a park shall:



      (1)   Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or
plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant;
attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant; or tie or
hitch an animal to any tree or plant; or



      (2)   Climb, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains,
railings, fences, trees or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for those purposes.



   (C)   Wild animals, birds.  No person in a park shall:



      (1)   Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease,
shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; remove or possess the
young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest or young of any reptile or bird,
except that snakes known to be deadly poisonous, such as rattlesnakes,
moccasins, coral snakes or other deadly reptiles may be killed on sight; or



      (2)   Give or offer or attempt to give to any animal or bird
any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substances.



(Ord. passed 9-17-1991)



§ 12-73  SANITATION.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in
the waters of any fountain, lake, stream or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer or drain flowing
into those waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which
will or may result in the pollution of those waters; or



   (B)   Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash
anywhere on the park grounds; except the matter may be placed in proper
receptacles where provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all rubbish
or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for
its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.



(Ord. passed 9-17-1991)



§ 12-74  TRAFFIC.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the motor
vehicle traffic laws of the state and ordinances of the city in regard to
equipment and operation of vehicles;



   (B)   Fail to obey all police officers, those persons being hereby
authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in
the parks in accordance with the provisions of this article and the
supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by the city;



   (C)   Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs, indicating speed,
direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for proper
control and to safeguard life and property;



   (D)   Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 mph;



   (E)   Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas, or other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated
as temporary parking areas by the city;



   (F)   Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated
parking area. Parking shall be in accordance with the posted directions and
with the instructions of any police officer who may be present;



   (G)   Fail to immediately notify the Police Department of an
emergency in the nature of a breakdown requiring the assistance of a tow
truck, mechanic or other persons; it shall be unlawful to work on or repair
vehicles for any reasons other than emergency purposes. Under no
circumstances may a broken- down vehicle remain in a park area longer than 48
hours. The city shall be allowed to remove any vehicle at that time by having
the vehicle towed to a bonded storage facility;



   (H)   Operate any go-cart or minibike at any location within any
park other than those places, if any, as are specifically designated for that
purpose by the Department, except that regularly licensed vehicles and
operators may have access to streets and roadways within parks to the same
extent as public streets, subject to the traffic rules of this article;



   (I)   Ride a bicycle on other than the righthand side of a paved
vehicular road or path designated for that purpose; or fail to keep in single
file when two or more bicycles are operating as a group. A bicyclist shall be
permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded
trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use;



   (J)   Ride any other person over the age of six years on a
single-passenger bicycle in any park;



   (K)   Leave a bicycle unattended in a place other than a bicycle
rack when one is provided and there is space available;



   (L)   Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, or set against
trees or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be
injured by it; or



   (M)   Ride a bicycle on any road between 30 minutes after sunset and
30 minutes before sunrise without an attached headlight plainly visible at
least 200 feet from the front, and without a red taillight or red reflector
plainly visible from at least 100 feet from the rear of the bicycle.



(Ord. passed 9-17-1991)



§ 12-75  RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Bathing and swimming.  No person in a park shall:



      (1)   Swim, bathe or wade in any waters on waterways in or
adjacent to any park; or



      (2)   Dress or undress in any vehicle, toilet or other place,
except in those structures as may be provided for that purpose.



   (B)   Fishing.  No person in a park shall fish by the use of a
hook, line, net, trap or other device from the spillway to the senior
citizens center, or any area that is developed or landscaped.



   (C)   Open picnic areas and use.  No person in a park shall:



      (1)   Picnic or lunch in a place other than normal picnic
areas within the parks. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to
achieve this end by the city; or



      (2)   Violate the regulations that the use of the individual
picnic area and shelters, together with tables and benches follows generally
the rule of “first come, first served;” provided, that the city may
designate certain unenclosed picnic areas as reservable, in which case the
provisions of subsection (D) below shall apply to those areas.



   (D)   Other activities.  No person in a park shall:



      (1)   Take part in or abet the playing of any games or
activities involving thrown or otherwise propelled, injurious objects such as
balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes, except in areas set apart
for those forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively
dangerous games such as football, baseball and golf is prohibited except on
the fields and courts or areas provided therefor. Roller skating and
skateboarding shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for
that pastime; or



      (2)   Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails; horses
shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, ridden with due care, and
shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended.



(Ord. passed 9-17-1991)



§ 12-76  BEHAVIOR.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Consume any malt beverage or unfortified wine, as defined in
G.S. Chapter 18B;



   (B)   Possess or consume any fortified wine or spirituous liquor, as
defined in G.S. Chapter 18B;



   (C)   Possess, use or consume any illegal drugs; or be under the
influence of any illegal drugs while in the park;



   (D)   Build or attempt to build a fire in any park, or throw or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco
paper or other flammable material, within any park area;



   (E)   Enter an area posted as “closed to the public,” nor shall
any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices;



   (F)   Lie or sleep in a prone position on seats, tables or benches;
or



   (G)   Disturb or interfere with the activities of any other person
occupying an area of a park with the intent to disrupt the activities of the
other person.



(Ord. passed 9-17-1991)



§ 12-77  MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Expose, offer for sale or advertise any article or service
except regularly licensed concessionaires acting by and under the authority
and regulation of the city, and/or unless a permit for the same has been
issued by the city; or



   (B)   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatsoever, except as authorized by the
Recreation Director.



(Ord. passed 9-17-1991)



§ 12-78  PARK OPERATING POLICY.



   (A)   Except for unusual and unforseen emergencies as determined by
the city, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during
designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each individual park
shall be determined by the city and shall be posted therein for public
information. The City Lake Park shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. until 7:00
a.m. daily.



   (B)   Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the
public by the city at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and
either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the city shall find reasonably
necessary.



   (C)   A permit shall be obtained from the city before participating
in any park activity which the city shall from time to time designate as
requiring a permit.



   (D)   Any park activity which conforms to any activity as set out in
Chapter 15 (parades, picketing and demonstrations), shall comply with the
permitting requirements of that chapter prior to engaging in that park
activity.



(Ord. passed 9-17-1991; Ord. 93-007, passed 5-11-1993)



§ 12-79  ENFORCEMENT.



   When there is a violation of any provision of this article, the city,
in its discretion, may take one or more of the following courses of action:



   (A)   The violator may be charged pursuant to G.S. §§ 14-4(a) and
(b) and be penalized as provided by the statute and its further amendments;
and/or



   (B)   The city may apply to the appropriate court for an injunction
or any other allowable civil penalty.



(Ord. passed 9-17-1991)



CHAPTER 13:  NOISE



Section



   13-1   Creation of unnecessary noise



   13-2   Unlawful noises enumerated



Cross-reference:



   Animals, see ch. 4



   Cemeteries, see ch. 6



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



   Parades, picketing and demonstrations, see ch. 15



Statutory reference:



   Municipal noise regulation, see G.S. § 160A-184



§ 13-1  CREATION OF UNNECESSARY NOISE.



   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the creation of any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise is prohibited. Noise of
this character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or
health of any individual is prohibited.



(1972 Code, § 14-1)



§ 13-2  UNLAWFUL NOISES ENUMERATED.



   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but this enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:



   (A)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a reasonable warning; the
creation by means of any signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh
sound and the sounding of that device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time;



   (B)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle other than
police, fire or other emergency vehicle;



   (C)   The playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical
instrument in a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence;



   (D)   The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent
or long continued noise, disturbs the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;



   (E)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out
of repair, so loaded or in a manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise;



   (F)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary
boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a
warning of danger;



   (G)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat
engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noise therefrom;



   (H)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air
unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;



   (I)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to
any school, institution of learning or court while the same is in session or
within 150 feet of any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the
working of that institution; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed
in the street indicating that the same is a school, court or hospital street;



   (J)   The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street
adjacent to any church; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in
those streets adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church
street;



   (K)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or
premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity
thereof;



   (L)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and
vendors which disturb the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;



   (M)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker, megaphone, bell, horn or
other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention, by
creation of noise, to any performance, show or other event or the sale or
display of merchandise, or the crying out of same, unless permitted by the
Council;



   (N)   The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks
or other moving vehicles for advertising or other purposes except where
specific license is received from the Council;



   (O)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or
filling station in any residential district so as to cause loud or offensive
noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;



   (P)   The firing of gunpowder or other combustible substance in the
streets or elsewhere for the purpose of making a noise or disturbance, except
by permission from the Police Department; or



   (Q)   Shouting or screaming in a loud, boisterous manner by any
person so as to disturb the public.



   (R)   The operation of compression release engine brakes is
regulated pursuant to § 11-78.



(1972 Code, §§ 14-2, 15-22)  (Ord. 2017-08, passed 11-14-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Horns and warning devices on motor vehicles, see G.S. §
20-125–Miscellaneous



CHAPTER 14:  OFFENSES–MISCELLANEOUS



Section



   14-1   Advertising; posting signs on public poles; billboards



   14-2   Advertising; posting on property of others



   14-3   Advertising; painting on street, sidewalk



   14-4   Begging, indirect solicitation of alms



   14-5   Distribution of medicine samples



   14-6   Disturbing school decorum



   14-7   Expectoration



   14-8   Use of firearms



   14-9   Injuring, interfering with city property



   14-10   Loitering



   14-11   Playing games in streets



   14-12   Shooting projectiles; archery ranges



   14-13   Stagnant water on premises



   14-14   Disposition of decayed or perishable products



   14-15   False police or fire reports



   14-16   Accumulation of rubbish



   14-17   Smoking in municipal buildings, city-owned parks and
recreational facilities and municipal vehicles; prohibited



   14-18   Limitations on the open and concealed carrying of firearms
on certain municipal property



Statutory reference:



   Criminal law, see G.S. Chapter 14



   General ordinance-making power, see G.S. § 160A-174



§ 14-1  ADVERTISING; POSTING SIGNS ON PUBLIC POLES; BILLBOARDS.



   No person shall tack, nail or otherwise attach any sign or poster to
any tree, telephone pole or electric pole nor shall erect and maintain any
billboards.



(1972 Code, § 15-2)



Cross-reference:



   Licenses and business regulations, see ch. 10



Statutory reference:



   Unlawful posting of advertisements, see G.S. § 14-145



§ 14-2  ADVERTISING; POSTING ON PROPERTY OF OTHERS.



   No person shall post any bills, signs or advertisements on any
buildings, fences or other property belonging to another without the consent
of the owner thereof. The consent shall be secured in writing, and this
written consent shall be exhibited by the person having the same to any
police officer on demand.



(1972 Code, § 15-3)



§ 14-3  ADVERTISING; PAINTING ON STREET, SIDEWALK.



   No person shall advertise or attempt to advertise by marking or
painting on or attaching any advertisements to any street or sidewalk.



(1972 Code, § 15-4)



§ 14-4  BEGGING, INDIRECT SOLICITATION OF ALMS.



   No person shall sell or offer for sale any pencils, shoestrings,
chewing gum or similar objects in the streets or other public places as an
indirect method of soliciting alms; nor shall any person offer a cup or other
receptacle for the deposit of money or take up any collection in connection
with the playing of any musical instrument in or on the streets or other
public places.



(1972 Code, § 15-5)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal regulation of begging, see G.S. § 160A-179



§ 14-5  DISTRIBUTION OF MEDICINE SAMPLES.



   No person shall leave any sample of medicine of any kind at the
dwelling house or in the yard of any person, unless the same be left with or
in care of some person of sufficient age and discretion to care properly for
the same.



(1972 Code, § 15-9)



§ 14-6  DISTURBING SCHOOL DECORUM.



   No person shall engage by conversation, sign or otherwise the attention
of any pupil to the disturbance of the discipline of any school.



(1972 Code, § 15-10)



§ 14-7  EXPECTORATION.



   No person shall expectorate in or upon any building or premises except
in receptacles provided for that purpose.



(1972 Code, § 15-12)



§ 14-8  USE OF FIREARMS.



   (A)   No person shall fire any pistol, gun or other firearm for
sport or amusement except under the supervision of the Chief of Police.



   (B)   Subsection (A) above shall not apply to authorized firearms
training for the police or other persons, nor to uses of firearms
specifically authorized by the Council or by law.



(1972 Code, § 15-13)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal regulation of firearms, see G.S. § 160A-189



§ 14-9  INJURING, INTERFERING WITH CITY PROPERTY.



   No person shall willfully or negligently injure or interfere with any
city property.



(1972 Code, § 15-14)



Statutory reference:



   Injuring personal property, see G.S. § 14-160



   Injuring wires, fixtures and the like, of telephone, telegraph and
electric-power companies, see G.S. §§ 14-154, 14-156



   Injury to houses, churches, fences and walls, see G.S. § 14-144



   Injury to public buildings and facilities, see G.S. § 14-132



   Willful and wanton injury to real property, see G.S. § 14-127



§ 14-10  LOITERING.



   No person shall habitually loaf or loiter on the streets, nor shall any
persons congregate on the streets or sidewalks or other area open to the
public in a way as to obstruct or interfere with the free passage into or out
of any public business or private property.



(1972 Code, § 15-17)



§ 14-11  PLAYING GAMES IN STREETS.



   No person shall play baseball, football or other games of similar
nature on any public street.



(1972 Code, § 15-19)



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks, see ch. 18



§ 14-12  SHOOTING PROJECTILES; ARCHERY RANGES.



   No person shall shoot or project any stone, rock, shot or other hard
substance by means of a slingshot, bean shooter, shot shooter, air rifle,
popgun, bow or other similar contrivance; provided, that archery shooting may
be engaged in on those grounds as may be set aside and approved therefor by
the City Manager or his or her designated agent.



(1972 Code, § 15-21)



§ 14-13  STAGNANT WATER ON PREMISES.



   No stagnant water shall be allowed to remain in any pool, pond, sink or
open vessel on any lot or premises or in the cellar of any building within
the city limits. Any person owning or controlling property where there is a
pond, sink or stagnant water of any kind shall fill or drain the same within
ten days after notice to do so is served upon him or her by the city
authorities.



(1972 Code, § 11-1)



Cross-reference:



   Water and sewers, see ch. 21



§ 14-14  DISPOSITION OF DECAYED OR PERISHABLE PRODUCTS.



   (A)   No person shall burn within the fire limits any decayed meats
or perishable products or other matter or material which would be likely,
when burning, to create an offensive odor.



   (B)   Persons handling or keeping meats or perishable products for
sale or otherwise shall provide themselves with a sanitary receptacle in
which all decayed meats or perishables shall be deposited.



   (C)   The receptacle shall be kept closed tightly at all times
except when it is being filled or emptied, and the accumulated contents shall
be disposed of by the city.



(1972 Code, § 11-3)



§ 14-15  FALSE POLICE OR FIRE REPORTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to give, or cause to be given, in
any manner, a false police report or a false fire report.



(1972 Code, §§ 9-15, 15-14)



Cross-reference:



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



Statutory reference:



   False fire alarm, see G.S. § 14-286



§ 14-16  ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH.



   No person shall permit the accumulation of waste paper, weeds, litter
or rubbish of any kind on roofs or other places where that material may
present a fire hazard.



(1972 Code, § 9-5)



Cross-reference:



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



   Solid waste and vegetation, see ch. 17



§ 14-17  SMOKING IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS, CITY-OWNED PARKS AND RECREATIONAL
FACILITIES AND MUNICIPAL VEHICLES; PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.  Any park area that is
owned, leased as lessor or leased as lessee and occupied by the city.



      SMOKING or SMOKING.  The inhaling, exhaling, burning of a
tobacco product, weed, filler or plant of any kind directly as in the form of
a cigar, or in a cigarette, or a pipe, or in any other device or includes the
carrying of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or any other lighted smoking
equipment.



      TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Any product that contains tobacco and is
intended for human consumption.



   (B)   Use of tobacco products in regulated in municipal buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any tobacco products in any
building or portion of a building now or hereafter owned, leased, operated,
occupied, managed or controlled by the city.



   (C)   Use of tobacco products in regulated in municipal vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any tobacco products in any
vehicle now or hereafter owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed or
controlled by the city.



   (D)   Smoking in city-owned park and recreational facilities.  The
use of any tobacco products are prohibited in the city-owned park and
recreational facilities.



   (E)   Conflict of laws.  If any portion of this section or the
enforcement thereof is found to be preempted by state or federal law, the
preemption shall not operate to invalidate the rest of the section and the
same shall remain in full force and effect. All ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed.



   (F)   Violations.  Per G.S. § 130A-498(c1), continuing to smoke in
violation of a local ordinance or other rules, laws or policies adopted under
this section constitutes an infraction, and the person committing the
infraction may be punished by a fine of not more than $50. Conviction of an
infraction under this section has no consequence other than payment of a
penalty. A person smoking in violation of a local ordinance or other rules,
laws or policies adopted under this section may not be assessed court costs.



(Ord. 93-010, passed 8-10-1993; Ord. 03-2006, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 07-2011,
passed 11-1-2011)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to protect the health, safety and welfare of municipal
employees, see G.S. § 160A-174



§ 14-18  LIMITATIONS ON THE OPEN AND CONCEALED CARRYING OF FIREARMS ON
CERTAIN MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   Concealed handguns.



      (1)   The carrying of concealed handguns by all persons,
including persons with a concealed handgun permit, is prohibited in all city
buildings; within the appurtenant premises of city buildings; and all
city-owned, leased or otherwise occupied recreational facilities. For the
limited purposes of this division (A) only, the term RECREATIONAL FACILITIES,
as defined by G.S. § 14-415.23, includes only the following:



         (a)   Athletic fields, including any appurtenant
facilities such as restrooms, during an organized athletic event if the field
had been scheduled for use with the City Parks and Recreation Department;



         (b)   Swimming pools, including any appurtenant
facilities used for dressing, storage of personal items, or other uses
relating to the swimming pools; and



         (c)   A facility used for athletic events, including,
but not limited to, a gymnasium.



      (2)   For the limited purposes of this division (A) only, the
term RECREATIONAL FACILITIES does not include any greenway, designated biking
or walking path, an area that is customarily used as a walkway or bike path
although not specifically designated for such use, or open areas or fields
where athletic events may occur unless the area qualifies as an “athletic
field” pursuant to this division. As provided by the G.S. § 14-415.23, a
concealed handgun permittee may secure the handgun in a locked vehicle within
the trunk, glove box, or other enclosed compartment or area within or on the
motor vehicle.



   (B)   Openly carried firearms. The open carrying of firearms of any
kind is prohibited in all city buildings; on the grounds and parking areas of
all city buildings; and in all city-owned, leased or otherwise occupied parks
and recreational facilities. As provided in G.S. § 14-409.40, a person may
store a firearm within a motor vehicle while the vehicle is on city
premises. 



   (C)   Law enforcement personnel. The restrictions set forth in
divisions (A) and (B) do not apply to law enforcement personnel acting within
the scope of their duties.



   (D)   Posting of signs required. The City Manager or his or her
designated official is hereby authorized and instructed to post conspicuous
signage at appropriate locations on or within each park, recreational
facility and building or portion of a building owned, leased as lessee,
operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the city, as well as the
appurtenant premises to those buildings, indicating that carrying a concealed
handgun and the open carry of all firearms are prohibited or restricted as
provided by this section.



   (E)   Location of signs. Signs shall be visibly posted on the
exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the
building. The City Manager or his or her designated official shall exercise
discretion in determining the number and appropriate location of signs to be
placed on or within appurtenant premises, parks and recreational facilities.



   (F)   Authority; severability; conflict of laws. This section is
adopted pursuant to authority granted by G.S. §§ 14-409.40 and 14-415.23.
If this section or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of
the section which can be given separate effect and to that end the provisions
of this section are declared to be several.



(Ord. passed 10-10-1995; Ord. 2016-03, passed 3-8-2016)



CHAPTER 15:  PARADES, PICKETING AND DEMONSTRATIONS



Section



   15-1   Definitions



   15-2   Permit; required



   15-3   Permit; conditions for issuance



   15-4   Permit; revocation



   15-5   Certain activities prohibited



   15-6   Interference with parades, demonstrations prohibited



   15-7   Limitations on picketing



   15-8   Exceptions



Cross-reference:



   Animals, see ch. 4



   Emergencies, see ch. 7



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



   Municipal lakes, parks and recreation, see ch. 12



   Noise, see ch. 13



   Streets and sidewalks, see ch. 18



Statutory reference:



   Local regulation of processions and assemblages, see G.S. § 20-169



   Picketing or parading near court building, see G.S. § 14-225.1



   Weapons at parades and the like, see G.S. § 14-277.2



§ 15-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.



   BLOCK.  The portion of any street lying between its intersections with
other streets.



   GROUP DEMONSTRATION.  Any assembly in the street or concert of action
between or among two or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter
or of making known any position or promotion of those persons or of or on
behalf of any organization or class of persons or for the purpose of
attracting attention to the assembly.



   PARADE.  Any assemblage of two or more persons participating in or
operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession
of any kind in or upon the public streets or other public places.



   PICKET LINE.  Any two or more persons formed for the purpose of making
known any position or promotion of those persons or of or on behalf of any
organization or class of persons.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



Cross-reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



§ 15-2  PERMIT; REQUIRED.



   No person shall organize, conduct or participate in any parade or group
demonstration in or upon any street, within the city, unless a permit
therefor has been issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 15-3  PERMIT; CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to issue
permits as required in § 15-2, and in the issuance thereof shall:



   (A)   Require a written application for a permit to be filed up to
72 hours in advance of the parade or group demonstration;



   (B)   Require that the application for a permit specify whether or
not minors below the age of 18 years will be permitted to participate; and



   (C)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify and
the permit shall designate the person in charge of the activity. That person
shall be required to accompany the parade or group demonstration and shall
carry the permit with him or her at that time. The permit shall not be valid
in the possession of any other person.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 15-4  PERMIT; REVOCATION.



   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade or
group demonstration for any of the following causes:



   (A)   The violation by any participant of § 15-5; or



   (B)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the
permit.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 15-5  CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.



   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of any parade or group demonstration are hereby
prohibited and declared unlawful:



   (A)   The carrying on or about the person any firearm or any weapon
or article, including, but not limited to, blackjacks, nightsticks or
flashlights which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon; and



   (B)   The taking or keeping of any dog or any vicious animal,
whether leashed or unleashed.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 15-6  INTERFERENCE WITH PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall hamper, obstruct or interfere with any parade or group
demonstration being conducted under authority of a permit duly issued by the
Chief of Police.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 15-7  LIMITATIONS ON PICKETING.



   Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following
regulations.



   (A)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for
pedestrian movement and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used
primarily for vehicular traffic.



   (B)   Not more than ten pickets promoting the same objective shall
be permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block at any
one time.



   (C)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not
exceeding two feet in width and two feet in length promoting the objective
for which the picketing is done, provided that the words used are not
derogatory or defamatory in nature.



   (D)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and not
march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another.



   (E)   If pickets promoting different objectives desire to use the
same sidewalk for picketing and the use would result in the presence of more
than ten pickets thereon, the Chief of Police shall allot time to each group
of pickets for the use of the sidewalk on an equitable basis. Each group
shall be allowed the use, subject to the provisions of this section, at least
once every two hours.



   (F)   Pickets shall not block intersections or driveways.



   (G)   Pickets shall not carry on or about the person any firearm or
any weapon or article including, but not limited to, blackjacks, nightsticks
or flashlights which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon.



   (H)   No picket shall have any dog or any vicious animal, whether
leashed or unleashed.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hamper, obstruct or
interfere with any pickets except police officers may stop any picketing
activity if it becomes unlawful.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 15-8  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provision of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Funeral processions; and



   (B)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



CHAPTER 16:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 17:  SOLID WASTE AND VEGETATION



Section



Article I:  In General



   17-1   Littering



   17-2   Sweepings; protection of catchbasins



   17-3   Dumping prohibited



   17-4   Hauling refuse into city



Article II:  Garbage and Refuse Generally



   17-31   Definitions



   17-32   Placement of tree limbs, trimmings, other debris for
collection



   17-32.5   Responsibility for removal of appliances; debris



   17-33   Interference with receptacles, collection personnel and
equipment; permit or franchise requirement



   17-34   Placement of receptacles for collection



   17-35   Receptacles to be removed after collection



   17-36   Inspection of receptacles



   17-37   City employees shall not discharge duties of tenants,
storekeepers and the like



   17-38   Collectors to use reasonable care



   17-39   Stable and kennel manure



   17-40   Sticker program guidelines



   17-41   Fees



   17-42   Roll-out garbage carts



Article III:  Nuisances



   17-61   Declaration; enumeration



   17-62   Reserved



   17-63   Investigation



   17-64   Violations; penalties; abatement by city



   17-65   Reserved



   17-66   Reserved



   17-67   Reserved



   17-68   Defects in service of notice



   17-69   Additional remedies



   17-70   Owners, occupants and the like jointly liable



Charter reference:



   Refuse, weeds and trash, see art. XVI



Cross-reference:



   Accumulation of rubbish, see § 14-16



   Administration, see ch. 2



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



   Licenses and business regulations, see ch. 10



   Water and sewers, see ch. 21



Statutory reference:



   Abatement of health and safety nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-193



   Abatement of public health nuisances and public safety nuisances, see
G.S. § 160A-193



   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175



   Garbage containers on highway rights-of-way, see G.S. § 136-18.3



   General ordinance-making power, see G.S. § 160A-174



   Littering, see G.S. § 14-399



   Placing glass, injurious obstructions and the like, in road, see G.S.
§ 136-91



   Plant pests, see G.S. §§ 106-419 et seq.



   Public enterprises, see G.S. §§ 160A-311 et seq.



   Radioactive waste, see G.S. §§ 104E-1 et seq.



   Regulation of the placing of trash, refuse and garbage within municipal
limits, see G.S. § 160A-303.1



   Solid waste management, see G.S. §§ 130A-290 et seq.



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 17-1  LITTERING.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit in any manner trash, garbage,
litter, refuse, waste or any other substance upon any street, sidewalk, alley
or public way in the city, or upon any property owned by the city, whether by
throwing same from a motor vehicle or in any other manner. This section shall
not prohibit the orderly placement of trash on the street or curb for
collection by the city.



   (B)   Subsection (A) above shall not apply to regular employees of
the city working under orders and directions of the City Manager and Council
and to persons acting pursuant to permits from the city.



(1972 Code, §§ 10-1, 15-16.1)



§ 17-2  SWEEPINGS; PROTECTION OF CATCHBASINS.



   No person shall sweep into any street, sidewalk or gutter, nor shall
throw into any catchbasin, any substance or object.



(1972 Code, § 10-4)



§ 17-3  DUMPING PROHIBITED.



   No garbage or offensive or disease-producing materials shall be dumped
for any purpose on any lot or space within the city limits.



(1972 Code, § 10-11)



§ 17-4  HAULING REFUSE INTO CITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or carry any garbage,
refuse or debris into the city from outside the city and leave or deposit
garbage, refuse or debris within the city.



(Ord. passed 6-14-1988)



ARTICLE II:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE GENERALLY



§ 17-31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.



   ASHES.  The refuse from fires in houses, schools, stores and the like,
and includes at times small quantities of glass, crockery, sweepings, dust,
brick, metal and other inorganic materials.



   GARBAGE.  The organic waste matter, both animal and vegetable, from
houses, kitchens, restaurants, hotels, hospitals and the like, comprised
chiefly of waste food and does not include liquids that may be drained into
the sewer.



   REFUSE.  Includes tin cans, dirty rags, old clothes, waste and other
materials not otherwise designated herein.



(1972 Code, § 10-2)



Cross-reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



§ 17-32  PLACEMENT OF TREE LIMBS, TRIMMINGS, OTHER DEBRIS FOR COLLECTION.



   (A)   All tree limbs and trunks shall be cut into pieces not
exceeding six feet in length and placed neatly in a pile. No individual piece
shall exceed 50 pounds in weight. All trimmings, shrubbery and the like shall
be cut into pieces not exceeding six feet in length.



   (B)   All debris placed for removal by the city shall be placed
within the parkway strip between the curb and the sidewalk at the front of
the premises; provided, however, that if there is no sidewalk and curb, the
debris shall be placed at the front of the premises reasonably adjacent to
the street. No debris shall be placed in any street, gutter, canal, ditch or
drainageway or upon any sidewalk in the city.



(Ord. passed 6-14-1988; Ord. passed 7-12-1988)



§ 17-32.5  RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF APPLIANCES; DEBRIS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, APPLIANCES shall be deemed to
be discarded water heaters, refrigerators, freezers, stoves, washers, dryers,
televisions and window mounted air conditioning units.



   (B)   All persons having control of any lot or any part thereof in
the city shall be entitled to curbside pickup and disposal by the city of
discarded appliances subject to those requirements as may be set by the City
Manager.



   (C)   Any building debris or other debris as set out in § 17-61,
which cannot be placed in two trash cans as required for weekly pickup of
garbage by the city shall be removed from each lot by the lot owner or person
having control of a lot or any part thereof.



   (D)   Any violation of this section shall be enforced in the same
manner that § 17-61 is enforced.



(Ord. passed 6-12-1990)



§ 17-33 INTERFERENCE WITH RECEPTACLES, COLLECTION PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT;
PERMIT OR FRANCHISE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No person shall molest or interfere with the contents of any
receptacles set out for removal by the City Public Works Department.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner
with yard waste collectors or yard waste collection and transportation
equipment.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business
of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of yard waste placed on
city rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the city without a permit
or franchise from the city.



   (D)   Subsections (B) and (C) above will not prohibit someone from
getting permission from a property owner to rake up pine straw from their
property for resale. This only prohibits noncity personnel from collecting
pine straw and other yard waste from the city rights-of-way.



(1972 Code, § 10-5)  (Ord. passed 9-9-1986)



§ 17-34  PLACEMENT OF RECEPTACLES FOR COLLECTION.



   Each landlord, tenant or storekeeper shall see that the various garbage
and refuse receptacles and their contents, as herein provided for, are set
out for the convenience of the collector in or immediately adjacent to the
nearest alley or curb or at another place and at a time as may be fixed by
the Public Works Department.



(1972 Code, § 10-6)



§ 17-35  RECEPTACLES TO BE REMOVED AFTER COLLECTION.



   Each landlord, tenant or storekeeper shall restore the garbage and
refuse receptacles to their proper place within 12 hours after collection of
the contents by the Public Works Department.



(1972 Code, § 10-7)



§ 17-36  INSPECTION OF RECEPTACLES.



   All garbage receptacles shall be inspected as to their sanitary
condition ,and if and when found in an unsanitary condition, the Department
of Public Works shall furnish the owner of the receptacle a notice to correct
the condition as to container and its unsanitary condition if such should
prevail. If the owner does not correct this condition in a reasonable length
of time, the Director of Public Works shall take the necessary steps to have
the owners to comply with state and city sanitary requirements.



(1972 Code, § 10-8)



§ 17-37  CITY EMPLOYEES SHALL NOT DISCHARGE DUTIES OF TENANTS, STOREKEEPERS
AND THE LIKE.



   No employee of the city shall assist in any way in the performance of
what has been set forth as the duty of the landlord, tenant or storekeeper
with the reference to the enforcement of this article.



(1972 Code, § 10-9)



§ 17-38  COLLECTORS TO USE REASONABLE CARE.



   Collectors shall exercise reasonable care in the handling of garbage
receptacles and shall not willfully break, deface or injure the same.



(1972 Code, § 10-10)



§ 17-39  STABLE AND KENNEL MANURE.



   Stable or kennel manure shall be removed by persons who maintain
stables or kennels and not by city employees.



(1972 Code, § 10-12)



Cross-reference:



   Animals, see ch. 4



§ 17-40  STICKER PROGRAM GUIDELINES.



   (A)   Stickers are sold to remove white goods and bulky curbside
trash items and must be purchased at the Public Works Department, located at
1000 Oakhurst Avenue, Hamlet, North Carolina, (910-582-7987).



   (B)   At time of sticker purchase, you will be scheduled for a
pick-up date.



   (C)   Stickers must be applied to the front of the item as
registered with the Public Works office for pick up to take place. (No
substitute to be made).



   (D)   Stickered items must be placed curbside by 6:00 a.m. the day
of pickup or no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the night before.



   (E)   The pickups may begin promptly at 6:00 a.m.



   (F)   If you are unable to have the items out as scheduled, it is
your responsibility to notify the Public Works office (910-582-7987) no later
than 12:00 noon on the day before the scheduled pickup date. At the time of
the call, we will schedule you for an optional date or stickers may be put on
hold for future use.



   (G)   If the city is unsuccessful at picking up the items on the
scheduled date, then you will need to contact the Public Works office
(910-582-7987) to purchase additional stickers and schedule a later pickup
date. Again, it is very important that you call us no later than 12:00 noon
on the day before the scheduled pickup date to avoid any further charges for
rescheduling. Items cannot remain at the curb until another date.



   (H)   There are no refunds on this program. Monies collected will be
applied as administration fees.



   (I)   Should you have any questions or concerns, please do not
hesitate to contact the Public Works office at 910-582-7987.



   (J)   Items not available for pick up include:



      (1)   Building materials;



      (2)   Paint;



      (3)   Tires; and



      (4)   Shingles.



(Ord. passed 6-14-2011)



§ 17-41  FEES.



 


Fee Schedule





Computer monitor
 

$20



Freon appliances
 

$20



Light ballasts
 

$20



TVs
 

$20



Household Items


Arm chair
 

$5



Baby stroller
 

$2



Bathtub
 

$5



Bed (head and foot board)
 

$5



Bicycle
 

$2



Bookcase
 

$5



Box springs
 

$5



Card table
 

$2



China cabinet
 

$5



Crib/playpen
 

$5



Dehumidifier
 

$2



Desk
 

$5



Dresser
 

$5



End table
 

$2



Entertainment center
 

$5



Humidifier
 

$2



Kitchen chair
 

$2



Lawn chair
 

$2



Lawn umbrella
 

$2



Mattress
 

$5



Metal file cabinet
 

$5



Ottoman
 

$2



Ping pong table
 

$5



Portable stereo
 

$5



Propane tank (20 lb.)
 

$5



Sink - kitchen or bath
 

$5



Sofa
 

$5



Sofa bed
 

$5



Stereo/radio console
 

$5



Toilet
 

$5



Toys/play equipment
 

$5



Miscellaneous Large Items


Carpet pads
 

$5



Carpets
 

$10



Inflatable pool
 

$10



Lawnmower
 

$10



Rugs (over 4 ft. by 6 ft.)
 

$5



Swimming pool liner
 

$10



White Goods


Dishwasher
 

$10



Dryer
 

$10



Hot water heater
 

$10



Microwave
 

$10



Stove
 

$10



Trash compactor
 

$10



Washer
 

$10





 



(Ord. passed 6-14-2011)



§ 17-42  ROLL-OUT GARBAGE CARTS.



   (A)   Additional carts.  Residences and businesses will be issued
one roll-out cart at no cost to them. Residences and businesses will be
allowed to purchase up to two additional roll-out carts at cost and assessed
an additional charge per pick-up, per cart.



   (B)   Number of pickups per week.



      (1)   All residences in the city will receive one household
garbage pickup per week. The day of pickup will be determined by the garbage
route as set by the Public Works Department.



      (2)   Certain small commercial establishments will receive two
garbage pickups per week. The day of pickup will be determined by the Public
Works Department. Any commercial establishments that generate more than six
96-gallon roll-out carts of trash/garbage per week must utilize a private
dumpster service.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1996)



ARTICLE III:  NUISANCES



§ 17-61  DECLARATION; ENUMERATION.



   The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant lot or
other parcel of land within the corporate limits, or within one mile thereof,
is hereby declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or
safety and to constitute a public nuisance:



   (A)   The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds or grass, not grown
for agriculture purposes, to a height in excess of 12 inches on the average,
causing, or threatening to cause, a hazard detrimental to the public health
or safety. It shall also be the duty of the owner to cut and remove all weeds
and other rank vegetation as often as necessary so as to comply with this
subsection. This subsection does not apply to lots exceeding one acre in size
or lots which are covered with trees. However, lots exceeding one acre or
lots covered with trees shall be maintained in accordance with this
subsection to a depth of ten feet from the property lines, if, and only if,
the adjacent property is occupied by a dwelling or other structure located
within 50 feet of the property;



   (B)   Any accumulation, including burial, of animal or vegetable
matter that is offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitancy
therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which or may be dangerous
or prejudicial to the public health;



   (C)   Any accumulation or rubbish, trash or junk causing, or
threatening to cause, a fire hazard, the accumulation of stagnant water or
the inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is
or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health;



   (D)   Any ditches, drains or culverts which are not kept properly
clean from June 1 until November 1 of each year;



   (E)   Any sinkhole whereby unclean or stagnant water may stand or be
conveyed into the streets or alleys, or keeping, or permitting to be kept,
any bucket, can, barrel or any other receptacle whereby unclean or stagnant
water may accumulate or stand;



   (F)   Operating a junkyard, or dismantling secondhand automobiles
for the purpose of salvaging and selling the parts thereof, or storing
unserviceable automobiles, or parts thereof, in areas on the outside of
buildings or in open lots;



   (G)   Any condition detrimental to the public health, which violates
the rules and regulations of the County Health Inspector; and



   (H)   Any condition which results from the failure of the owner,
occupant or other person in control of any building or land in the city,
including vacant property, to keep the building or land in a clean and
orderly condition.



(Ord. passed 10-14-1986; Ord. passed 3-1-2008; Ord. passed 11-11-2008)



§ 17-62  RESERVED.



Editor’s note:



   This section was reserved by an ordinance passed March 1, 2008.



§ 17-63  INVESTIGATION.



   The City Manager, upon notice from any person of the possible existence
of any of the conditions described in § 17-61, shall cause to be made by the
appropriate County Health Department Official or city official an
investigation as may be necessary to determine whether conditions exist which
may constitute a public nuisance as declared in § 17-61.



(Ord. passed 10-14-1986)



§ 17-64  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   (A)   Upon investigation and finding by the City Manager that any
premises is being maintained in violation of § 17-61, the City Manager or
authorized person is hereby vested with authority to give written notice,
which may be served personally, by registered mail or in any other manner
authorized by law to the owner, occupant or person in charge of those
premises or to any two or all of the persons believed to be responsible for
the violation. The notice shall specify the condition which constitutes the
violation and shall direct the addressee to abate the violation in a lawful
manner within ten days from the date of the notice. The notice shall also
warn the addressee that failure to comply with this notice shall subject him
or her to prosecution for his or her violation and, in addition, shall render
him or her liable to the city for any costs and expenses which may be
incurred by the city in the abatement of the violation under the provisions
of subsection (B) below, and that the costs and expenses shall constitute a
lien upon the property involved.



   (B)   If upon the expiration of the time specified in any notice,
the condition which constitutes the violation has not been abated in a lawful
manner, the City Manager or authorized person shall provide for the abatement
of the condition by the most expedient means, and the costs and expenses
thereby incurred, including any cost incurred in service of the notice, shall
be collected by the City Tax Collector from any one or more of the addresses
served with notice, and, if the costs and expenses are not paid within 30
days, the City Tax Collector shall make collection thereof in the manner
provided by law for delinquent taxes, or in any other manner authorized by
law; and the amount of the costs and expense shall constitute a lien in favor
of the city upon the property upon which the violation occurred.



   (C)   In addition to the sanctions imposed in subsection (B) above,
a violation of this article or any order issued under this article shall also
be a civil offense and shall subject the offender to a civil penalty as
follows.



      (1)   If the offender shall abate the nuisance within ten days
from the date of the notice and shall not within the preceding three years
have been notified of any prior violation of this article, no penalty shall
be assessed.



      (2)   If the offender shall abate the nuisance within ten days
from the date of the notice but shall within the preceding three years have
been notified of any prior violation of this article, a civil penalty in the
amount of $200 shall be assessed.



      (3)   If the offender shall not abate the nuisance within ten
days from the date of the notice, a civil penalty in the amount of $50 shall
be assessed for each day and every day during which the violation shall
continue. Each day shall be a separate and distinct violation of this section.



(Ord. passed 3-1-2008)



§ 17-65  RESERVED.



Editor’s note:



   This section was reserved by an ordinance passed March 1, 2008.



§ 17-66  RESERVED.



Editor’s note:



   This section was reserved by an ordinance passed March 1, 2008.



§ 17-67  RESERVED.



Editor’s note:



   This section was reserved by an ordinance passed March 1, 2008.



§ 17-68  DEFECTS IN SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   Defects in the method of giving the notice as specified in § 17-64 or
in the form thereof or the giving of notice to an improper person shall not
prevent the city in any case where the work of abating any violation of this
article is actually done by the city from collecting the cost thereof from
the owner of the premises upon which the violations occurred, nor shall it
affect the validity of the lien on the cost.



(Ord. passed 3-1-2008)



§ 17-69  ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.



   The procedure set forth in this article shall be in addition to any
other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of
public nuisances and this article shall not prevent the city from proceeding
in a criminal action against any person violating the provisions of this
article as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. passed 10-14-1986)



§ 17-70  OWNERS, OCCUPANTS AND THE LIKE JOINTLY LIABLE.



   The owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any building or premises where
there is a nuisance or any violation of an ordinance or provision of this
Code relating to health and sanitation shall be jointly and severally liable
therefor, and each of them may be required to abate the same or comply with
the order of the Chief of Police or his or her assistants within the time
specified within the order.



(1972 Code, § 11-4)



CHAPTER 18:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   18-1   Excavation permit



   18-2   Allocation and assessment of costs of paving, curbing and the
like



   18-3   Installation of private driveway; permission, supervision
required



   18-4   Protection of openings; warning devices



   18-5   Filling of opening upon completion of work



   18-6   Specifications for paving sidewalks



   18-7   Height of awnings above sidewalk



   18-8   Obstructions generally



   18-9   Attracting crowds on public ways



   18-10   Acts and conditions requiring special street cleaning or
repair prohibited



   18-11   Cleaning and repairing streets, sidewalks and drains



   18-12   Encroachments on streets



   18-13   Gates shall not open outward



   18-14   Sidewalk dining



   18-15   Temporary street closings



Charter reference:



   Assessments for street improvements, see art. IX



   Establishment of proposed street lines, see art. X



   Sidewalks, see art. XV



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



   Buildings, see ch. 5



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



   Parades, picketing and demonstrations, see ch. 15



   Playing games in streets, see § 14-11



   Riding bicycle on sidewalk, see § 11-72



   Riding or driving animals over sidewalks, see § 4-5



   Survey of street lines, see § 5-75



   Vehicles for hire, see ch. 20



   Water and sewers, see ch. 21



Statutory reference:



   Municipal streets, see G.S. §§ 160A-296 et seq.



   Public works, see G.S. Chapter 133



   Roads and highways, see G.S. Chapter 136



   Special assessments, see G.S. §§ 160A-216 et seq.



§ 18-1  EXCAVATION PERMIT.



   No person shall make any excavations, cut or make any other opening in
any of the streets or sidewalks without first having obtained a permit
therefor from the Council or person duly authorized by the Council.



(1972 Code, § 18-1)



§ 18-2  ALLOCATION AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS OF PAVING, CURBING AND THE LIKE.



   When property owners duly petition the city for street and sidewalk
paving, the petitioner(s) and other affected property owners shall be
responsible for and assessed for 50% of the cost of the paving (not including
the cost of improvements made at street intersections). Nothing herein shall
be construed to prohibit a property owner from paving a sidewalk or street
wholly at his or her own expense; provided the property owner secures the
permit required by § 18-1 and follows the requirements of this chapter.
Improvements to sidewalks, streets and curbs and gutters shall be made only
after approval by the Council. This section affects construction of new
sidewalks, curbs, gutters and paving only and does not apply to repairs or
resurfacing.



(1972 Code, § 18-1.1)



§ 18-3  INSTALLATION OF PRIVATE DRIVEWAY; PERMISSION, SUPERVISION REQUIRED.



   The permission of the Director of Public Works shall be secured before
any property owner shall install, at his or her own expense, a private
driveway. The Director shall supervise the installation.



(1972 Code, § 18-2)



Statutory reference:



   Curb cut regulations, see G.S. § 160A-307



§ 18-4  PROTECTION OF OPENINGS; WARNING DEVICES.



   Any person excavating or opening any street or sidewalk shall protect
the same with a sufficient number of red flags during the daytime and yellow
lights or other lawful warning devices at night.



(1972 Code, § 18-3)



§ 18-5  FILLING OF OPENING UPON COMPLETION OF WORK.



   All openings made into any street or sidewalk under the provisions of
this article, immediately upon the completion of the work, shall be filled in
and the surface thereof made flush with the adjacent surfaces. Any hard
surface, macadam or asphalt removed shall be replaced by the city at the
expense of the applicant granted permission to open the street or sidewalk.
Each day the opening is left unfilled in violation of this section shall
constitute a separate offense.



(1972 Code, § 18-4)



§ 18-6  SPECIFICATIONS FOR PAVING SIDEWALKS.



   No sidewalk shall be paved without the permission of the Council or
person duly authorized by the Council and under the direction of the Director
of Public Works in accordance with the following specifications.



   (A)   There shall be no greater distance from the curbline to the
sidewalk than three feet unless conditions otherwise require.



   (B)   The distance from the curbline to the paving adjoining the
particular sidewalk to be paved shall be the same distance as the pavement
which is already placed on the sidewalk.



   (C)   No sidewalk shall be less than five feet in width unless
conditions otherwise require.



   (D)   Additional construction standards shall be as required by the
Director of Public Works.



(1972 Code, § 18-5)



§ 18-7  HEIGHT OF AWNINGS ABOVE SIDEWALK.



   No person shall erect in front of any building any shelter, sunshade or
awning which extends over the sidewalk and is less than seven feet above the
level of the sidewalk or which extends more than ten feet from the building
to which it is attached; provided, that stationary awning arms shall not be
less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk.



(1972 Code, § 18-6)



§ 18-8  OBSTRUCTIONS GENERALLY.



   No person shall build, erect, construct or place any porch, steps,
fence, wall or other obstruction whatsoever in or over any of the streets or
sidewalks, and no person shall repair or improve any porch, steps, fence,
wall or other obstruction whatsoever now in or over any of the streets or
sidewalks. No person shall obstruct any sidewalk or street with any
wheelbarrow, wagon, automobile, truck or other vehicle, railroad car, chair,
bench, open gate, chicken coop, box or other article. This section shall not
apply to baby carriages and invalid chairs rolled on the sidewalks in a
manner as not to obstruct the same.



(1972 Code, § 18-7)



Statutory reference:



   Obstruction of highways and roads, see G.S. §§ 136-90 et seq.



§ 18-9  ATTRACTING CROWDS ON PUBLIC WAYS.



   No person shall attract a crowd on any street, sidewalk or public
thoroughfare so as to impede travel thereon.



(1972 Code, § 18-8)



§ 18-10  ACTS AND CONDITIONS REQUIRING SPECIAL STREET CLEANING OR REPAIR
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Any act, neglect or omission or any condition caused or
allowed to continue, which creates or results in causing a condition in or
upon any public street, sidewalk or storm drain which requires special
cleaning or repair of the street, sidewalk or storm drain is hereby
prohibited. Prohibited acts, neglects, omissions and conditions which result
in requiring special cleaning or repair shall include, but shall not be
limited to:



      (1)   The hauling of dirt, debris, materials removed from the
sites of construction or reconstruction of buildings or structures or trees,
limbs, logs or waste materials of any kind, in a manner that any portion of
the dirt, debris or materials is spilled, lost, dropped or left upon the
streets or sidewalks;



      (2)   The depositing or leaving upon the streets or sidewalks
of mud, dirt, trees, limbs, logs or any other material as a result of the use
of trucks, construction equipment or other machinery, regardless of whether
the materials are spilled, lost or dropped in transit or are deposited upon
the surface of the street or public property by contractors and their
employees or by the tires or wheels of trucks, construction equipment or
machinery; and



      (3)   The grading of lots, land or driveways at elevations
higher than street or sidewalk level or any other acts, neglects or
conditions created or allowed to exist upon the property which results in
mud, dirt, soil, gravel, debris or other materials being washed onto city
streets or sidewalks or into the city storm drainage system.



   (B)   Special cleaning or repair of streets, sidewalks and the storm
drainage system shall be deemed to be required when their condition is such
that the public health, safety, welfare or public use of the same is
threatened, limited or impaired; the use and enjoyment of property abutting
the streets or sidewalks is diminished or limited; or substantial damage is
caused to the streets, sidewalks or drainage facilities or to the abutting
property. The words SPECIAL CLEANING OR REPAIR as used in this section and §
18-11 shall include resurfacing, restoration of gravel and similar repairs
made necessary by prohibited acts, neglects or conditions.



(1972 Code, § 18-9)



§ 18-11  CLEANING AND REPAIRING STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRAINS.



   (A)   The Public Works Department will clean and repair all streets,
sidewalks and storm drains as and when special cleaning or repair is required
by conditions defined in § 18-10.



   (B)   The Public Works Department will keep records of the costs of
all specially required cleaning and repair (which may be computed on the
basis of established per mile or per hour cost of the use of city equipment,
plus labor and materials, including water, likewise computed at cost to the
city).



(1972 Code, § 18-9.1)



§ 18-12  ENCROACHMENTS ON STREETS.



   The Building Inspector shall notify all persons about to erect any
building, sidewalk, wall or fence near the street or any public way not to
encroach upon the street. If in the opinion of the Building Inspector any
obstruction is being or has been constructed on any street, the Building
Inspector shall cause a survey of the line of the street to be made by a
competent surveyor. If the survey shows that the street is obstructed by any
building, sidewalk, wall or fence, the owner shall pay the costs of the
survey, and shall remove all obstructions at once. No person who is found to
have encroached on any street or public way shall refuse or neglect to remove
the same within one week from the date of notice from the Building Inspector.



(1972 Code, § 18-10)



Cross-reference:



   Buildings, see ch. 5



§ 18-13  GATES SHALL NOT OPEN OUTWARD.



   No gate to any residence, lot or other enclosure shall swing or open
outward over the street or sidewalk. Each day any gate is allowed to open
outward over the sidewalk or street shall constitute a separate offense.



(1972 Code, § 18-11)



§ 18-14  SIDEWALK DINING.



   (A)   Encroachment agreement.  Any restaurant operator that desires
to offer sidewalk dining shall execute an encroachment agreement with the
city which agreement shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the restaurant
desiring to operate sidewalk dining;



      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the restaurant
operator;



      (3)   The type of food and beverage, or food product, to be
sold and served for the sidewalk dining;



      (4)   The hours of operation of the restaurant and the
proposed hours of operation of sidewalk dining;



      (5)   A drawing showing the section of sidewalk to be used for
the dining; the section to be kept clear for pedestrian use; and the proposed
placement of the tables, chairs and other furnishings on the sidewalk;



      (6)   Evidence of adequate insurance, as determined by the
city, to hold the city harmless from claims arising out of the operation of
the sidewalk dining;



      (7)   An indemnity statement whereby the restaurant operator
agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and
employees from any claim arising from the operation of the sidewalk dining;
and



      (8)   A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the state,
county or city, including health and ABC permits, if any, necessary for the
operation of the restaurant or business.



   (B)   Issuance of encroachment agreement.  An encroachment
agreement for the operation of sidewalk dining may not be issued unless the
agreement is complete and unless the following requirements are met.



      (1)   Sidewalk dining must be associated with an operating
restaurant so that it is under the same management and shares the same food
preparation facilities, restroom facilities and other customer convenience
facilities as the restaurant.



      (2)   Sidewalk dining must be clearly incidental to the
associated restaurant business.



      (3)   The placement of tables, chairs and other furnishings as
shown in the drawing required in subsection (A)(5) above must be done in a
manner that at least six feet of unobstructed paved space (as measured from
the street-side of the sidewalk) remains on the sidewalk for the passage of
pedestrians.



      (4)   The restaurant seeking approval for sidewalk dining must
front on and open onto the sidewalk proposed for the sidewalk dining. The
placement of tables, chairs and other furnishings may not extend beyond the
sidewalk frontage of the associated restaurant.



      (5)   The tables, chairs and other furnishings used in
sidewalk dining shall be removed daily from the sidewalk at the close of the
associated restaurant’s business day.



      (6)   The operation or furnishings associated with sidewalk
dining shall not result in any permanent alteration to or encroachment upon
any street, sidewalk or to the exterior of the associated restaurant.



   (C)   Placement of furnishings.  Furnishings for sidewalk dining
shall not be:



      (1)   Within ten feet of any driveway or alleyway;



      (2)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or standpipe;



      (3)   Within ten feet of a crosswalk of the intersection of
right-of-way lines (property lines) at a street intersection;



      (4)   At any location which obstructs underground utility
access points, ventilation areas, meters, accessible ramps or other
facilities provided for physically challenged persons, a building access or
exit or any emergency access or exit ways;



      (5)   In front of an adjacent property, without the written
approval of the adjacent business or property owner; and



      (6)   In front of an adjacent display window, without the
written approval of the business or property owner.



   (D)   Reservation of rights.  The city reserves the right to cease
part or all of any sidewalk dining pursuant to this section in order to allow
construction, maintenance or repair any street, sidewalk, utility or public
building, by the city, its agents or employees, or by any governmental entity
of public utility; and to allow for the use of the street or sidewalk in
connection with parades, civic festivals and other events of a temporary
nature, as permitted by the city. The city also reserves the right to amend,
alter, change or terminate this agreement upon further review and
consideration for reasons of public safety, adopted public policy or
operational concerns without any cost to the city.



   (E)   Term and transfer.



      (1)   Agreements issued in accordance with the provisions of
this section shall remain in effect for a period of one year.



      (2)   Encroachment agreements entered into pursuant to this
section shall not be transferable or assignable.



   (F)   Conflict.  Except as is specifically provided by this
section, and any agreement executed pursuant to this section, the provisions
of this Chapter 18 shall not amend, annul, repeal, abrogate, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations or permits previously adopted
or issued pursuant to laws. If this section shall conflict with any
applicable federal, state or local laws, the most stringent shall govern.



   (G)   Separability. Should any section or provision of this section
be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the declaration shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or
any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or
unconstitutional.



   (H)   Inclusion in City Code.  This section and any amendments
hereto, shall become part of the Code.



(Ord. passed 1-9-2001)



§ 18-15  TEMPORARY STREET CLOSINGS.



   The city will only allow temporary street closings on city-maintained
streets with the criteria that it must be a city-sponsored event, the request
must be made in a timely manner (a minimum two-week notice is to be provided
to administration) to the Police and Fire Department, and there must be an
alternative access for emergency services at the requested location.



(Ord. passed 3-10-2012; Ord. 2016-10, passed 6-14-2016)



CHAPTER 19:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   19-1   Construction and placement



   19-2   Reserved



   19-3   Construction permits



   19-4   Reserved



   19-5   Reserved



   19-6   Reserved



   19-7   Inspection



   19-8   Filling swimming pool



Cross-reference:



   Buildings, see ch. 5



   Municipal lakes, parks and recreation, see ch. 12



   Water and sewers, see ch. 21



Statutory reference:



   Public swimming pools, see G.S. §§ 130A-280 et seq.



§ 19-1  CONSTRUCTION AND PLACEMENT.



   (A)   The North Carolina Residential Building Code, Appendix G,
"Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs,” shall control the definitions used in
this chapter, and the design and construction of swimming pools, spas and hot
tubs installed in or on the lot of one- and two-family dwellings.



   (B)   No swimming pool shall be located in the front yard of any
residence.



   (C)   Setbacks for swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall be the
same as for accessory structures located in the same zoning district.



(Ord. 2009-04, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2015-04, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 19-2  RESERVED.



§ 19-3  CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.



   (A)   A zoning and fence compliance permit shall be applied for and
issued by the City Zoning Officer before construction shall begin on any
swimming pool.



   (B)   A permit shall be applied for and issued by the County
Building Inspection Department before construction shall begin on any
swimming pool. A final inspection and approval shall be required from the
Building Inspector.



   (C)   All applications for a zoning and fence compliance and county
building permit shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by the city and
county.



(Ord. 2009-04, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2015-04, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 19-4  RESERVED.



§ 19-5  RESERVED.



§ 19-6  RESERVED.



§ 19-7  INSPECTION.



   The Zoning Enforcement Officer and County Building Inspector shall have
the right, at any reasonable hour, to inspect any swimming pool for the
purpose of determining that all provisions of this chapter are fulfilled and
complied with.



(Ord. 2009-04, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2015-04, passed 9-8-2015)



§ 19-8  FILLING SWIMMING POOL.



   (A)   The Water Department may regulate the hours for the filling of
swimming pools.



   (B)   No person(s) shall be allowed to fill a swimming pool through
the use of any fire hydrant or Fire Department hose or any other city
apparatus or equipment.



(Ord. 2009-04, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2015-04, passed 9-8-2015)



CHAPTER 19.5:  TREES



Section



   19.5-1   Finding



   19.5-2   Purpose



   19.5-3   Types of trees



   19.5-4   Spacing



   19.5-5   Distance from curb and sidewalk



   19.5-6   Utilities



   19.5-7   Tree maintenance



   19.5-8   Tree topping



   19.5-9   Pruning



   19.5-10   Removal of tree stumps



   19.5-11   Removing trees



   19.5-12   Notice of violation and citation procedure



   19.5-13   Privilege license



   19.5-14   Review by City Manager



   Appendix A:  Tree list



§ 19.5-1  FINDING.



   (A)   The city contains a diversity and abundance of trees. These
elements are of economic value to the city and make it a desirable place for
both residents and visitors.



   (B)   The appearance of the city from the public ways contributes to
the economic prosperity of the city.



   (C)   Trees and other landscape elements help to naturally control
flooding and erosion, moderate noise pollution, dust and other airborne
pollutants and moderate the city climate.



   (D)   The growth and development attracted to the city often
necessitates the removal of trees, thereby contributing to their depletion.



   (E)   It is necessary to protect and manage these valuable assets
and their habitat in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of
citizens in the city.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-2  PURPOSE.



   The City Council declares the intent of this chapter is to:



   (A)   Regulate the protection, installation, removal and long-term
management of trees in the city; and



   (B)   Encourage the proper protection and maintenance of existing
trees on all public lands as herein described now or hereafter in the city.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-3  TYPES OF TREES.



   Appendix A contains a partial list of trees that may be planted on city
rights-of-way, city parks and other city owned property. Other species not
listed may be planted when approved by the City Horticulturist or City
Manager designee.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-4  SPACING.



   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three
species and sizes listed in § 19.5-3, and no tree may be planted closer
together than the following:



 


Small trees

 

30 feet




Medium trees

 

40 feet




Large trees

 

50 feet



Or as directed or approved by the City Horticulturist or City Manager designee



 



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-5  DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.



   The distance trees may be planted from curb or curb lines and sidewalks
will be determined by the previous tree species or as approved by the City
Horticulturist or City Manager designee. No street tree shall be planted
closer than 30 feet of any street corner, measured from the point nearest
intersecting curb or curb lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than
ten feet of any fireplug.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-6  UTILITIES.



   No trees other than those species listed as small trees may be planted
under any overhead utility wire or within five lateral feet of any
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility, or
without prior approval by the City Horticulturist or City Manager designee.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-7  TREE MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The City Horticulturist or City Manager designee shall have
the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, shrubs within
the line of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds
as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the
symmetry and beauty of the public grounds.



   (B)   The city may remove or order to be removed any tree or part
thereof which is deemed unsafe by the City Horticulturist, other
professional, City Manager designee or which by reason of its nature is
injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvement, or is affected with any injury, fungus, insect or pest.



   (C)   This does not prohibit the planting of street trees by
adjacent property owners, providing that the selection of the trees is in
accordance with those listed in § 19.5-3.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-8  TREE TOPPING.



   It shall be prohibited as normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or any tree on public property.
TOPPING is defined as severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three
inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree, so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storm or other causes, or trees under utility wires or other obstructions,
where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this
section at the determination of the City Horticulturist or City Manager
designee.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-9  PRUNING.



   The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private or
public property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the
street from a street light, or interferes with visibility of any traffic
control device or sign.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-10  REMOVAL OF TREE STUMPS.



   As is feasible, all stumps of street and park trees shall be removed
below the surface of the ground, so that the top of the stump shall not
project above the surface of the ground.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-11  REMOVING TREES.



   (A)   No abutting property owner, nor any agent acting in his or her
behalf, a utility company, nor any other person, firm or corporation shall
remove any tree now or hereafter growing on a public right-of-way of the city
or city park without first obtaining permission from the City Horticulturist
or City Manager designee. Permission may be granted if it is found that a
compelling public or private need exists for the removal of the tree.
Abutting property owners shall be advised of the decision of the City
Horticulturist or City Manager designee and shall have five days’ notice to
appeal the decision in writing. Appeals will be heard by City Council at the
next scheduled Council meeting.



   (B)   See § 19.5-12.



   (C)   Any person who without authorization removes or causes to be
removed any tree from city owned property, city park or right-of-way, if
there is a suitable location, must replace each removed tree with an
equivalent tree or trees as follows.



      (1)   A suitable tree is one that the City Horticulturist or
City Manager designee determines to have characteristics equivalent to the
removed tree.



      (2)   If the removed tree has a caliper of less than four
inches, it must be replaced by a tree of equivalent caliper. If the removed
tree has a caliper equal to, or greater than four inches, it may be replaced
by two or more trees with a caliper of at least two inches and a cumulative
caliper equal to or greater than the tree removed.



      (3)   The timing and technique of planting the replacement
trees must be done in the manner determined by the City Horticulturist or
City Manager designee to be that which is best suited for the health of the
trees.



      (4)   If the City Horticulturist or City Manager designee
determines that the removed tree may not be effectively replaced, the person
responsible for replacing the tree must pay to the city an amount that is
equal to the cost of replacing the tree had a suitable replacement been
possible.



   (D)   This section is inapplicable to any project which shall
hereinafter be authorized or approved by the City Council. No permission will
be required of the State Department of Transportation when working on their
rights-of-way. However, as a matter of policy, coordination will be effected
between the Department of Transportation and the city prior to the removal of
any trees.



   (E)   Any act constituting a violation of this section resulting in
the loss or destruction of specimen trees shall subject the landowner to a
civil penalty equivalent to one and one-half times the monetary value of the
trees destroyed up to a maximum of $20,000. For purposes of this
determination the City Horticulturist or City Manager designee shall apply
the most current formula of the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, or
a similar method in common use. In addition, any tree or trees so destroyed
must be replaced with a number of new trees whose total DBH equals that of
the trees destroyed.



   (F)   Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation or offense.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-12  NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND CITATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Notice required before penalty.  No penalty shall be assessed
pursuant to § 19.5-11 unless and until the person alleged to be in violation
has been notified of the violation in accordance with this section.



   (B)   Notice of violation and opportunity to cure.  Whenever the
city has reasonable cause to believe that a person is violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or any plan, order or condition which has been
approved, issued or imposed pursuant to this chapter, the city shall
immediately notify that person of the violation. The notice of violation
shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or by certified
or registered mail, return receipt requested. The notice of violation shall
describe the violation, shall identify the provision or provisions of this
chapter which are being violated, shall specify what actions must be taken to
correct the violation (including an order to stop any and all work which
violates this chapter), shall direct the person to correct the violation
within a specified reasonable time period (beginning on the date the notice
is received) and shall warn that more severe measures (such as a civil
penalty or criminal prosecution) may be assessed or brought against the
person if he or she fails to take appropriate action to cure or correct the
violation. If the violator cannot be ascertained, then the notice of
violation shall be sent to the record owner of the land on which the
violation occurs. If the violation is cured or corrected within the time
period specified in the notice of violation, then the city shall take no
further action against the person.



   (C)   Extension of time to cure.  Upon receipt of a written request
from the alleged violator or the property owner for an extension of time to
cure or correct the violation, the city may grant a single extension of time,
not to exceed a period of 30 days, in which the alleged violator may cure or
correct the violation before the city issues a citation pursuant to
subsection (D) below. This extension of time shall not be granted unless the
alleged violator or the property owner can demonstrate to the city that the
violation cannot be cured or corrected within the time period specified in
the notice of violation because the labor or materials needed to take
appropriate action are unavailable due to circumstances beyond the control of
the alleged violator or the property owner.



   (D)   Citation for violation.  Any person who, after being given a
notice of violation pursuant to subsection (B) above, does not comply with
this chapter within the time period set forth in the notice of violation, and
who continues the violation, shall be subject to the civil and/or criminal
penalties set forth in § 19.5-11.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-13  PRIVILEGE LICENSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person(s) or firm to engage in the
business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing trees within the city
without first applying for and procuring a license. The privilege license fee
shall be $25 annually. However, no license shall be required of any city
employee doing the work in pursuit of their public service endeavors.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 19.5-14  REVIEW BY CITY MANAGER.



   Any person(s) may have the right to appeal any ruling or order by the
City Horticulturist or City Manager designee to the City Manager who may hear
the matter and can make recommendations to City Council.



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



APPENDIX A:  TREE LIST



 


Partial List of Trees That May Be Planted




Small Trees

 

Medium Trees

 

Large Trees





Chaste Tree
 
American Holly
 
American Sweetgum


Common Smoketree
 
American Hornbean
 
Common Bald Cypress


Crepe Myrtle
 
Bradford Pear
 
Common China Fir


Flowering Crabapple
 
Chinese Elm
 
Cottonwood


Flowering Peach
 
Flowering Cherry
 
Dawn Redwood


Fringe Trees
 
Goldenraintree
 
Ginko


Hawthorne Species
 
Lusterleaf Holly
 
Green Ash


Japanese Maple
 
Osage-orange
 
Japanese Zelkova


Little Gem Magnolia
 
Possumhaw
 
Leyland Cypress


Loquat
 
Redbud
 
Loblolly Pine


Nellie Stevens Holly
 
Saucer Magnolia
 
Longleaf Pine


Purpleleaf Plum
 
Savannah Holly
 
Oak Species


Virginia Pine
 
Silverbell
 
Peacan


 
 
Trident Maple
 
Red Maple


 
 
 
 
River Birch


 
 
 
 
Southern Magnolia


 
 
 
 
Sugar Maple


 
 
 
 
Sycamore


 
 
 
 
Tuliptree


 
 
 
 
White Pine




 



(Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



CHAPTER 20:  VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section



Article I:  In General



   20-1 through 20-25   Reserved



Article II:  Taxicabs



Division 1:  Generally



   20-26   Definitions



   20-27   Reports and recommendations of Police Chief



   20-28   Conduct of drivers



   20-29   Taxicab stands



   20-30   Penalties



Division 2:  Operating Permit



   20-41   Required



   20-42   Issuance



   20-43   Application requirements



   20-44   Hearing on application



   20-45   Conditions of issuance



   20-46   Expiration



   20-47   Renewal



   20-48   Transfer



   20-49   Suspension and revocation



   20-50   Suspension and revocation; appeals



   20-51   Fees



Division 3:  Driver’s Permit



   20-61   Required



   20-62   Application requirements



   20-63   Qualifications of applicant



   20-64   Refusal; grounds specified



   20-65   Issuance; probationary period



   20-66   Fees



   20-67   Revocation; grounds



   20-68   Appeals



Division 4:  Operation



   20-81   Registration and all proper permits necessary



   20-82   Compliance with state law, ordinances and the like



   20-83   Insurance policies to be filed



   20-84   Insurance liable regardless of operator



   20-85   Safety and maintenance



Cross-reference:



   Licenses and business regulations, see ch. 10



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



   Streets and sidewalks, see ch. 18



Statutory reference:



   Age limits for drivers of public passenger-carrying vehicles, see G.S.
§ 20-10



   Financial responsibility, see G.S. § 20-280



   For-hire vehicles to be marked, see G.S. § 20-101



   Franchise ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-76



   General municipal powers as to taxicabs, see G.S. §§ 20-37, 160A-304



   Municipal license tax on taxicabs, see G.S. § 20-97



   Passenger vehicle registration fees, see G.S. § 20-87



   Transporting fortified wine or spirituous liquor in a for-hire
passenger vehicle, see G.S. § 18B-401



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§§ 20-1 THROUGH 20-25  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II:  TAXICABS



Division 1:  Generally



§ 20-26  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this
article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   CRUISING.  The movement of a vehicle for hire over public streets or
public vehicular areas in search of passengers or for the purpose of
attracting passengers.



   DRIVER.  Any person who drives a taxicab.



   DRIVER’S PERMIT.  The license issued by the city to any person to
enable that person to drive a taxicab vehicle.



   INDIVIDUAL OWNER-DRIVER.  A person, self-employed, who engages in the
business of operating a single taxicab, as its owner and driver. The term
includes all operating permit holders who hold no more than one operating
permit.



   MEDALLION.  A nontransferable, numbered insignia to provide exterior
identification that a particular taxicab has a valid operating permit
associated with it.



   OPERATING PERMIT.  The license, issued by the City Manager or his or
her designee, under which a person may operate a taxicab vehicle, and which
shows that the convenience and necessity of the public requires the operation
of the taxicab.



   OPERATING PERMIT HOLDER.  The vehicle owner and supporting services
provider to whom an operating permit for the operation of a taxicab has been
issued.



   STREET.  Any street, alley, avenue, highway or any other public
vehicular area within the corporate limits of the city as the same may exist
or may be hereafter extended.



   TAXICAB.  Any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer passengers and
driver-operated for hire upon any street, on call or demand.



   TAXICAB COMPANY.  Any company which engages in the business of
operating taxicabs as the owner or franchiser.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



Cross-reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



§ 20-27  REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF POLICE CHIEF.



   The Police Chief or his or her designee shall advise the City Manager
with respect to matters covered or incidentally involved in the operation or
administration of this article. He or she shall make reports to the City
Manager and the Council as may be required. He or she shall make
recommendations to the City Manager with respect to whether applicants for an
operating permit meet the eligibility criteria set out in §§ 20-43, 20-62,
20-63 and 20-64.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-28  CONDUCT OF DRIVERS.



   (A)   No driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger
who may ride or desire to ride in his or her taxicab as to his or her
destination or the rate of fare to be charged, or convey or cause to be
conveyed any passenger to any place other than as directed by the passenger,
and in no event shall any driver providing taxi service take a longer route
to the requested destination than is necessary, unless he or she is so
requested by the passenger.



   (B)   Drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests
of the passenger as to the speed of travel and the route to be taken.



   (C)   No driver shall at any time solicit passengers by any word,
sign or gesture, or for the purpose of soliciting patronage, in any manner
annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person or traffic or follow
any person, except that within a taxicab stand, as designated in § 20-29, a
driver located inside his or her vehicle or outside, but within ten feet of
the taxicab, may solicit passengers. Except in a manner provided by this
subsection, drivers may not solicit. Nothing in this subsection shall
prohibit drivers from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of
assisting passengers into or out of taxicabs.



   (D)   No driver shall allow the seating capacity of his or her
taxicab to be exceeded, with the exception that rear seat passengers may hold
children in their arms.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-29  TAXICAB STANDS.



   A list of all taxicab stands in the city shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Manager and shall be open to inspection by the public.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-30  PENALTIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this article. If the person violating any provision of this article is a
corporation, the officers, agents or employees thereof who shall violate or
procure, aid or abet any violation of any provisions of this article or
permit the operation of any taxicab contrary to the requirements hereof,
shall be subject to the same penalties as if they themselves were personally
operating the taxicab at the time the violations were committed. Upon a
person’s violation of any provision of this article, the City Manager or
his or her designee may suspend or revoke any operating permit held by that
person, and the City Manager may suspend or revoke any driver’s permit held
by that person.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



Division 2:  Operating Permit



§ 20-41  REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate any taxicab in the city without first having
obtained an operating permit authorizing the operation.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-42  ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Council, by resolution, may in its discretion limit by
policy the total number of taxicab operating permits to be granted. The city
staff will review on an annual basis the limit on the total number of
operating permits available and make recommendations for changes, if any. An
operating permit, whether or not limited in number, shows that by its
issuance the convenience and necessity of the public requires the operation
of the taxicab.



   (B)   The Council authorizes the City Manager or his or her designee
to issue operating permits to any applicant or applicants subject to those
conditions as the Council may deem advisable or necessary in the public
interest, and upon payment of a regulatory fee provided by § 20-51. These
operating permits shall be issued for a period of one year and be renewable
annually upon payment of a regulatory fee as provided by § 20-51.



   (C)   No operating permit shall be issued to or renewed by any
person who shall not have fully complied with all of the prerequisite
requirements of this article before the commencement of the operation of the
proposed service.



   (D)   The operating permit holder shall, in the case of any change
in business address or telephone, notify the City Manager or his or her
designee in writing of the change within 48 hours of the effective date of
the change.



   (E)   (1)   The City Manager, Chief of Police or their designee,
shall conduct an investigation of any taxi driver permit.



      (2)   The applicant for the permit shall upon request provide
to the City Manager, Chief of Police or their designee:



         (a)   A completed taxi driver permit application:



         (b)   A valid state driver’s license: and



         (c)   The fees for the application so that the City
Manager, Chief of Police or their designee may cause a thorough search to be
made of local and state criminal records to determine if the applicant has a
history of criminal convictions or the crimes enumerated above by the use of
the Division of Criminal Information network (DCI).



   (F)   Prior to denial of the taxi driver permit based upon DCI
inquiry, the city shall verify the existence of a record by submitting a
fingerprint card of the individual to the State Bureau of Investigation (SBI)
for verification that the DCI record belongs to the individual.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989; Ord. passed 3-25-2006; Ord. passed 5-9-2006)



§ 20-43  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   If the DCI indicates a possible record found, the
applicant shall provide:



         (a)   All necessary identification information, either
name and other appropriate identifiers, or a completed fingerprint form
approved by the State Bureau of Investigation (SBI);



         (b)   Any other physical or numerical personal
descriptors requested;



         (c)   Authorization in a form acceptable to the SBI for
performing a computerized criminal history (CCH) records check; and



         (d)   Payment of the then-current fee for a CCH records
check.



      (2)   If the City Manager, Chief of Police or their designee
receives a CCH records check (or copy thereof), he or she shall not
disseminate the same and shall take reasonable steps to maintain its
confidentiality.



      (3)   The findings from the CCH shall be provided to the Chief
of Police, City Manager or their designee, provided that all necessary
agreements with the State Bureau of Investigations Division of Criminal
Information have been executed.



      (4)   No operating permit shall be issued if the CCH records
check described above or other information obtained by the city reveals that
the applicant has, within the ten-year period preceding the application, been
convicted of any felonies or misdemeanors involving controlled substances.



   (B)   The Council may request that the applicant submit the
following additional information:



      (1)   Existence of a depot or terminal on private property;



      (2)   Ability to provide radio-dispatched taxi service 24
hours a day, seven days a week;



      (3)   Ability to provide adequate supervision of taxicabs and
drivers operating under the operating permit(s);



      (4)   Evidence that the telephone number(s) of the taxicab
company will be listed in the local telephone directory issued; and



      (5)   Assurance that each vehicle operating under the permit
shall be kept clean and in good mechanical condition and in good physical
condition at all times.



   (C)   The applicant shall swear that the information submitted is
neither false nor misleading. Submitting, or causing to submit, false or
misleading information is unlawful and shall be grounds for denial of an
operating permit.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989; Ord. passed 3-25-2006; Ord. passed 5-9-2006)



§ 20-44  HEARING ON APPLICATION.



   The City Manager or his or her designee may require a hearing with the
operating permit applicant if the Manager is not convinced that the applicant
meets all eligibility criteria and has provided all necessary data to the
City Manager as outlined in § 20-43.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-45  CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE.



   (A)   On recommendation of the Police Chief or his or her designee,
the City Manager or his or her designee shall authorize issuance to every
person who files an application as herein provided for an operating permit
for a taxicab, subject to the conditions this chapter may require, provided
that:



      (1)   The vehicle for which application for an operating
permit or permits is made shall have been found, after investigation by the
Police Chief, to be in strict compliance with this article;



      (2)   The court record of the applicant is not one as would
make it against the public interest for the application to be granted;
specifically, any felon whose latest conviction is less than five years old
or whose conditions of parole or offense might be considered contrary to
public safety. More than one count conviction of driving while intoxicated
within the last five years shall constitute grounds for rejection;



      (3)   The applicants shall have complied with all the
provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, the provision of:



         (a)   Adequate supervision of drivers;



         (b)   Evidence that telephone numbers for the taxicab
company will be listed in the next local telephone directory issued; and



         (c)   Assurance that each vehicle operating under this
permit shall be kept clean and in good mechanical condition and in good
physical condition at all times.



      (4)   The issuance is not in conflict with these conditions as
placed by the Council on the issuance of operating permits.



   (B)   Upon authorization by the City Manager or his or her designee
the Police Chief shall issue the operating permit.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



Statutory reference:



   Administrative search and inspection warrants, see G.S. § 15-27.2



§ 20-46  EXPIRATION.



   All operating permits shall expire on December 31 of the year during
which the operating permit is granted. The operating permit shall
automatically expire if the conditions under which the permit was issued, as
provided in § 20-45, change without prior approval of the City Manager.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-47  RENEWAL.



   Upon application, prior to the end of each calendar year, the City
Manager or his or her designee shall renew any operating permit or cause a
new operating permit to be issued for the ensuing year, in the absence of any
contrary evidence and finding of the City Manager or his or her designee
regarding the operating permit holder’s fulfillment of the eligibility
criteria in § 20-43 and his or her ability to comply with the provisions of
this article.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-48  TRANSFER.



   Each permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this division is
separate and distinct and shall not be transferable from the operating permit
holder or entity.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-49  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee may suspend or revoke
an operating permit upon the occurrence of any one of the following:



      (1)   The operating permit holder fails to operate his or her
taxicab or taxicabs in compliance with all the provisions of this article;



      (2)   The Manager or his or her designee finds that the
operating permit holder submitted, or caused to be submitted, false or
misleading information on his or her application for an operating permit;



      (3)   The operating permit holder ceases to operate any
taxicab, during a period of 30 consecutive days, for a minimum of 20 days at
least eight hours a day, without having obtained permission for the cessation
from the Police Chief;



      (4)   The operating permit holder commits any act with the
intent to defraud his or her creditors; or



      (5)   The City Manager or his or her designee determines that,
in the interest of the public safety and welfare, an operating permit should
be suspended or revoked.



   (B)   The City Manager or his or her designee may also revoke an
operating permit due to acts of drivers, pursuant to § 20-50.



   (C)   (1)   No operating permit may be suspended or revoked until
the City Manager or his or her designee has conducted a hearing thereon.



      (2)   The holder of the permit shall have the right to be
present at the hearing and shall be given at least 48 hours’ advance notice
thereof.



   (D)   Operating permits may be suspended under this section for a
period not to exceed six months.



   (E)   An operating permit holder who has had an operating permit
revoked may not apply for an operating permit for a period of six months.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-50  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION; APPEALS.



   (A)   Upon a finding by the City Manager or his or her designee that
an operating permit should be suspended or revoked pursuant to § 20-49, the
operating permit holder shall be so notified and informed of the manner in
which the finding may be appealed.



   (B)   The operating permit holder may appeal the suspension or
revocation of an operating permit by filing with the City Manager, within ten
days after the Manager’s decision is rendered, written notice of appeal.
The notice of appeal shall set forth the reasons why the suspension or
revocation is improper.



   (C)   The suspension or revocation of an operating permit shall not
become effective until ten days after the decision is rendered. If an appeal
is filed within this period, the suspension or revocation shall be stayed
pending final decision of the Council.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-51  FEES.



   Fees for obtaining, renewing, duplicating, transferring and reinstating
operating permits shall be collected. Fees shall be approved by the City
Manager and on file with the Police Chief. Other fees as permitted by state
law may be collected. Fees shall be set initially at $50 for new application
and $10 for annual renewal.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



Division 3:  Driver’s Permit



§ 20-61  REQUIRED.



   No person shall drive a taxicab within the city without first having
obtained a taxicab driver’s permit from the Police Chief.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-62  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each applicant for a driver’s permit shall make application
on forms to be provided by the Police Chief. (For renewal applications, a
physical will be required every two years.) The application shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   The applicant’s full name and address;



      (2)   The applicant’s physical condition, with particular
reference to hearing, eyesight and use of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or
barbiturate drugs;



      (3)   The applicant’s physical description, including age,
race, height, weight and color of eyes and hair;



      (4)   The length of time the applicant has resided at his or
her present address; and



      (5)   The applicant’s court records.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any applicant to willfully include,
or willfully cause to be included, a false statement in his or her
application for a driver’s permit.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-63  QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT.



   Each applicant for a driver’s permit must meet the following
requirements:



   (A)   Be at least 18 years of age;



   (B)   Possess eyesight correctable to 20/20 and not suffer from
epilepsy, vertigo, heart disease or any other physical or mental condition
which renders him or her unfit for safe operation of a taxicab;



   (C)   Be able to read, write and speak the English language;



   (D)   Be clean in dress and person;



   (E)   Be not addicted to the use of alcoholic beverages or narcotic
or barbiturate drugs;



   (F)   Possess a valid state driver’s license issued to him or her;
and



   (G)   Have permission from an operating permit holder to operate a
taxicab under the permit assigned to that operating permit holder.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-64  REFUSAL; GROUNDS SPECIFIED.



   The City Manager may refuse to grant or renew a driver’s permit for
any applicant:



   (A)   Whose state motor vehicle operator’s license is in a state
of revocation or suspension;



   (B)   Who has committed, been convicted of or pleaded guilty or no
contest to, within five years immediately prior to the date of application,
any of the following:



      (1)   A felony;



      (2)   Any crime involving the driving of a motor vehicle;



      (3)   Impaired driving under state law or any comparable
provision of any other state;



      (4)   A violation of any city, county, state or federal law
relating to the use, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or substances
regulated by the State Toxic Vapors Act; or



      (5)   A violation of any city, county, state or federal law
relating to prostitution or gambling.



   (C)   Who, within a period of five years immediately prior to the
date of his or her application, has been an habitual violator of traffic
laws, or an habitual user of intoxicating liquors or any substance regulated
by the State Controlled Substances Act (G.S. §§ 90-86 through 90-113.8) or
the State Toxic Vapors Act (G.S. §§ 90-113.8A through 90-113.14); and



   (D)   Who does not fulfill the qualifications set forth in § 20-63.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-65  ISSUANCE; PROBATIONARY PERIOD.



   The Police Chief, upon finding that an applicant has satisfactorily
complied with the provisions of this division, shall issue to an applicant a
driver’s permit, which shall show the applicant’s photograph, name,
height, weight, age, the expiration date and the operating permit holder for
whom the driver will be employed. The driver’s permit must be displayed at
all times in the card frame attached to the glove compartment or dash on the
right side in the driver’s taxicab. No driver shall operate a cab for any
operating permit holder other than the operating permit holder shown on his
or her driver’s permit, and, upon the termination of a driver’s agreement
to drive for the operating permit holder, the driver shall surrender his or
her permit to the Police Chief within 48 hours.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-66  FEES.



   Fees to cover the administrative cost of the driver’s permit shall be
as follows:



 

Issuing new permit or reinstating permit
 

$10



Renewal of permit annually
 

$5




 



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-67  REVOCATION; GROUNDS.



   The City Manager may revoke or refuse to renew a driver’s permit if
the person to whom the driver’s permit was issued is, at any time after
issuance:



   (A)   Found by the Police Chief to have committed, been convicted of
or pled guilty or no contest to, any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of any federal, state or local law relating
to the use, possession, manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages or any
substance regulated by the State Controlled Substances Act (G.S. §§ 90-86
through 90-113.8) or the State Toxic Vapors Act (G.S. §§ 90-113.8A through
90-113.14);



      (2)   A violation of any federal, state or local law relating
to prostitution or gambling;



      (3)   An accumulation, under G.S. § 20-16, within a
three-year period of 12 or more points, or eight or more points within the
three-year period following reinstatement of a state driver’s license which
has been suspended or revoked; or has been convicted of any other moving
violation of traffic laws, for which the state driver’s license is
suspended or revoked;



      (4)   Any felony;



      (5)   Any violation of a federal, state or local law designed
for the protection of life; or



      (6)   Any criminal assault involving the operation of a
taxicab.



   (B)   Found by the Police Chief to be an habitual user of alcoholic
beverages or any substance regulated by the State Controlled Substances Act
(G.S. §§ 90-86 through 90-113.8) or the State Toxic Vapors Act (G.S. §§
90-113.8A through 90-113.14);



   (C)   Found by the Police Chief to have made or caused to be made a
false statement in his or her application for issuance or renewal of a
driver’s permit; or



   (D)   Does not continue to meet the qualifications for a driver’s
permit suspended three times in any five-year period.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-68  APPEALS.



   A decision by the City Manager not to grant or renew or to suspend or
revoke a driver’s permit, and a determination by the City Manager under §
20-67, shall be subject to appeal to the Council.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



Division 4:  Operation



§ 20-81  REGISTRATION AND ALL PROPER PERMITS NECESSARY.



   No person shall operate a motor vehicle as a taxicab until the vehicle
has been registered in accordance with all the requirements of this state and
all proper permits have been obtained therefor.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-82  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW, ORDINANCES AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Every taxicab shall be operated in accordance with the laws of
this state and the ordinances of this city and with due regard for the
safety, comfort and convenience of passengers and for the safe and careful
transportation of property and for the safety of the general public.



   (B)   No taxicab shall be operated at a rate of speed inconsistent
with existing traffic regulations, road conditions and the hazard at
intersections and any other conditions then existing, nor in a manner or
condition to endanger or to be likely to endanger the safety of passengers,
pedestrians, vehicles or the person and property of others.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



Cross-reference:



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see ch. 11



§ 20-83  INSURANCE POLICIES TO BE FILED.



   The operating permit holder shall file with the Police Chief a copy of
the vehicle insurance policy insuring the liability of the vehicle, as a
condition precedent to the operating of any taxicab on the streets of the
city. The policy filed shall, among other things, set forth a description of
each and every taxicab operating under the terms of the policy or policies.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-84  INSURANCE LIABLE REGARDLESS OF OPERATOR.



   (A)   Any policy of insurance submitted under this division shall be
conditioned upon the payment of any final judgment recovered by any person as
a result of the negligent operation of any vehicle or taxicab permitted to
operate hereunder, no matter by whom operated or driven at the time of the
injury or damage.



   (B)   The insurance shall contain a provision for the continuing
liability thereunder to the full amount thereof notwithstanding any recovery
thereon.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



§ 20-85  SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE.



   The operating permit holder shall maintain all taxicabs in a safe
condition that would meet or exceed all state inspections standards.



(Ord. passed 9-12-1989)



CHAPTER 21:  WATER AND SEWERS



Section



Article I:  In General



   21-1   Definitions



   21-2   Abbreviations



   21-3   Supervision of Utilities Department



   21-4   Director of Utilities Department; generally



   21-5   Director of Utilities Department; inspection authority



   21-6   Application for use of water; generally



   21-7   Application for use of water; effect of application



   21-8   Deposits required



   21-9   Fee for filling up water lines



   21-10   Establishment of rates, charges



   21-11   Rates for units in apartment houses



   21-12   Payment of connection charges



   21-13   Billing for water services



   21-14   Adjustment of claims



   21-15   Connections made by authorized persons only



   21-16   Licensed plumber to install lines on private property



   21-17   Inspections of fixtures by Plumbing Inspector



   21-18   Fire hydrants



   21-19   Unnecessary use of water restricted



   21-20   Discontinuance of service for violation of chapter



Article II:  Water System



   21-46   Connections generally



   21-47   Separate connections required



   21-48   Metering water supply; authority



   21-49   Metering water supply; charges for all water passing through
meter



   21-50   Metering water supply; meter to serve one customer only



   21-51   Approval of water line alterations



   21-52   Stop and waste cock required; maintenance of fixtures and
the like; cutoff fee



   21-53   Refunds and damages for water stoppage



   21-54   Unauthorized use of facilities



   21-55   Resale of water prohibited



   21-56   Service outside city limits



   21-57   Discontinuance of service to users outside city upon failure
to pay fees



   21-58   Allocation of cost of replacing smaller line



   21-59   Climbing on, loitering near, defacing water tanks or towers



   21-60   Temporary cutoff by request of customer



   21-61   Tampering with city property



   21-62   Fire line connections to be metered



   21-63   Cutoff and backflow preventers required on property owners
side of meter



Article III:  Sanitary Sewer System Generally



   21-81   Use of septic tanks



   21-82   Separate connections for each building



   21-83   Construction or repair of sewers; permit required; fee



   21-84   Construction or repair of sewers; permit application



   21-85   Construction or repair of sewers; duty of property owner



   21-86   Construction or repair of sewers; duty of city



   21-87   Repairs to existing laterals and lines



   21-88   Appeal from ruling of Director of Utilities



   21-89   Damaging, defacing and the like, sewer system



   21-90   Furnishing of sewer service only



   21-91   Property owner to furnish cleanout plugs



   21-92   Certain connections prohibited



   21-93   Branch sewers may be required



   21-94   Connections to be made where opening provided



   21-95   Connections outside city; fee



   21-96   Measurement of flow



   21-97   Surcharge for treatment of industrial waste; billing;
delinquency



   21-98   Tampering with, damaging testing equipment



Article IV:  Sewer Use



Division 1:  Generally



   21-111   Purpose and policy



   21-112   Definitions and abbreviations



Division 2:  General Sewer Use Requirements



   21-121   Prohibited discharge standards



   21-122   National categorical pretreatment standards



   21-123   Local limits



   21-124   State requirements



   21-125   Right of revision



   21-126   Dilution



   21-127   Pretreatment of wastewater



   21-128   Accidental discharge/slug control plans



   21-129   Hauled wastewater



   21-130   Protection from damages



   21-131   Connecting to sewer system



   21-132   Prohibition of discharge of wastewater to surface courses



   21-133   Connecting unpolluted waters



   21-134   Regulation of building of sewers and connections



Division 3:  User Charge System



   21-141   User charges



   21-142   Pretreatment program administration charges



Division 4:  Discharge Permit Application and Issuance



   21-151   Wastewater dischargers



   21-152   Wastewater permits



Division 5:  Reporting Requirements



   21-161   Baseline monitoring reports



   21-162   Compliance schedule progress reports



   21-163   Compliance reports for categorical pretreatment standards



   21-164   Periodic compliance reports



   21-165   Reports of changed conditions



   21-166   Reports of potential problems



   21-167   Reports from unpermitted users



   21-168   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting



   21-169   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste



   21-170   Analytical requirements



   21-171   Sample collection



   21-172   Timing



   21-173   Record keeping



Division 6:  Compliance Monitoring



   21-181   Monitoring facilities



   21-182   Inspection and sampling



   21-183   Search warrants



Division 7:  Confidential Information



   21-187   Trade secrets



Division 8:  Enforcement



   21-191   Administrative remedies



   21-192   Civil penalties



   21-193   Other available remedies



   21-194   Remedies nonexclusive



Division 9:  Annual Publication of Significant Noncompliance



   21-201   Publication



Division 10:  Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations



   21-206   Upset



   21-207   Prohibited discharge standards defense



   21-208   Bypass



Article V:  Extension of Water and Sewer Service



Division 1:  Generally



   21-216   Conformance with chapter



   21-217   Minimum distance for extensions



   21-218   Size of mains



   21-219   Extensions to meet city specifications; ownership



   21-220   Additional subdivision requirement of improved streets



Division 2:  Extensions Inside the City



   21-231   Application for extension; required



   21-232   Application for extension; contents generally



   21-233   Application for extension; plans for development



   21-234   Developed area or approved subdivision; generally



   21-235   Developed area or approved subdivision; assessment



   21-236   Developed area or approved subdivision; payment of costs



   21-237   Proposed developments and unapproved subdivisions; generally



   21-238   Proposed developments and unapproved subdivisions; financing



   21-239   Facilities excluded in determining property owner’s share
of cost



   21-240   Exceptions authorized



Division 3:  Extensions Outside City



   21-251   Application for extension



   21-252   Financing; generally



   21-253   Financing; deposit of funds; contract



   21-254   Financing; alternatives to depositing funds



   21-255   Petition for annexation of property



Article VI:  Conservation of Water



   21-270   Purpose



   21-271   Year-round practices



   21-272   Determination of water shortage or emergency



   21-273   Proclamation of water shortage or water supply emergency



   21-274   Mandatory conservation during Stage I water shortage



   21-275   Mandatory conservation during Stage II water shortage



   21-276   Mandatory conservation during water supply emergency



   21-277   Notice of violation (NOV)



   21-278   Penalties



   21-279   Tampering



Article VII:  Fats, Oil and Grease Control



   21-290   Scope and purpose



   21-291   Definitions



   21-292   Grease interceptor maintenance, record keeping and grease
removal



Article VIII:  Backflow Prevention



   21-305   Purpose



   21-306   Definitions



   21-307   Compliance with state and federal law



   21-308   Unlawful connections



   21-309   Inspection of property



   21-310   Right of access



   21-311   Hazardous uses



   21-312   Moderate hazard



   21-313   Fire sprinkler systems



   21-314   Other connections



   21-315   Installation of containment devices



   21-316   Change in nature of use



   21-317   Consumer responsibilities



   21-318   Violations; penalties



   21-319   Testing and maintenance of devices



   21-320   Limitation of liability



Article IX:  Requirements for Irrigation Systems and Installation



   21-335   Requirements



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



   Buildings, see ch. 5



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



   Plumbing Code, see § 5-38



   Solid waste and vegetation, see ch. 17



   Stagnant water on premises, see § 14-13



   Streets and sidewalks, see ch. 18



   Swimming pools, see ch. 19



Statutory reference:



   Excavations, placing pipes and the like, see G.S. § 160A-296



   Franchises, see G.S. §§ 160A-76, 160A-319



   Municipal regulation of the emission of pollutants or contaminants, see
G.S. § 160A-185



   Ordinances effective on municipal property outside limits, see G.S. §
160A-176



   Public enterprises, see G.S. §§ 160A-311 et seq.



   Public health and public safety nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-193



   Public utilities, see G.S. Chapter 62



   Revenue bonds, see G.S. §§ 159-80 et seq.



   Special assessments, see G.S. §§ 160A-216 et seq.



   Water and air resources, see G.S. §§ 143-211 et seq.



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 21-1  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, as
amended.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Director of the Division of Environmental
Management (DEM), State Department of Environment, Health and Natural
Resources.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY.  The City Manager.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.  May be:



      (1)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of
Vice President, if the industrial user is a corporation;



      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or



      (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if the representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.



   BILLABLE BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  A user’s loading in pounds of
BOD calculated using the billable flow and concentration of BOD in the
wastewater in excess of 300 mg/l.



   BILLABLE CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The user’s loading in pounds of
COD calculated using the billable flow and concentration of BOD in the
wastewater in excess of 750 mg/l.



   BILLABLE FLOW.  A user’s recorded water usage as determined by the
appropriate water utility, plus measured water from wells and other sources,
and less any sewer-exempt measured water, times the approved percentage
factor for wastewater entering the wastewater disposal system. Residential
users on unmetered wells shall have their BILLABLE FLOW estimated by
averaging the BILLABLE FLOW of other residential users.



   BILLABLE TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN.  A user’s loading in pounds of TKN
calculated using the billable flow and concentration of TKN in the wastewater
in excess of 40 mg/l.



   BILLABLE TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  A user’s loading in pounds of TSS
calculated using the billable flow and concentration of TSS in the wastewater
in excess of 300 mg/l.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of oxygen, expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l) utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20°C.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives sanitary or industrial wastewater only and is
located inside the walls of a building and conveys the wastewater to the
building sewer, which begins five feet outside the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the
collection sewer or other place of disposal and conveys only sanitary or
industrial wastewater.



   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.  National categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment standard.



   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD).  The total amount of oxygen required to
oxidize the organic matter in a waste as described in Standard Methods.



   CLASSES OF USERS.  The division of POTW customers by similar
wastewater characteristics, business function and the like, such as
residential, institutional, industrial, governmental, restaurants, laundries
and the like.



   COLOR.  The true color due to the substances in solution expressed in
parts per million.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH
and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the
POTW NPDES permit, where the POTW is designed to treat those pollutants and,
in fact, does treat those pollutants to the degree required by the NPDES
permit.



   COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.



   DIRECT DISCHARGE.  The discharge of wastewater directly to the waters
of the state.



   DOMESTIC SEWAGE.  The liquid waste from bathrooms, toilet rooms,
kitchens and home laundries.



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat or grease in a physical state so that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility.



   GARBAGE.  The animal or vegetable wastes from the domestic and
commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the
commercial handling, storage and sale of produce.



   HOLDING TANK WASTE.  Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  All pollutants other than compatible
pollutants.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE.  The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317) into the POTW (including holding tank waste).



   INDUSTRIAL USER.  A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to §
402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  Liquid wastes, other than domestic sewage,
resulting from processes or operations employed in industrial establishments.



   INFILTRATION.  The extraneous groundwater entering the wastewater
disposal system through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes,
pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.



   INFLOW.  The surface water entering the wastewater disposal system
from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders; cellar, yard and area
drains; foundation drains; unpolluted cooling water discharges; drains from
springs and swampy areas; manhole covers; cross-connections from storm sewers
and/or combined sewers; catchbasins; stormwaters; surface runoff; street wash
waters or drainage.



   INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirements
of the POTW’s NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulation developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA)
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



   LOCAL GOVERNMENT.  The City of Hamlet, North Carolina acting through
its Mayor and Council.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD. 
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA
in accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which
applies to a specific category of industrial users.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION PERMIT.  A permit issued
under the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) for
discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the United States.



   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD.  Any regulation developed under the authority of § 307(b) of the
Act and 40 C.F.R. part 403.5.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other surface water or groundwater.



   NEW SOURCE.  Any wastewater source, the construction of which is
commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a §
307(c) (33 U.S.C. § 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be
applicable to that source, if the standard is thereafter promulgated within
120 days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is
promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, a NEW SOURCE means any
source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation
of the standard.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS.  All costs, direct and indirect, not
including debt service and capital related expenditures, but inclusive of
expenditures attributable to administration, monitoring, inspections,
reviewing applications, maintenance of equipment and treatment and collection
of wastewaters, necessary to ensure adequate wastewater collection and
treatment on a continuing basis which conforms to applicable regulations and
assures optimal long term facility management.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the
plural where indicated by context.



   pH.  The term used to express the intensity of the acid or base
condition of a solution as determined by Standard Methods, i.e., the
logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter
of solution. A stabilized pH will be considered as a pH which does not change
beyond the specified limits when the waste is subjected to aeration. A pH
value indicates the degree of acidity or alkalinity.



   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing those pollutants into the POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, or process changes of other means, except as prohibited by 40
C.F.R. part 403.6(d).



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed
on an industrial user.



   PRIVATE SEWER.  A sewer which is not owned by the city.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer which is owned and controlled by the city, and
is separate from and does not include sewers owned by other governmental
units.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW).  A treatment works as defined
by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the city. This
definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment
plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected
to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, POTW
shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters from persons outside
the city who are, by contract or agreement with the local government, users
of the POTW.



   QUALIFIED LABORATORY.



      (1)   For commercial laboratories, laboratories currently
certified by the state to perform water and wastewater analyses; or



      (2)   For all other laboratories including in-house
laboratories, laboratories accepted and approved by the local government.



   RECEIVING STREAM.  The body of water, stream or watercourse receiving
the discharge waters from the sewage treatment plant or formed by the waters
discharged from the sewage treatment plant.



   REPLACEMENT COSTS.  The capital expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances necessary during the
service life of the POTW to maintain the capacity and performance for which
those works were designed and constructed.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sanitary and/or industrial
wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions. SANITARY SEWERS are separate and distinct from storm sewers and
are not intended to carry surface runoff, groundwater or other waste
expressly prohibited by this chapter.



   SHALL.  Is mandatory and requires compliance; MAY is permissive and
compliance is subject to the discretion of the local government.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any industrial user of the POTW who has
a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day; or has a
flow greater than 5% of the flow in the POTW; or has in his or her wastes
toxic substances as defined pursuant to § 307 of the Act or state statutes
and rules; or is found by the local government, DEM or the EPA to have
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, on the wastewater disposal system, the quality of sludge, the
system’s effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of wastewater which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period duration longer
than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or
flow during normal operation. Applicable specifically to those discharges
which hydraulically overload the wastewater disposal system or cause
interference.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A classification pursuant
to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.



   STANDARD METHODS.  The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association,
American Water Works Association and Water Pollution Control Federation
and/or any other procedures recognized by the DEM and EPA.



   STORM SEWER.  A sewer that carries only stormwaters, surface runoff,
street wash and drainage, and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastewater
is not intentionally admitted.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The authorized representative of the city.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of or are
in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN).  The sum of organic nitrogen and
ammonia nitrogen content of a wastewater as determined by Standard Methods.



   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS).  Total suspended matter that either
floats on the surface of, or is in suspension with, water, wastewater or
other liquids and is removable by laboratory filtration as described in
Standard Methods.



   TOXIC SUBSTANCES.  Any substances whether gaseous, liquid or solid,
which when discharged into the wastewater disposal system in sufficient
quantities may tend to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or to
constitute a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent
from the POTW. These substances include, but are not limited to, those listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of CWA
307(a) or other acts.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water of a quality equal to or better than the
NPDES effluent criteria in effect, or water that is of sufficient quality
that it would not be in violation of federal or state water quality standards
if the water was discharged into waters of the state.



   USEFUL LIFE.  The anticipated term in years of physical and/or
functional productivity of elements and/or the whole of the wastewater
disposal system.



   USER.  Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the POTW.



   USER CHARGE SYSTEM.  The system of charges levied on users for the
cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement reserve requirements
on new and old wastewater collection and treatment facilities.



   WASTEWATER.  The combination of the liquid and water carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
including polluted cooling water, wash water and infiltration/inflow.



      (1)   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER.  A combination of liquid and
water carried wastes discharged from any industrial establishment and
resulting from any trade or process carried on in that establishment and
shall include the wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling
water.



      (2)   SANITARY WASTEWATER.  The combination of liquid and
water carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing
facilities.



   WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM.  The structures, equipment and processes
owned and controlled by the city (unless specified otherwise) required to
collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastewater and to
dispose of the effluent and accumulated residual solids.



   WATERS OF THE STATE.  All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.



(1972 Code, § 21-32)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1990)



Cross-reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



§ 21-2  ABBREVIATIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter the following abbreviations shall have
the designated meanings.



 



BOD
 
Biochemical oxygen demand


C.F.R.
 
Code of Federal Regulations


COD
 
Chemical oxygen demand


DEM
 
Division of Environmental Management, State Department of Environment, Health
and Natural Resources


EPA
 
Environmental Protection Agency


mg/l
 
Milligrams per liter


NH3-N
 
Ammonia nitrogen


NPDES
 
National pollutant discharge elimination system


POTW
 
Publicly owned treatment works


SIC
 
Standard industrial classification


TKN
 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen


TSS
 
Total suspended solids


U.S.C.
 
United States Code




 



(Ord. passed 7-1-1990)



§ 21-3  SUPERVISION OF UTILITIES DEPARTMENT.



   The Water and Sewer Departments, hereinafter referred to as the
Utilities Department, of the city shall be conducted under the direct
supervision and control of the Council or person duly authorized by the
Council. The Council or person duly authorized by the Council is authorized
from time to time to make those rules and regulations not inconsistent
herewith and to make those changes as may be deemed reasonable.



(1972 Code, § 21-1)



Cross-reference:



   Administration, see ch. 2



§ 21-4  DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES DEPARTMENT; GENERALLY.



   The City Manager shall appoint a Director who, subject to the
supervision and control of the Council, shall operate the Utilities
Department. The Director shall perform those duties as may be prescribed by
this Code or by ordinance or by direction of the City Manager not
inconsistent with the proper operation of the Utilities Department.



(1972 Code, § 21-2)



§ 21-5  DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES DEPARTMENT; INSPECTION AUTHORITY.



   The Director of the Utilities Department or his or her authorized
assistants may enter the premises of any water taker between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to examine the pipes and fixtures, the quantity of
water used and the manner of its use.



(1972 Code, § 21-3)



Statutory reference:



   Administrative search and inspection warrants, see G.S. § 15-27.2



§ 21-6  APPLICATION FOR USE OF WATER; GENERALLY.



   All applications for the use of water must be made at the office of the
Utilities Department on the form prescribed and signed by the owner of the
property to be supplied or his or her duly authorized agent.



(1972 Code, § 21-4)



§ 21-7  APPLICATION FOR USE OF WATER; EFFECT OF APPLICATION.



   The application shall bind the applicant to take water and sewerage
services, and so long as water and sewerage services are used by the
applicant, he or she shall pay to the Director of Utilities the established
rates and comply with all reasonable rules and regulations prescribed by the
city.



(1972 Code, § 21-5)



§ 21-8  DEPOSITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   A deposit shall be required for residential consumers who do
not own the premises where they consume water. Residential consumers outside
the city shall pay a deposit.



   (B)   The unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded upon
closing the account.



   (C)   In the event of a residential consumer’s death, the deposit
may be transferred to the name of the surviving spouse, provided that the
death certificate and proof of residency is furnished.



(1972 Code, § 21-6)  (Ord. passed 6-12-2012)



§ 21-9  FEE FOR FILLING UP WATER LINES.



   The fee for filling up water lines per 1,000 gallons or part thereof
shall be the same as commercial rates. In addition, the customer shall be
liable to pay for all damages to surrounding lines.



(1972 Code, § 21-7)



§ 21-10  ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES, CHARGES.



   All rates, deposits and other charges relating to water and sewage
shall be set by the Council.



(1972 Code, § 21-8) (Ord. passed 6-12-2012)



§ 21-11  RATES FOR UNITS IN APARTMENT HOUSES.



   The rate and deposit for each apartment in each tenement in all blocks
shall be the same as for separate houses, and the minimum rate will be
charged for each apartment in each tenement house. Each apartment in
apartment houses hereafter constructed shall have a separate meter.



(1972 Code, § 21-9)



§ 21-12  PAYMENT OF CONNECTION CHARGES.



   The charges for installation of meters or service lines shall be paid
to the city collections office when an application for a connection is made.



(1972 Code, § 21-10)



§ 21-13  BILLING FOR WATER SERVICES.



   Bills due the Utilities Department shall be rendered monthly and are
payable at the finance and collections office in the city by the fifteenth of
every month. The sending of a bill to the customer shall be the notice
required, and if any bills after 5:00 p.m. on the twentieth of every month, a
late fee is added and the water may be turned off. If water service is
disconnected by the city for nonpayment of charges, the city shall have 24
hours to reinstate water service after all current charges and late fees have
been paid in full.



(1972 Code, § 21-11)  (Ord. passed 6-8-1999)



§ 21-14  ADJUSTMENT OF CLAIMS.



   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized, by and
with the consent of the Council, to adjust and settle claims against the
Utilities Department for abnormal bills due to unavoidable waste, which in
his or her judgment might work an injustice to the consumer unless adjusted.
Adjustments may be given if there has been a leak and only after the leak has
been fixed. Proof of leak being fixed must be shown to qualify for an
adjustment. Proof will be a copy of the plumber’s bill, a copy of receipt
for parts used to make repairs or an approved statement by the City Manager.
An adjustment will be made. The city will adjust the water and sewer to the
average use. The average bill is to be determined by the Water Department.
All subsequent bills will be charged the full amount.



(1972 Code, § 21-12)



§ 21-15  CONNECTIONS MADE BY AUTHORIZED PERSONS ONLY.



   (A)   No person except a properly authorized agent of the city shall
tap or make any connection with the main or distribution pipes of the
waterworks system.



   (B)   No person shall make connection with any service pipe until an
application has been made for the same and permit granted, at which time all
bills chargeable against the connection must be paid. Any repair or
alteration to water or sewer lines within the city street right-of-way shall
be done only by permit given by the Director of Utilities or the City Manager.



(1972 Code, § 21-13)



§ 21-16  LICENSED PLUMBER TO INSTALL LINES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   From property lines, where water lines are run by the Utilities
Department, the property owner shall have his or her water and sewage lines
installed by a plumber licensed by the city. The material used shall be
approved by the Director of the Utilities Department.



(1972 Code, § 21-14)



§ 21-17  INSPECTIONS OF FIXTURES BY PLUMBING INSPECTOR.



   The water shall not be turned on to any premises where a meter is used
until the plumbing and fixtures have been inspected and approved by the
Plumbing Inspector who shall be notified by the owner or tenant that the
premises are ready for inspection. The Plumbing Inspector shall then notify
the Utilities Department that water may be turned on.



(1972 Code, § 21-15)



§ 21-18  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   The fire hydrants are for the use of the Fire Department and Street
Sprinkling Division and are not to be used by any other person for any
purpose without permission in writing from the Superintendent of the Water
Department. If any hydrant is damaged, notice must be sent at once to the
office of the Utilities Department.



(1972 Code, § 21-16)



Cross-reference:



   Fire prevention and protection, see ch. 9



§ 21-19  UNNECESSARY USE OF WATER RESTRICTED.



   No person shall fill any reservoir or use a stream of water larger than
two inches for washing or flushing purposes without written permission from
the Director of the Utilities Department.



(1972 Code, § 21-17)



§ 21-20  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.



   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may have his or her
water turned off, and all connections from the premises severed after notice.
The city shall incur no liability whatever for turning off the water under
these circumstances.



(1972 Code, § 21-18)



ARTICLE II:  WATER SYSTEM



§ 21-46  CONNECTIONS GENERALLY.



   (A)   The city, through the Utilities Department, will furnish all
material and make all connections to the water mains and install all water
service pipes from the mains to the inside of the property line.



   (B)   The following regulations shall apply to connections generally.



      (1)   Any connections for fire protection shall be made by the
Utilities Department. All plans for private fire protection shall be
submitted to and a permit obtained from the Utilities Department before an
installation or an extension to an existing installation is made.



      (2)   No person shall make a cross-connection between the
Water Department’s supply and a private well, spring or other source. Where
the customer has another source of water in addition to that of the Utilities
Department, there shall be no physical connection between the two supplies.



      (3)   No person shall make a cross-connection between the city
water lines and air lines used for washing automobiles or for any other
purpose. Where water passes through recirculating systems such as cooling
towers and the like, there shall be no physical connection between the
waterworks system and the pressure lines from the recirculating system.



      (4)   The city reserves the right to require all hotels,
office buildings, factories and the like, which require continuity of
service, to have at least two separate sources of supply.



      (5)   No customer shall install a bypass to a meter to provide
continuity of service. In case continuity is required, a separate source with
a duplicate meter installation shall be made.



(1972 Code, § 21-19)



§ 21-47  SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise herein provided, in the introduction of water from
the city waterworks into any house or lot, there shall be a separate tap or
connection with the water pipe of the city and a separate service pipe for
each house or lot, and no service pipe shall be used for supplying more than
one house.



(1972 Code, § 21-20)



§ 21-48  METERING WATER SUPPLY; AUTHORITY.



   The city reserves the right to meter any existing unmetered connection
and to charge therefor the same prices for other water use.



(1972 Code, § 21-21)



§ 21-49  METERING WATER SUPPLY; CHARGES FOR ALL WATER PASSING THROUGH METER.



   Consumers using meters shall have their entire water supply to the
premises metered, and they shall be charged for all water that passes through
the meter whether used or wasted.



(1972 Code, § 21-22)



§ 21-50  METERING WATER SUPPLY; METER TO SERVE ONE CUSTOMER ONLY.



   Water shall not be supplied to more than one party through a single
meter stop.



(1972 Code, § 21-23)



§ 21-51  APPROVAL OF WATER LINE ALTERATIONS.



   No person shall in any way alter or extend any unmetered water lines
which connect with the Utilities Department’s distribution lines unless the
plan therefor has been fully approved in writing by the Director of the
Utilities Department. Any lines heretofore altered or extended in a manner
contrary to the rules and regulations of the Utilities Department shall be
made to conform within 90 days after notice from the Superintendent to do so.



(1972 Code, § 21-24)



§ 21-52  STOP AND WASTE COCK REQUIRED; MAINTENANCE OF FIXTURES AND THE
LIKE; CUTOFF FEE.



   (A)   There shall be installed on each line at a convenient place a
stop and waste cock for the control of the water service by the property
owner or tenant.



   (B)   The pipe and connections in the street will be cared for by
the Utilities Department without expense to the consumer or owner of the
property. There shall be charged a fee for cutting water off or on when so
requested by the consumer.



   (C)   All water and sewerage lines and fixtures within the premises
must be kept in repair by the property owner or consumer.



(1972 Code, § 21-25)



§ 21-53  REFUNDS AND DAMAGES FOR WATER STOPPAGE.



   No person shall be entitled to damages nor to have any portion of a
payment refunded for any stoppage of water caused by additions, accidents,
repairs or for any other necessary stoppage in the city system.



(1972 Code, § 21-26)



§ 21-54  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF FACILITIES.



   No owner, agent or tenant of any premises shall turn on, use or permit
the use of any city water through any of the city water facilities where
service has been discontinued, or otherwise use the city water facilities
without first having obtained written authorization from the Director of the
Utilities Department.



(1972 Code, § 21-27)



§ 21-55  RESALE OF WATER PROHIBITED.



   No water taker will be allowed to supply or sell water, either before
or after using, to other persons or families, nor shall any person take away
or carry water from any hydrant, watering trough or public fountain without
the consent in writing of the Director of the Utilities Department.



(1972 Code, § 21-28)



§ 21-56  SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.



   The City Manager is hereby authorized at his or her discretion to
furnish water from the water mains of the city to persons applying therefor
in territory adjacent to the city; provided, that no person other than the
proper authorized agents of the City Manager shall tap or make any
connections with the main or distribution pipes of the Utilities Department.
The Council at its pleasure may discontinue the furnishing of water in those
pipes.



(1972 Code, § 21-29)  (Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



Cross-reference:



   Petition for annexation of property, see § 21-255



§ 21-57  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE TO USERS OUTSIDE CITY UPON FAILURE TO
PAY FEES.



   The Director of the Utilities Department is hereby authorized to cut
off all users of water outside the city that do not pay sewerage fees in
accordance with the requirements of the city. The water so turned off will
not be again turned on except upon the payment of the sewerage fee and an
additional fee.



(1972 Code, § 21-30)



§ 21-58  ALLOCATION OF COST OF REPLACING SMALLER LINE.



   If the line to be installed by the applicant is larger than the
existing line at the point where the applicant is to connect, and it is
determined by the city that the existing smaller line will have to be
replaced in order to provide adequate pressure and flow for the applicant and
the present users, the additional cost of the replacement of the existing
line from the applicant’s point of connection to the point where there
exists a line the size of or larger than the line to be installed shall be
shared 50% by the applicant and 50% by the city.



(1972 Code, § 21-31)



§ 21-59  CLIMBING ON, LOITERING NEAR, DEFACING WATER TANKS OR TOWERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for all persons, except city employees,
contractors and agents of the city acting within the course and scope of
their employment or contract, to climb upon or attempt to climb upon any
water tanks and towers owned by the city; to walk upon or loiter upon the
ground around or beneath any water tank or tower; or to mark, paint or
otherwise deface in any way any water tank or tower.



   (B)   This section is enacted in addition to the applicable trespass
laws of the state.



(Ord. passed 9-14-1979)



§ 21-60  TEMPORARY CUTOFF BY REQUEST OF CUSTOMER.



   (A)   If a customer requests that his or her water services be
temporarily cut off, there will be no charge when the customer requests it to
be cut back on.



   (B)   However, if this is a frequent request (more than two times in
one month), there will be a fee for the third and following times.



§ 21-61  TAMPERING WITH CITY PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to alter,
tamper with or bypass a meter which has been installed for the purpose of
measuring the use of water that has been provided by the city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly use water passing
through a tampered meter.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to reconnect or
otherwise turn back on a water meter lawfully disconnected by the city.



   (D)   (1)   In lieu of criminal charges, the city may at its
option charge for violation of any of the above; a tampering fee for each
separate violation; payment of water charges based on estimated water use
illegally obtained; and the meter removed until the account and charges are
paid in full.



      (2)   Charges shall be as follows:



 

Broken lock
 

$50



Tampering


   First offense
 

$150



   Second offense
 

$200



    Third offense or more
 

$250




 



(Ord. passed 6-8-1999; Ord. passed 10-9-2018)



§ 21-62  FIRE LINE CONNECTIONS TO BE METERED.



   (A)   There shall be installed on each fire line, at a convenient
place, a water meter, to measure the usage through the fire line.



   (B)   Consumers shall be charged for all water that passes through
the meter whether used or wasted except for actual fire suppression purposes.



(Ord. passed 7-9-1996)



§ 21-63  CUTOFF AND BACKFLOW PREVENTERS REQUIRED ON PROPERTY OWNERS SIDE OF
METER.



   (A)   There shall be installed, at the owners’ expense, on all new
construction a cutoff valve on the property owners’ or tenants’ side of
the meter for the control of the water service by the property owner or
tenant. This cut off shall be immediately installed adjacent to the city’s
water meter.



   (B)   There shall be installed, at the owners’ expense, on all new
construction a backflow preventer (check valve) on the property owners or
tenants side of the meter. This check valve shall be installed immediately
adjacent to the property owners’ or tenants’ cutoff valve.



(Ord. passed 7-9-1996)



ARTICLE III:  SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM GENERALLY



§ 21-81  USE OF SEPTIC TANKS.



   (A)   Any person owning a building of human habitation or occupancy
or a building where any person is employed within the corporate limits, upon
a lot which does not adjoin a street along which is located a public sanitary
sewer accessible within 200 feet of the lot, shall, within 30 days from the
date of legal notice served by the Director of Utilities, provide the house
or building with water carried sewer service by installing a septic tank
approved by the health authorities of the county and the state.



   (B)   No owner or person in charge or control of any lot or premises
thereafter shall use any dry closet or privy in connection with the building
or cause, permit or suffer the same to be used by any person, whether tenant
or otherwise.



(1972 Code, § 21-34)



§ 21-82  SEPARATE CONNECTIONS FOR EACH BUILDING.



   (A)   Every building abutting on any sewer main and requiring a
sewer connection shall be separately and independently connected; except,
that in those cases where laterals have already been laid in macadam or
improved streets from the main, with provision having been made for the
building, the connection may be made to an existing lateral.



   (B)   If the building is on a macadam or improved street where
laterals have not been laid, the connection may be made to any convenient
lateral.



(1972 Code, § 21-35)



§ 21-83  CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF SEWERS; PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   The city may charge a fee for any permit for construction or repair of
sewer connections, and the permit shall be obtained before any work is done.



(1972 Code, § 21-36)



§ 21-84  CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF SEWERS; PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Every application for a permit for sewer construction or sewer repairs
shall be made on forms approved by the Council and shall be obtained from the
Director of Utilities by the owner of the property or by some person in his
or her behalf.



(1972 Code, § 21-37)



§ 21-85  CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF SEWERS; DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER.



   Any construction or repair to any sewer connection shall be made by the
property owner, together with the connection to the main, and the city shall
have no cost in the construction of the improvement or repair. No plumber or
contractor shall cover any part of the work done by him or her until the same
has been inspected and approved by the Director of Utilities.



(1972 Code, § 21-38)



§ 21-86  CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF SEWERS; DUTY OF CITY.



   The city shall make cuts in the pavement and replace the same, but the
contractor or owner shall fill all excavations and shall well settle the same
so that the paving may be replaced without any filling or grading being done
by the city. If any contractor or owner fails to fill any excavations thus
made, and it becomes necessary for the city to do work or incur expense in
making the fill, the cost of the work shall be charged to the contractor and
the owner, and both parties shall be responsible for the payment thereof.



(1972 Code, § 21-39)



§ 21-87  REPAIRS TO EXISTING LATERALS AND LINES.



   Any repairs to existing sewer laterals and lines from the existing city
maintained line or sewer connections already installed that may be necessary
shall be at the expense of the property owner, and the city shall not be
responsible for any expense in making the repairs.



(1972 Code, § 21-40)



§ 21-88  APPEAL FROM RULING OF DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES.



   The Director of Utilities may make orders and give instructions
relating to the construction or repair of any sewer connection, but any
property owner may appeal from the rulings of the Inspector and may, within
ten days after the ruling, file with the City Clerk his or her written
objections, specifically stating his or her grounds for appeal. Thereafter a
hearing shall be held by the City Manager, at which time the property owner
and the Director shall be present and give their testimony regarding the
appeal. This ruling may be appealed to the City Council, whose decision shall
be final.



(1972 Code, § 21-41)



§ 21-89  DAMAGING, DEFACING AND THE LIKE, SEWER SYSTEM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person maliciously, willfully or
negligently to break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
part of the public sewer system.



(1972 Code, § 21-42)



§ 21-90  FURNISHING OF SEWER SERVICE ONLY.



   If the applicant provides his or her own water or receives water from
some source other than the city, he or she and the Council shall enter into a
contract and agreement under the terms of which the applicant shall guarantee
to the city payment of all sewer service charges which may be assessed
against him or her; provided, that the city shall not be held responsible for
any lack of water pressure or flow to the applicant when the city does not
furnish the applicant with water services. If after water or sewer
connections have been made, it is determined that either the water or sewer
connections involved are inadequate because of the size of the applicant’s
installation, the additional cost of providing adequate water and sewer
service shall be assumed fully by the applicant.



(1972 Code, § 21-43)



§ 21-91  PROPERTY OWNER TO FURNISH CLEANOUT PLUGS.



   All property owners requesting connections to city sewer shall furnish,
at their expense, cleanout plugs on their property according to
specifications of the city.



(1972 Code, § 21-44)



§ 21-92  CERTAIN CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall directly or indirectly connect any open gutter,
rainwater conductor, cesspool or privy vault with any public sewer.



(1972 Code, § 21-45)



§ 21-93  BRANCH SEWERS MAY BE REQUIRED.



   When it is desirable to improve any street by paving, the Council may
order owners of property abutting the street to lay branch sewers to the
inside property line, and any failure to comply with this order shall subject
the owner to the penalties provided for a violation of any provision of this
Code.



(1972 Code, § 21-46)



§ 21-94  CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE WHERE OPENING PROVIDED.



   All connections made with sewers having Ys already prepared for lot
connections shall connect with these Ys and not put in others without special
permit from the Director of Utilities. Connections shall be made to all Ys
left in front of property and extended inside of the sidewalk, if the street
is being permanently improved.



(1972 Code, § 21-47)



§ 21-95  CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY; FEE.



   Any person who owns or controls premises located beyond the city limits
and who desires to install a plumbing system for discharging domestic sewage
or industrial waste into the sanitary sewers of the city may do so by
complying with the requirements of this chapter and by paying a monthly sewer
use charge as determined by the City Council.



(1972 Code, § 21-54)



§ 21-96  MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.



   The volume of flow used in computing industrial waste surcharges shall
be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter
reading maintained by the City Utilities Department.



(1972 Code, § 21-57)



§ 21-97  SURCHARGE FOR TREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE; BILLING; DELINQUENCY.



   (A)   The combined surcharge for treatment of industrial waste shall
be billed and payable monthly on a separate bill rendered to the proper
person by the City Utilities Department.



   (B)   If a person who discharges wastes into the city sanitary sewer
system does not procure his or her water supply from the city becomes
delinquent in his or her payment of the surcharge, his or her connection with
the sewer system shall be severed and will only be reconnected at his or her
expense.



(1972 Code, § 21-62)



§ 21-98  TAMPERING WITH, DAMAGING TESTING EQUIPMENT.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any equipment or materials belonging
to the city used for the purpose of making tests or examinations and left
upon the premises of a person discharging wastes into the sewers.



(1972 Code, § 21-63)



ARTICLE IV:  SEWER USE



Division 1:  Generally



§ 21-111  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the
general pretreatment regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403).



   (B)   The objectives of this article are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately
treated, into any waters of the state or otherwise be incompatible with the
system;



      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludges from the municipal system;



      (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected
by sewage, sludge and effluent in the course of their employment and the
general public;



      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES
or nondischarge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and
any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is
subject.



   (C)   This article provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance
of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.



   (D)   This article shall apply to all users of the municipal
wastewater system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW Director
shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any
powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be delegated by the
POTW Director to other city personnel. By discharging wastewater into the
wastewater system, industrial users located outside the city limits agree to
comply with the terms and conditions established in this article, as well as
any permits, enforcement actions or orders issued hereunder.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. passed 3-13-2001;
Ord. passed 5-14-2002)



Editor’s note:



   Ord. 93-009 passed 7-6-1993, contains the SUO Review Checklist, which
is on record and available for public inspection in the office of the City
Clerk.



§ 21-112  DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.



   (A)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated.



      ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Director of the Division of
Environmental Management of the State Department of Environment, Health and
Natural Resources or his or her designee.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.



         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation,
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE means:



            1.   The President, Secretary or a Vice President
of the corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the
corporation; or



            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter
1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE means a general partner or the
proprietor, respectively.



         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or
local government facility, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE means a director or
the highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.



         (d)   The individuals described in subsections (a)
through (c) above may designate another AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or
position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
city.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., milligrams per liter (mg/l)).



      BUILDING SEWER.  A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.



      BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of an industrial user’s treatment facility.



      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.  Federal categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment standard.



      COLOR.  The true color due to the substances in solution
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) or those units as the POTW Director
specifies.



      CONTROL AUTHORITY.  Refers to the approval authority, as defined
above or the POTW Director.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be
used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official
of that agency.



      FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD.  Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated
by EPA in accordance with §§ 3070(d) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears
in 40 C.F.R. chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471.



      FEDERAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD.  Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 21-121 of this article and are
developed under the authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. part
403.5.



      GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over the period of
time not to exceed 15 minutes.



      HOLDING TANK WASTE.  Any waste from holding tanks, including,
but not limited to, holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE.  The discharge or the
introduction from any nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or
(d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank
waste discharged into the system).



      INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any person that is a source of indirect
discharge.



      INFLOW.  Water other than sewage that enters a sanitary sewer
system including water entering through a building sewer from sources such as
roof leaders, collar drains, yard drains, area drains, drains from springs
and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections between storm sewer and
sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, surface runoff,
street wash waters or drainage.



      INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition or disruption of the POTW
treatment processes, operations or its sludge process, use or disposal, which
causes or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES
or nondischarge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations
or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by
the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary
Act (MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA)
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



      MEDICAL WASTE.  Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and
dialysis wastes.



      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES
PERMIT.  A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342),
or pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation
from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to that source
if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307(c),
provided that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source
is located results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of subsections (a)2. or (a)3. above but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a
NEW SOURCE has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun or caused to begin as part of a
continuous on-site construction program:



               a.   Any placement, assembly or installation
of facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Significant site preparation work,
including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures
or facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation
of new source facilities or equipment.



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can
be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering and design studies, do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this definition.



      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling that does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.



      NONDISCHARGE PERMIT.  A disposal system permit issued by the
state pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1.



      NONDOMESTIC DISCHARGE.  Any substances other than human
excrement and household gray water (shower, dishwashing operations and the
like). discharged into the POTW. Common characteristics of nondomestic
pollutants in wastewater discharges include, but are not limited to pH,
temperature, total suspended residue (solids), turbidity, BOD, COD, toxicity,
odor and color.



      PASS THROUGH.  A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of
the state in quantities or concentrations that, alone or with discharges from
other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation, of the POTW’s NPDES or nondischarge permit or a
downstream water quality standard.



      PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state and local government entities.



      pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the
reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter
of solution.



      POLLUTANT.  Any waste as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18) and
dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of
wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity
or odor).



      POTW DIRECTOR.  The City Manager.



      POTW TREATMENT PLANT.  The portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.



      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing those pollution into a POTW. The reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or
process changes or other means, except by diluting the concentration of the
pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM.  The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from nondomestic sources developed by the city in
compliance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.8 and approved by the approval authority
as authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part
403.11.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical standards and local limits.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
SYSTEM.  A treatment works as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §
1292), which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes
any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.
It also includes pipes, sewers or other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this article,
POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, or
in any other way, users of the POTW.



      SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer intended to receive domestic sewage and
industrial waste, without the admixture of surface water and stormwater.



      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the industrial user’s treatment facilities that causes
them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources that can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a
bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays
in production.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any industrial user of the
wastewater disposal system who:



         (a)   Has an average daily process wastewater flow of
25,000 gallons or more;



         (b)   Contributes more than 5% of any design or
treatment capacity (i.e., allowable pollutant load) of the wastewater
treatment plant receiving the indirect discharge;



         (c)   Is required to meet a national categorical
pretreatment standard; or



         (d)   Is found by the city, the Division of
Environmental Management or the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) to have the potential for impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industrial users, on the wastewater treatment system, the
quality of sludge, the system’s effluence quality or compliance with any
pretreatment standards or requirements.



      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or REPORTABLE NONCOMPLIANCE.  A status
of SIGNIFICANT OR REPORTABLE NONCOMPLIANCE is defined as follows.



         (a)   Violations of wastewater discharge limits.



            1.   Chronic violations. Sixty-six percent or more
of the measurements exceed (by any magnitude) the same daily maximum limit or
the same average limit in a six-month period;



            2.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations.
Thirty-three percent or more of the measurements are equal to or more than
the TRC times the limit (maximum or average) in a six-month period. For
conventional pollutant parameters (BOD, TSS, fats/oil and grease), TRC = 1.4,
for all other pollutants parameters, TRC = 1.2;



            3.   Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit
(average or daily maximum) that the control authority believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through;
or endangered the health of the sewage treatment plant personnel or the
public; and



            4.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment and has
resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or
prevent a discharge.



         (b)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones,
contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting
construction, completing construction and attaining final compliance by 90
days or more after the schedule date;



         (c)   Failure to provide reports for compliance
schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day
compliance reports and periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the
due date;



         (d)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and



         (e)   Any other violation or group of violations that
the control authority considers to be significant.



      SLUG LOAD.  Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration that
could cause a violation of the specific discharge prohibitions in § 21-121.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.



      STORMWATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



      SUPERINTENDENT.  The person designated by the city to supervise
the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his or her duly
authorized representative.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



      UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An UPSET does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



      USER.  Any person who contributes, causes or has responsible
charge over the contribution of wastewater into the POTW including persons
who discharge wastewater from mobile sources.



      WASTEWATER.  The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
waste from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile
sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether
treated or untreated, that are contributed into or permitted to enter the
POTW.



      WASTEWATER PERMIT.  The meaning as set forth in § 21-152.



      WATERS OF THE STATE.  All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.



   (B)   This article is gender neutral with respect to masculine and
feminine gender. References using either the masculine or feminine gender
shall apply to both genders.



   (C)   SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive or discretionary.



   (D)   The use of the singular shall be construed to include the
plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context
of their use.



   (E)   The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall
have the designated meanings.



 



BOD
 
Biochemical oxygen demand


C.F.R.
 
Code of Federal Regulations


COD
 
Chemical oxygen demand


EPA
 
Environmental Protection Agency


gpd
 
Gallons per day


G.S.
 
General Statutes


l
 
Liter


mg
 
Milligrams


mg/l
 
Milligrams per liter


NCAC
 
State Administrative Code


NPDES
 
National pollution discharge elimination system


O & M
 
Operation and maintenance


POTW
 
Publicly owned treatment works


RCRA
 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act


SIC
 
Standard Industrial Classification


SWDA
 
Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.)


TKN
 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen


TSS
 
Total suspended solids


U.S.C.
 
United States Code




 



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. passed 3-13-2001;
Ord. passed 5-14-2002)



Cross-reference:



   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see § 1-2



Division 2:  General Sewer Use Requirements



§ 21-121  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions.  No person shall contribute or cause to
be contributed into the POTW, either directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater that causes interference or pass through. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a
significant industrial user or subject to any federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:



      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases, with a closed cup flash
point of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
C.F.R. part 261.21, including gasoline, kerosene, benzene and naphtha, or
that by their nature or quantity are of sufficient concentration, either
alone or with interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion
in the POTW, or be injurious in any way to the POTW or its personnel, or to
the operation of the POTW. At no time, shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter taken of a wastewater either at the point of discharge
into the system or causing at any point in the system be more than 5% nor any
single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter;



      (2)   Solid or viscous substances, including ground paper
products, wood, glass, ashes, cinders, hair, rags, mud, straw, metal and
whole blood, in amounts that will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch
in any dimension;



      (3)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products
of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through;



      (4)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than
9.0 standard units except by permit authorization, or wastewater having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the POTW or equipment;



      (5)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including
oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD and the like) in sufficient quantity, either
by flow or concentration, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, to cause interfere with the POTW;



      (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F
(55°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment
plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature of the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F
(60°C);



      (7)   Any pollutants that result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;



      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the POTW Director in accordance with § 21-129;



      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids or
other wastewater that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair;



      (10)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or
any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits
issued under § 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used;



      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (12)   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, inflow, swimming pool drainage,
condensate, deionized water, cooling water and unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW Director;



      (13)   Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l;



      (14)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (15)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the POTW Director in a wastewater discharge permit;



      (16)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts or other
chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with
the municipal wastewater system;



      (17)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous
waste according to 40 C.F.R. part 261; if not disposed of in a sewer except
as may be specifically authorized by the POTW Director;



      (18)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to
violate state water quality standards for toxic substances as described in
15A NCAC 2B.0200;



      (19)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (20)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy;



      (21)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents
or other substances that may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;



      (22)   Any wastewater that imparts objectionable color which
cannot be removed by the POTW’s treatment process;



      (23)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater or other wastes
prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in a manner that
they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or
materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user’s
pretreatment facility before connecting with the system; and



      (24)   When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in those
amounts that may cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or
pass through, the POTW Director shall:



         (a)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact
contribution on the POTW in accordance with §§ 21-191 through 21-194; and



         (b)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §§
21-151 and 21-152 for the user to protect the POTW from interference or pass
through.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. passed 3-13-2001;
Ord. passed 5-14-2002)



§ 21-122  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to
comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 C.F.R. chapter 1,
subchapter N, parts 405 through 471 and incorporated herein.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.6(c).



   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW
Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream
formula in 40 C.F.R. part 403.6(e).



   (C)   An industrial user may obtain a variance from a categorical
pretreatment standard if the industrial user can prove, pursuant to the
procedural and substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. part 403.13, that factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors
considered by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   An industrial user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.15.



(Ord. passed 1-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-123  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user
discharging wastewater containing in excess of the following:



 




300 mg/l

 

BOD5




750 mg/l

 

COD




300 mg/l

 

TSS




40 mg/l

 

TKN




0.003 mg/l

 

Arsenic




0.003 mg/l

 

Cadmium




0.05 mg/l

 

Total chromium




0.061 mg/l

 

Copper




0.049 mg/l

 

Lead




0.0003 mg/l

 

Mercury




0.021 mg/l

 

Nickel




0.005 mg/l

 

Silver




0.175 mg/l

 

Zinc




0.041 mg/l

 

Cyanide





 



   (B)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop
user-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW’s maximum
allowable headworks loading is not exceeded for particular pollutants of
concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern
shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may impose mass
limits in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limits above.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. passed 3-13-2001;
Ord. passed 5-14-2002)



§ 21-124  STATE REQUIREMENTS.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations
or those in this article.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-125  RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements
which are more stringent than those required by either state or federal
regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
21-111 or the general and specific prohibitions in §  21-121, as is allowed
by 40 C.F.R. part 403.4.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-126  DILUTION.



   No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in
any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained
in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-127  PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Industrial users shall provide
wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and wastewater
permits issued under § 21-152, and shall achieve compliance with all federal
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out
in § 21-121 within the time limitations as specified by the EPA, the state
or the POTW Director, whichever is more stringent.



      (1)   Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense.



      (2)   Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted for review to the city and/or the
state, as ordered by the POTW Director. The authorization to construct the
pretreatment facilities shall be issued by the city and/or the state, also as
ordered by the POTW Director.



      (3)   The review of these plans and operating procedures shall
in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility
as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the
provisions of this article.



      (4)   Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the POTW Director
prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.



   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.



      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require
certain users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate
that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate
and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams, and require other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements
of this article.



      (2)   The POTW Director may require any industrial user
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at
their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.



      (3)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of fat, oil, grease or
sand except that the interceptors shall not be required for residential
users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the
POTW Director and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. The interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.



      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-128  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   At least once every two years, the POTW Director shall
evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental
discharge/slug control plan. The POTW Director may require any user to
develop, submit for approval and implement a plan. Alternatively, the POTW
Director may develop a plan for any user.



   (B)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director
of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 21-166; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. These procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-129  HAULED WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the POTW Director, and at those times as are
established by the POTW Director. The waste shall not violate §§ 21-121
through 21-134 or any other requirements established by the city. The POTW
Director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge
permits. The POTW Director also may prohibit the disposal of septic tank
waste.



   (B)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to
obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require generators
of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW
Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this article.



   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any
load prior to discharge.



   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form
for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address
of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-130  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGES.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any element or
appurtenances of the POTW including equipment belonging to the city used for
the purposes of making tests or examinations and left upon the premises of a
person discharging wastes into the sewers.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-131  CONNECTING TO SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. Every person, group
of persons, firm or corporation, owning a dwelling, building or other
structure that is used for human habitation or occupancy within the POTW’s
jurisdiction, and is situated on a lot or parcel of land that abuts or
adjoins a street or other public way, and along which is located a sanitary
sewer of the city, shall connect the dwelling or structure to the sewer
system.



   (B)   A connection shall not be required to the system unless the
lot or parcel of land on which the dwelling, building or structure is
situated is accessible within 200 feet of the sewer system. In addition, no
person shall be required to cross the private property of any other person to
make the connection.



   (C)   Owners of properties whereupon exists a dwelling, building or
other structure that is used for human habitation or occupancy that is not
accessible to the sewer system for the reason they are more than 200 feet
therefrom or would require crossing another person’s private property to
make connection shall install septic tanks or other facilities in accordance
with the regulations of the County Health Department. Installation of the
septic tank or other facility must also receive the approval of the POTW
Director prior to construction of the facilities.



   (D)   Where connections are required, all toilets, sinks and other
plumbing fixtures shall be installed, arranged or rearranged to drain into
the sanitary sewer.



   (E)   In cases where a sanitary sewer is constructed where none
before existed, the connection must be made within 90 days of completion of
the sewer construction.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-132  PROHIBITION OF DISCHARGE OF WASTEWATER TO SURFACE COURSES.



   The discharge of treated or untreated domestic sewage or industrial
wastes to any storm sewer, pond, open ditch, stream or watercourse is not
allowed within the POTW’s jurisdictional area, except that uncontaminated
noncontact cooling water may be discharged, provided that the discharge is
constructed and operated within the laws of the state. However, where the
City Council decides that it is not in the best interest of the city to
accept any particular industrial waste into its sanitary sewer, the waste may
be discharged within the city provided the discharge meets the requirements
of the state and the discharge is approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-133  CONNECTING UNPOLLUTED WATERS.



   No person shall make any connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, area drains or other sources of inflow, groundwater or
other unpolluted waters to a building sewer or building drain which in turn
is connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer. Unpolluted
waters may be discharged to city storm sewers and drainage ditches subject to
approval of the POTW Director and provided that all required federal, state
and local permits required for a discharge are secured by the person causing
the discharge.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-134  REGULATION OF BUILDING OF SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.



   All connections to the sanitary sewer system under the control of and
operated by the city shall be made by authorized employees of the city in
accordance with requirements of the State Plumbing Code, city specifications
and all other applicable state and federal regulations. If authorized by the
City Council, connections may be made by plumbers licensed to perform
plumbing work in the state. Any sewer connection made by an authorized
licensed plumber shall be inspected by the POTW Director after the work has
been completed and prior to the time the connection is covered.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



Division 3:  User Charge System



§ 21-141  USER CHARGES.



   (A)   Authority.  Pursuant to the provisions of Pub. L. No. 92-500
§ 240(b) and subsequent amendments to it, the city, having received
Environmental Protection Agency financial assistance for the construction of
treatment works, shall adopt a system of charges to assure that each user
pays a share of the annual administration, operation and maintenance
(including replacement) costs of the POTW.



   (B)   Intent.  The intent of the user charges is to equitably
distribute the cost of administration, operation and maintenance of the POTW
to each user proportional to the amount of wastewater treatment service each
user receives; and to promote self-sufficiency of the POTW with respect to
administration, operation and maintenance costs.



   (C)   Definition.  The term REPLACEMENT referred to in subsection
(A) above is defined as those expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances that are necessary during the service
life of the treatment works to maintain the treatment works capacity and
performance. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes replacement.



   (D)   User class.  Each user shall be charged a share of the
treatment works operation and maintenance cost based on the measured
proportional contribution to the treatment works loading. Generally, the user
charge will be dependent upon flow insofar as BOD, COD, TSS and other
pollutant contributions discharged by all users are approximately equal.
Where pollutants exceed the range of concentration of these pollutants in
normal domestic sewage, a surcharge will be added to the base charge. The
models used in calculating the user charge are defined in subsection (F)
below. Charges for flow to the treatment plant not directly attributable to
the users shall be distributed among all users of the treatment plant based
upon the volume of flow of the users.



   (E)   User charge criteria. The user charge system shall be approved
by the Regional Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and
shall be maintained by the city in accordance with the following requirements.



      (1)   The user charge system must result in the distribution
of the cost of operation and maintenance of treatment works within the city
jurisdiction to each user (or user class) in proportion to the user’s
contribution to the total wastewater loading of the treatment works. Factors
such as strength, volume and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be
considered and included as the basis for the user’s contribution to ensure
a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs to each user
(or user class).



      (2)   The user charge system must generate sufficient revenue
to offset the cost of all treatment works operation and maintenance provided
by the city.



   (F)   Model user charge system.



      (1)   The user charge system adopted by the city shall result
in the equitable distribution of annual treatment works administration,
operation and maintenance costs to each user (or user class) in approximate
proportion to each user’s (or user class’) contribution towards the total
wastewater loading of the treatment works. The following user charge models
shall be used for this purpose.



      (2)   The symbols used in the models are as defined below:



         (a)   Cf = Total fixed operation and maintenance (O & M)
costs per unit of time;



         (b)   Ct = Total variable operation and maintenance (O &
M) costs per unit of time;



         (c)   Cu = A user’s charge for O & M per unit of time;



         (d)   Cs = A surcharge for wastewaters of excessive
strength;



         (e)   Vu = Volume contribution from a user per unit of
time;



         (f)   Vt = Total volume contribution from all users per
unit of time;



         (g)   Bc = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD);



         (h)   B = Contribution of BOD from a user above a base
level;



         (i)   Sc = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of
suspended solids;



         (j)   S = Contribution of SS from a user above a base
level;



         (k)   Nc = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of ammonia;



         (l)   N = Concentration of ammonia from a user above a
base level;



         (m)   Pc = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of any
pollutant having identifiable contributions to overall treatment costs; and



         (n)   P = Concentration of a pollutant from a user above
a base level.



      (3)   Models.



         (a)   Model No. 1.  Whereas the treatment works is
primarily flow dependent as the BOD, suspended solids and other pollutant
concentrations discharged by the majority of users are approximately equal;
therefore, the user charge will be developed on a volume basis in accordance
with the model below:



 

C u =           Cf          +           Vu Ct         

       No. of Users                  Vt



 



         (b)   Model No. 2.  When determined by the city that
BOD, COD, TSS, ammonia and any other appropriate pollutant concentrations
from a user exceed the range of concentration of these pollutants typical
found in normal domestic sewage, a surcharge calculated by means of Model No.
1 shall be levied in addition to the base sewer use charge. The surcharge
shall be computed by the model below:



 

C s = [Bc(B) + Sc(S) + Nc(N) + Pc(P)]



 



   (G)   Baseline pollutant concentrations.  Baseline pollutant
concentrations shall be 300 mg/l for BOD5, 750 mg/l for COD, 300 mg/l TSS and
40 mg/l for TKN or as established by the POTW Director and held as a standard
for the city.



   (H)   Costs for operation and maintenance.  Model No. 1 shall
include all costs for operation and maintenance associated with extraneous
flows not attributable to any one user class, thereby distributing these
costs to all users.



   (I)   Other considerations.  User charges may be established based
on a percentage of the charge for water usage. However, the unit rate sewer
charge for the largest volume users must be as great as or greater than the
unit cost of operation and maintenance (excluding debt service). In any
event, a surcharge shall still be levied in accordance with the provisions of
Model No. 2 above. The system of user charges for the wastewater treatment
system shall be based on total annual system costs, including operation and
maintenance expenses.



   (J)   Notification.  Each user shall be notified no less often than
annually of the rates for user charges. The notification shall be done in
conjunction with a regular bill, and, if the regular bill also includes
charges for other services, shall clearly identify the portion of the bill
attributable to wastewater user charges.



   (K)   Annual review.  The City Council shall review annually the
sewage contributions of users, the total annual costs of debt service,
operation and maintenance of the POTW and will make adjustments in the
schedule of charges and fees as necessary to support the intent of this
article.



   (L)   User charge system to take precedence.  The user charge
system shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of any contracts or
agreements that are inconsistent with § 204(b)(1)(a) of the Clean Water Act
(“the Act” as defined by this article).



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-142  PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION CHARGES.



   (A)   The POTW Director has reserved the authority to establish a
schedule of charges and fees for the reimbursement of costs incurred in
operating and administering the required local pretreatment program in
conjunction with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. part 403. The charges shall
become effective upon presentation to and adoption by the City Council.



   (B)   Costs to be provided for by the schedule may include:



      (1)   Reimbursement of the costs of the initial setup and the
operation of the pretreatment program;



      (2)   Monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures;



      (3)   Reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction plans and specifications;



      (4)   Permitting;



      (5)   Labor and material used for enforcement actions; and



      (6)   Any other costs required of the city necessary to meet
the requirements of the local pretreatment program and 40 C.F.R. part 403.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



Division 4:  Discharge Permit Application and Issuance



§ 21-151  WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW
without first obtaining the permission of the city. When requested by the
POTW Director, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within 90 days of receipt of the request.
The POTW Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-152  WASTEWATER PERMITS.



   (A)   Generally.  All significant industrial users shall obtain a
significant industrial user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to
the POTW. Existing industrial users who are determined by the POTW Director
to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user
permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW Director’s
determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial
user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW Director be required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit for nonsignificant industrial users.



   (B)   Significant industrial user determination. All industrial
users proposing to discharge nondomestic wastewater, or proposing to change
the volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of nondomestic
wastewater, shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial
user determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the
proposed discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria, he or she
will require that a significant industrial user permit application be filed.



   (C)   Significant industrial user permit application.  Users
required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete, and
file with the city, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW
Director, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in
the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply
for a significant industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of
the POTW Director’s determination in subsection (B) above. In support of
the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:



      (1)   Name, address and location (if different from the
address);



      (2)   Standard industrial classification (SIC) codes for
pretreatment, the industry as a whole, and any processes for which
categorical pretreatment standards have been promulgated;



      (3)   Analytical data on wastewater constituents and
characteristics, including, but not limited to, those mentioned in §§
21-121 through 21-134, any of the priority pollutants (§ 307(a) of the Act)
which the applicant knows or suspects are present in the discharge as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory and any other pollutant of
concern to the POTW; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with the procedures established by the EPA pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act
and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as amended;



      (4)   Time and duration of the indirect discharge;



      (5)   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans
and details to show all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, direction of
flow and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;



      (7)   Description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises including all materials that are or could be
accidentally or intentionally discharged;



      (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal
pretreatment standards and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards;



      (9)   If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required
to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide the additional pretreatment. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this
schedule:



         (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in
the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading
to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No increment in the
schedule shall exceed nine months; and



         (b)   No later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the POTW Director including, at a minimum, whether, or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the progress
reports to the POTW Director.



      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production;



      (11)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



      (12)   Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of
the plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
if subject to a categorical standard, a baseline monitoring report in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.12(b) and 15A NCAC 2H.0908(a) as outlined
in § 21-161; and



      (13)   Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW
Director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.



   (D)   Application signatories and certification.  All wastewater
discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification
statement:



      I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons, directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.



   (E)   Application review and evaluation.  The POTW Director will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information.



      (1)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications
for the city and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review
and evaluation.



      (2)   Within 30 days of receipt, the POTW Director shall
acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall
return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional
information is required.



   (F)   Tentative determination and draft permit.



      (1)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application
and an on-site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any
pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative
determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit.



      (2)   If the staff’s tentative determination in subsection
(F)(1) above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations
shall be made in writing:



         (a)   Proposed discharge limitations for those
pollutants proposed to be limited;



         (b)   A proposed schedule of compliance, including
interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and



         (c)   A brief description of any other proposed special
conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in
the application.



      (3)   The staff shall organize the determinations made
pursuant to subsections (F)(1) and (F)(2) above and the city’s general
permit conditions into a significant industrial user permit.



   (G)   Permit synopsis.  A fact sheet providing a brief synopsis of
the application shall be prepared by the POTW staff for submission to the
applicant and the approval authority and shall be made available to the
public upon request. The contents of the fact sheets shall include at least
the following information:



      (1)   A sketch and detailed description of the industrial
facilities and pretreatment facilities, including the location of all points
of discharge to the POTW and all established compliance monitoring points;



      (2)   A quantitative description of the discharge described in
the application which includes at least the following:



         (a)   The rate or frequency of the proposed discharge;
if the discharge is continuous, the average daily flow;



         (b)   The actual average daily discharge in pounds per
day of any limited pollutant and any pollutant identified in the application
as known or suspected to be present; and



         (c)   The basis for the pretreatment limitations,
including the documentation of any calculations in applying categorical
pretreatment standards.



   (H)   Final action on significant industrial user permit
applications.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all
applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete
application.



      (2)   The POTW Director is authorized to:



         (a)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing those conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this article and G.S. § 143-215.1;



         (b)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements;



         (c)   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days’
notice and pursuant to subsection (J) below;



         (d)   Revoke any permit pursuant to § 21-191;



         (e)   Suspend a permit pursuant to § 21-191; and/or



         (f)   Deny a permit application when in the opinion of
the POTW Director the discharge may cause or contribute to pass through or
interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to
effectuate the purposes of G.S. § 143-215.1.



   (I)   Hearings.



      (1)   Initial adjudicatory hearing.  An applicant whose
permit is denied, or is granted subject to conditions he or she deems
unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under § 21-192, or
one issued an administrative order under § 21-191 shall have the right to an
adjudicatory hearing before a Hearing Officer designated by the POTW Director
upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested,
to the POTW Director within 30 days following receipt of the significant
industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment or administrative order.
Unless the written demand is made within the time specified herein, the
action shall be final and binding. The Hearing Officer shall make a final
decision on the contested permit, or order within 45 days of the receipt of
the written demand for a hearing. The POTW Director shall transmit a copy of
the Hearing Officer’s decision by registered or certified mail.



         (a)   New permits.  Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the general courts of justice, of the terms or conditions of a
newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed
and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial
review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.



         (b)   Renewed permits.  Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the general courts of justice, of the terms or conditions of a
renewed permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in
effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.



      (2)   Final appeal hearing.  Any decision of a Hearing
Officer made as a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under subsection
(I)(1) above may be appealed to the City Council upon filing a written demand
within ten days of receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings held under
this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with the city’s hearing
procedures. Failure to make written demand within the time specified herein
shall bar further appeal. The City Council shall make a final decision on the
appeal within 90 days of the date the appeal was filed and shall transmit a
written copy of its decision by registered or certified mail.



      (3)   Official record.  When a final decision is issued under
subsection (I)(2) above, the City Council shall prepare an official record of
the case that includes:



         (a)   All notices, motions and other like pleadings;



         (b)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;



         (c)   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if
testimony is transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a
narrative summary of any testimony taken; and



         (d)   A copy of the final decision of City Council.



      (4)   Judicial review.  Any person against whom a final order
or decision of the City Council is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted
under subsection (I)(2) above, may seek judicial review of the order or
decision by filing a written petition within 30 days after receipt of notice
by registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter,
with the Superior Court of Richmond along with a copy to the city. Within 30
days after receipt of the copy of the petition of judicial review, the City
Council shall transmit to the reviewing Court the original or a certified
copy of the official record.



   (J)   Permit modification.



      (1)   (a)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to
the same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as follows:



            1.   Changes in the ownership of the discharge
when no other change in the permit is indicated;



            2.   A single modification of any compliance
schedule not in excess of four months; and



            3.   Modification of compliance schedules
(construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new sources
will not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational.



         (b)   Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.



      (2)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a federal
categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to the standards shall be revised to require compliance with the
standard within the time frame prescribed by the standard. Where a user,
subject to a federal categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by
subsection (C) above, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable federal categorical
pretreatment standard.



      (3)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall
constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. § 143-215(b) for
modifications.



   (K)   Permit conditions.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a
permit with those conditions attached as he or she believes necessary to
achieve the purpose of this article and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater permits
shall contain, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five
years);



         (b)   A statement of nontransferability;



         (c)   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical
standards or local limits, or both;



         (d)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law;



         (e)   Notification requirements for slug loads; and



         (f)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any
applicable compliance schedule.



      (2)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited
to, the following;



         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly
average and/or maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified
wastewater pollutants or properties;



         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology or construction of appropriate containment devices and the like,
designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the treatment works;



         (d)   Development and implementation of spill control
plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine discharges;



         (e)   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the
municipal wastewater system;



         (f)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system;



         (g)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



         (h)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedules;



         (i)   Requirements for immediate reporting of any
instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within
30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s);



         (j)   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment
standards and requirements;



         (k)   Requirements for submission of periodic
self-monitoring or special notification reports;



         (l)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans
and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in § 21-171 and
affording the POTW Director, or his or her representatives, access thereto;



         (m)   Requirements for prior notification and approval
by the POTW Director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of
any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to
introduction in the system;



         (n)   Requirements for the prior notification and
approval by the POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or
pretreatment process used by the permittee;



         (o)   Requirements for immediate notification of
excessive, accidental or slug discharges, or any discharge which could cause
any problems to the system;



         (p)   A statement that compliance with the permit does
not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the terms of the permit; and



         (q)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW
Director to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal laws,
rules and regulations.



   (L)   Permit duration.  Permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period
less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.



   (M)   Permit transfer.  Wastewater permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation.



   (N)   Permit reissuance.  A significant industrial user shall apply
for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in
accordance with this section a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the existing permit.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. passed 3-13-2001;
Ord. passed 5-14-2002)



Division 5:  Reporting Requirements



§ 21-161  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Reporting deadlines.



      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 C.F.R. part 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report containing the
information listed in subsection (B) below.



      (2)   At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical users subsequent
to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit to the
POTW Director a report that contains the information listed in subsection (B)
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use
to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantify of pollutants to be discharged.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.



      (1)   Identifying information.  The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



      (2)   Environmental permits.  A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



      (3)   Description of operations.  A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of
the operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.



      (4)   Flow measurement.  Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. part 403.6(e).



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process;



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the POTW Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall
be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance
with procedures set out in § 21-170; and



         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 21-171.



      (6)   Certification.  A statement, reviewed by the user’s
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards
and requirements.



      (7)   Compliance schedule.  If additional pretreatment and/or
O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide additional pretreatment and/or O & M.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance
schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in §
21-162.



      (8)   Signature and certification.  All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 21-152(D).



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-162  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 21-161(B)(7):



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (these events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the
progress reports to the POTW Director.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-163  COMPLIANCE REPORTS FOR CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to these pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
POTW Director a report containing the information described in §§
21-161(B)(4) through (B)(6). For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40
C.F.R. part 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 21-152(D).



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-164  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   The POTW Director may require any significant industrial user
to submit reports, at a frequency determined by the POTW Director (but in
these cases, no less than twice per year in June and December), indicating
the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharges that are limited
by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum
daily flows. All the periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified
in accordance with § 21-152(D).



   (B)   The city may sample and analyze permitted user discharges in
lieu of requiring the permitted users to conduct any or all sampling and
analysis.



   (C)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are not
representative of the user’s discharge.



   (D)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director
using the procedures prescribed in § 21-170, the results of that monitoring
shall be included in the report.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-165  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant
changes to the user’s operations or system that might alter the nature,
quality or volume of its wastewater at least 45 days before the change.



   (A)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit that
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 21-152.



   (B)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 21-152 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
21-152 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include,
but are not limited to, flow increases or decreases of 20% or greater, or the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-166  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
POTW Director of the incident. This notification shall include the location
of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following the discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. The notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability that may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall the notification relieve the user of
any fines, penalties or other liability that may be imposed pursuant to this
article.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a discharge described in subsection (A) above. Employers shall ensure that
all employees who may cause a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-167  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may
require.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-168  NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days after becoming
aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the POTW
Director monitors at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the
POTW Director samples between the users initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-169  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and
state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW
of a substance that, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 C.F.R. part 261. The notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other).



   (B)   If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of this waste
per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the
following information to the extent the information is known and readily
available to the user:



      (1)   An identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes;



      (2)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of those
constituents in the waste stream discharge during the calendar month; and



      (3)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste
stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.



   (C)   All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after
the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under § 21-165. The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the
self-monitoring requirements of §§ 21-161, 21-163 and 21-164.



   (D)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (A)
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes
as specific in 40 C.F.R. parts 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more
than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. parts 261.30(d)
and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during
which the user discharges more than those quantities of any hazardous waste
do not require additional notification.



   (E)   In the case of any new regulation under § 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of the substance within 90 days
of the effective date of the regulations.



   (F)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (G)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit
issued thereunder or any applicable federal or state law.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-170  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. Where the EPA
has not approved procedures, the procedures used must be approved POTW
Director.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-171  SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   Except as indicated in subsection (B) below, wastewater
samples must be collected using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the POTW
Director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of
four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge
limits.



   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-172  TIMING.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States postal service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-173  RECORD KEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of the requirements.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling and
the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods
used; and the results of the analyses. These records shall remain available
for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or city, or
where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by
the POTW Director.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



Division 6:  Compliance Monitoring



§ 21-181  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   The city may require users to provide and operate at the
user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and
flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but
the city may, when a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on
the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or
sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or
parked vehicles.



   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.



   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
city’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the city.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-182  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   The city will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are
being complied with.



   (B)   Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created
or discharged shall allow the city, approval authority and EPA or their
representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying or in the performance of any of their duties.



   (C)   The city, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to
set up on the user’s property those devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.



   (D)   Where a user has security measures in force that would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the
user shall make necessary arrangements so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities.



   (E)   Denial of the POTW Director’s, approval authority’s or
EPA’s access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this article.
Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-183  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the POTW Director, approval authority or EPA has been refused access
to a building, structure, property or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the POTW Director, approval authority or EPA may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the general court of justice to gain free and easy access to the
building, structure, property or part thereof suspected to be contributing to
the cause of the violation.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



Division 7:  Confidential Information



§ 21-187  TRADE SECRETS.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the release of
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any request must be
asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.



   (B)   (1)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the
portions of a report that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to
this article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)
permit, nondischarge permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided,
however, that the portions of a report shall be available for use by any
state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report.



      (2)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.



   (C)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be made available to officials of the approved authority and EPA upon
request.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



Division 8:  Enforcement



§ 21-191  ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Notification of violation.  Whenever the POTW Director finds
that any industrial user has violated or is violating this article, a
wastewater permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained
therein or any other pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director may serve
upon a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30
days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city
by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.



   (B)   Consent orders.  The POTW Director is hereby empowered to
enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for
the noncompliance. These orders shall include specific action to be taken by
the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect
as an administrative order issued pursuant to subsection (D) below.



   (C)   Show cause hearing.



      (1)   The POTW Director may order any industrial user who
causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this
article or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show
cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the
POTW Director determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice
shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing,
the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for the action and a request
that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered
or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the
hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.



      (2)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at
the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is
appropriate.



      (3)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a
prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under § 21-192, nor is any
action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this section, subject to
an administrative appeal under § 21-152(I).



   (D)   Administrative orders.



      (1)   When the POTW Director finds that an industrial user has
violated or continues to violate this article, permits or orders issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director may issue
an order to cease and desist all violations and direct those persons in
noncompliance to do any of the following:



         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements;



         (b)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time
schedule set forth in the order;



         (c)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in
the event of a continuing or threatened violation; and



         (d)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated
within a specified time period.



      (2)   An industrial user to whom an administrative order is
issued may appeal the administrative order under the procedures set under §
21-152(I).



   (E)   Emergency suspensions.



      (1)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment
service and/or wastewater permit when the suspension is necessary in order to
stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or
the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any
condition of its NPDES or nondischarge permit.



      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the
notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the
user’s waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take
those steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment
to any individuals.



      (3)   The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit
and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date
of the above-described hearing.



   (F)   Termination of permit.  Any user who violates the following
conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal regulations, is
subject to having his or her permit terminated:



      (1)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of his or her discharge;



      (2)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



      (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit.



   (G)   Noncompliance.  Noncompliant industrial users shall be
notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and shall be
offered an opportunity to show cause under this section why the proposed
action should not be taken.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-192  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any
provision of this article, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder, may be fined up to $25,000 per day per violation.



   (B)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW
Director shall consider the following:



      (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural
resources, to the public health or to public or private property resulting
from the violation;



      (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



      (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or
quality or on air quality;



      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



      (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



      (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or
intentionally;



      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing
to comply with the pretreatment program; and



      (8)   The costs of enforcement to the city.



   (C)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this
section shall be as provided in § 21-152(I).



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. passed 3-13-2001;
Ord. passed 5-14-2002)



§ 21-193  OTHER AVAILABLE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this
article, are available to the POTW Director who may use any single one or
combination against a noncompliant user.



   (B)   Additional available remedies include, but are not limited to,
the following.



      (1)   Criminal violations.  The district attorney for the
city’s judicial district may, at the request of the city, prosecute
noncompliant users who violate the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B. Under
state law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term, condition or
requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to apply for a
pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. § 143-215.6B(f)), to
knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition or requirement of a
pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a
pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. § 143-215.6B(g)), to
knowingly violate any term, condition or requirement of a pretreatment permit
issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment
permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in imminent danger of
death or serious bodily injury (G.S. § 143-215.6B(h)) and to falsify
information required under G.S. Chapter 143, Article 21 (G.S. §
143-215.6B(i)).



      (2)   Injunctive relief.  Whenever a user is in violation of
the provisions of this article or an order or permit issued hereunder, the
POTW Director, through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
Justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and
permanent injunction that restrains or compels the activities in question.



      (3)   Water supply severance.  Whenever an industrial user is
in violation of the provisions of this article or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service
will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated ability to comply.



      (4)   Public nuisances.  Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this article or of a permit or order issued
hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city’s Code governing
nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing,
abating or remedying the nuisance.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-194  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   (A)   The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive.



   (B)   The POTW Director may take any, all or any combination of
these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment
violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s enforcement
response plan. However, the POTW Director may take other action against any
user when the circumstances warrant.



   (C)   Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



Division 9:  Annual Publication of Significant Noncompliance



§ 21-201  PUBLICATION.



   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in the largest daily
newspaper circulated in the service area a list of those industrial users
found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable
noncompliance in 15A NCAC 2H.0903(b)(10), with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



Division 10:  Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations



§ 21-206  UPSET.



   (A)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards, if the
requirements of subsection (B) below, are met.



   (B)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs or other relevant evidence that:



      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;



      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and



      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the
POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days):



         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause
of noncompliance;



         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and



         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to be taken to
reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



   (C)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



   (D)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.



   (E)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility fails, or is reduced or lost.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



§ 21-207  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS DEFENSE.



   (A)   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement
action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in
§ 21-121(A) or the specific prohibitions in §§ 21-121(B)(2), (B)(3),
(B)(5) through (B)(7) and (B)(9) through (B)(23) of this article if it can
prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone
or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass
through or interference and that either:



      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and
the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the
pass through or interference; or



      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and in the case
of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.



   (B)   Pursuant to 40 C.F.R. part 403.5(a)(2), the affirmative
defense outlined in this section cannot apply to the specific prohibitions in
§ 21-121(B)(1), (B)(4) and (B)(8).



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. passed 3-13-2001; Ord. passed 5-14-2002)



§ 21-208  BYPASS.



   (A)   Generally.  A user may allow any bypass to occur that does
not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if
it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (B) and (C) below.



   (B)   Notice.



      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director, at least ten days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.



      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within five days of this time the user becomes aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24
hours.



   (C)   Prohibition of bypass.



      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass that occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under
subsection (B) above.



      (2)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass
after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that
it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (C)(1) above.



(Ord. 93-009, passed 7-6-1993)



ARTICLE V:  EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE



Division 1:  Generally



§ 21-216  CONFORMANCE WITH CHAPTER.



   No extension to the water or sanitary sewer system of the city shall be
made, and no application shall be approved unless in accordance with the
requirements of this article.



(1972 Code, § 21-64)



§ 21-217  MINIMUM DISTANCE FOR EXTENSIONS.



   The minimum distance for any extension of a water main or sanitary
sewer main shall be determined by the Council.



(1972 Code, § 21-65)



§ 21-218  SIZE OF MAINS.



   The size of water mains and sanitary sewer mains to be installed and
the other required system facilities shall be determined by the Council in
accordance with the recognized standards and accepted engineering practices
and design and in accordance with applicable system plans adopted by the
Council.



(1972 Code, § 21-66)



§ 21-219  EXTENSIONS TO MEET CITY SPECIFICATIONS; OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Any water mains or sanitary sewer mains extended under the
provisions of this chapter shall be installed and constructed in accordance
with the approved plans, specifications and other requirements of the city.



   (B)   All facilities installed under the provisions of this chapter,
whether within or outside the city limits, shall become the sole property of
the city and shall be under its jurisdiction and control for all purposes at
the time the facilities are connected to the city system.



   (C)   When required, the property owner shall grant to the city
those utility easements as the city may require.



   (D)   In addition, a deed to the city for water and sewer facilities
installed which are located outside the city limits, the cost of which is
borne by individual property owners, shall be executed prior to the time any
extensions provided for in this chapter are connected to the city systems if
the City Manager so requests.



(1972 Code, § 21-67)



§ 21-220  ADDITIONAL SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENT OF IMPROVED STREETS.



   (A)   The Council in its discretion, as a condition under which
water or sewer service shall be extended, may require the owner of a proposed
subdivision to enter into an agreement to improve the proposed streets
therein at his or her own expense and in accordance with the provisions of
this Code governing the acceptance of public streets for the city.



   (B)   This section may apply to subdivisions which are located
either within or outside the city limits.



(1972 Code, § 21-68)



Division 2:  Extensions Inside the City



§ 21-231  APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION; REQUIRED.



   Any property owner, desiring water or sanitary sewer service shall
apply in writing to the City Utilities Department requesting the extension of
water or sanitary sewer service. No request for the extension of services
shall be considered unless submitted in writing in accordance with the
requirements of this division.



(1972 Code, § 21-69)



§ 21-232  APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION; CONTENTS GENERALLY.



   The city may require the applicant for an extension under this division
to submit as part of the written application information, plans or other data
as may be required to determine adequately whether the requirements of this
chapter shall be met.



(1972 Code, § 21-70)



§ 21-233  APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION; PLANS FOR DEVELOPMENT.



   When an application is made for a water or sewer extension to serve an
area or development that is planned as part of a larger development project
or subdivision, all of which is not to be developed at the time the
application is made, the owner shall submit plans in sufficient detail to
determine the size and type of facilities which will be necessary to serve
the entire development or subdivision when completed.



(1972 Code, § 21-71)



§ 21-234  DEVELOPED AREA OR APPROVED SUBDIVISION; GENERALLY.



   When an application is received requesting the extension of water or
sanitary sewer service to serve property within the city limits which is
developed or has been previously approved as a subdivision or where streets
have previously been dedicated and accepted by the city, and where the area
is not part of a new subdivision which has not been approved by the city, the
City Manager or other person designated by him or her shall estimate the cost
of the project and present the application for the extension, the estimated
cost and other required information to the Council for approval. If the
application is approved by the Council, subject to the availability of funds,
the city shall install or have installed by contract under its supervision
the extensions which have been approved.



(1972 Code, § 21-72)



§ 21-235  DEVELOPED AREA OR APPROVED SUBDIVISION; ASSESSMENT.



   When an approved water or sanitary sewer extension project has been
completed and the total cost thereof has been determined, 100% of the total
cost of the extension shall be assessed against the property owners whose
property abuts upon the extension at an equal rate per front foot in
accordance with and under the authority granted to the city by G.S. §§
160A-216 et seq.



(1972 Code, § 21-73)



§ 21-236  DEVELOPED AREA OR APPROVED SUBDIVISION; PAYMENT OF COSTS.



   Any property owner shall have the opportunity to pay his or her
proportionate share of the cost of the water or sewer extension after the
assessment roll is confirmed rather than paying his or her share in equal
annual installments with interest as required by the statute.



(1972 Code, § 21-74)



§ 21-237  PROPOSED DEVELOPMENTS AND UNAPPROVED SUBDIVISIONS; GENERALLY.



   (A)   When an application or petition is received requesting the
extension of water or sanitary sewer service to proposed developments or
subdivisions within the city limits which have not been approved by the
Council, the City Manager or other person designated by the Council shall
estimate the cost of the project and present the application for the
extension, the estimated cost and other required information to the Council
for approval.



   (B)   If the application is approved, subject to the approval of the
development or subdivision by the city and subject to the availability of
funds, the city shall install or have installed by contract under its
supervision those extensions.



(1972 Code, § 21-75)



§ 21-238  PROPOSED DEVELOPMENTS AND UNAPPROVED SUBDIVISIONS; FINANCING.



   (A)   Prior to the beginning of any construction, the property owner
shall advance to the city funds in an amount equal to 100% of the total
estimated cost of the proposed extensions of water and sewer service to a
proposed development or unapproved subdivision.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the funds, a written contract shall be entered
into between the city and the property owner under which the city shall use
the funds upon the following terms and conditions.



      (1)   The funds shall be deposited in a special account of the
city for which a separate accounting shall be made.



      (2)   (a)   At the time construction of the extension is
completed and the total cost thereof is determined, if the amount deposited
exceeds 100% of the total cost, that portion in excess of the amount
deposited shall be refunded to the owner without interest.



         (b)   If the amount deposited is less than 100% of the
total cost, the owner shall pay the additional amount to the city, and this
condition shall be a part of the written contract.



      (3)   In lieu of depositing the required funds, the owner or
owners may provide a surety bond or some other form of security that will
insure payment to the city of the owner’s or owners’ proportionate share
of the cost of extension in accordance with this article.



      (4)   No refund or reimbursement of funds shall be made to the
owner or owners who pay 100% of the total cost of extension under the
requirements of this subsection except as provided for in subsection (B)(2)
above.



(1972 Code, § 21-76)



§ 21-239  FACILITIES EXCLUDED IN DETERMINING PROPERTY OWNER’S SHARE OF
COST.



   (A)   When the city determines that it is advisable to install
larger size facilities than are necessary to serve the property requesting
the extension, the difference in the cost of the larger size facilities and
the cost of the facilities required to serve the property requesting the
extension shall be paid by the city and excluded from the total cost to be
shared by the property owner and the city.



   (B)   Fire hydrants, pumping stations and other system facilities
installed for general public use within the city limits which are expressly
identified in the application or agreement approved by the City Council shall
be paid for by the city and excluded from the total cost to be shared by the
property owner.



(1972 Code, § 21-77)



§ 21-240  EXCEPTIONS AUTHORIZED.



   Nothing in this division shall prevent the Council from extending water
or sanitary sewer mains within the city limits on its own motion without
receipt of an application from property owners and from assessing the cost of
the extensions in accordance with § 21-234 when in the opinion of the
Council the general public interest demands the extension of service.



(1972 Code, § 21-78)



Division 3:  Extensions Outside City



§ 21-251  APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION.



   All applications for water and sewer extensions outside the city limits
shall be made in the same manner and under the same requirements as for
extensions inside the city limits.



(1972 Code, § 21-79)



§ 21-252  FINANCING; GENERALLY.



   (A)   If an application under this division is approved by the
Council, the owner shall be required to pay 100% of the total cost of all
extensions; provided, that the city may participate to the extent agreed upon
by the Council in the cost of larger mains that are in excess of the size of
mains required to serve the project.



   (B)   No reimbursement shall be made upon annexation, and all water
and sewer lines connected to the city system and located outside the city
limits shall become the property of the city at the time the facilities are
connected.



(1972 Code, § 21-80)



§ 21-253  FINANCING; DEPOSIT OF FUNDS; CONTRACT.



   Prior to beginning any construction, the owner shall deposit with the
city funds in an amount equal to 100% of the total estimated cost of the
extensions under this division. Upon receipt of the funds a written contract
shall be entered into between the city and the property owner in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter. The contract shall provide that if the
funds deposited exceed the amount of the total extension cost when completed,
that portion in excess of the total cost shall be refunded to the owner
without interest. The contract shall also provide that if the amount
deposited is less than the total cost when completed, the owner shall pay the
additional amount to the city.



(1972 Code, § 21-81)



§ 21-254  FINANCING; ALTERNATIVES TO DEPOSITING FUNDS.



   In lieu of depositing funds pursuant to § 21-253, the owner may
execute a surety bond guaranteeing payment for the extension or may have the
extension work performed under private contract with the approval of the
Council; provided, that the work shall be performed in accordance with all
construction requirements and shall be subject to inspection and approval of
the city.



(1972 Code, § 21-82)



§ 21-255  PETITION FOR ANNEXATION OF PROPERTY.



   When any property owner applies for water or sewer service, the owner
shall petition for annexation of the property to the city according to the
terms specified by the Council. Failure to request annexation is grounds for
turning down sewer service. The final decision on annexation is at the
discretion of the Council. Extensions may be made to the property and the
cost thereof financed in accordance with the requirements of §§ 21-234
through 21-236 or §§ 21-237 and 21-238, whichever are applicable. Any
property owner wishing to establish a water connection only may do so without
petitioning for annexation.



(1972 Code, § 21-83)  (Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



ARTICLE VI:  CONSERVATION OF WATER



§ 21-270  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this water shortage response article is to
provide for the declaration of increasingly serious stages of water shortages
and to define voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures to be
implemented during these various stages. The intention is to preserve the
water resources of the city that water demands for human consumption,
sanitation and fire protection of its customers can be met throughout the
service area of the city.



   (B)   This article shall apply to all users connected directly or
indirectly to the city public water supply, regardless of whether the user is
located within the city limits or outside of the city limits.



   (C)   This article is enacted to support the following primary water
conservation and demand management goals.



(Ord. passed - -2002)



§ 21-271  YEAR-ROUND PRACTICES.



   (A)   All city water customers are encouraged to exercise voluntary
water conservation practices at all times during the year, regardless of
water shortage or emergency conditions. The city shall periodically provide
informational guidelines and conservation tips to its customers.



   (B)   All newly installed or substantially unproved irrigation
systems that are equipped with automatic timers and which use city supplied
water shall be equipped with automatic rain and soil moisture sensors that
are activated to prevent the operation of those irrigation systems while rain
is falling and/or when soil moisture is adequate.



(Ord. passed - -2002)



§ 21-272  DETERMINATION OF WATER SHORTAGE OR EMERGENCY.



   (A)   The Water Treatment Plant Superintendent and the City Manager
will determine the severity of water supply shortage and the various stages
of water shortages and subsequent restrictions.



   (B)   A water shortage or water emergency shall be deemed to exist
when the city cannot supply its customers with sufficient water to protect
the public health and safety without substantial reductions in water demand.



(Ord. passed - -2002)



§ 21-273  PROCLAMATION OF WATER SHORTAGE OR WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY.



   In the event of a water shortage or water supply emergency as
determined in § 21-272, the Water Treatment Superintendent and the City
Manager is authorized to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons
the existence of that state and the severity thereof, and in order to more
effectively protect the health and safety of the people within the city to
place in effect the restrictive provisions hereinafter authorized.



(Ord. passed - -2002)



§ 21-274  MANDATORY CONSERVATION DURING STAGE I WATER SHORTAGE.



   It shall be unlawful to use water from public water system supplied by
the city for the following purposes:



   (A)   To water lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, flower and vegetable
gardens except as follows:



      (1)   Irrigation with city supplied water applied through any
system or device other than a watering can shall be allowed only on Wednesday
and Sunday (two days out of each week). A total of no more than one inch of
water (as measured in a shallow container, such as an empty tuna fish can)
should be applied during any given week; and



      (2)   The restrictions of this section shall not apply to any
persons regularly engaged in the sale of plants, who shall be allowed to
irrigate their commercial stock in trade.



   (B)   To wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes or any
other type of mobile equipment other than on Saturday (one day out of each
week). Any person regularly engaged in the business of washing motor vehicles
and any commercial car wash facility shall be permitted to use water for
those purposes until they have reached their maximum average monthly usage.
Meters on the businesses will be disconnected once maximum average monthly
usage has been reached;



   (C)   To wash down outside areas such as streets, driveways, service
station aprons, parking lots, office buildings, exteriors of existing or
newly constructed homes or apartments, sidewalks or patios, or to use water
for other similar purposes; provided, however, that any person regularly in
the business of washing those areas shall be permitted to use water for those
purposes;



   (D)   To use water from public or private fire hydrants for any
purpose other than fire suppression or other public emergency or Water
Department needs;



   (E)   To use water for dust control or compaction; and



   (F)   To intentionally waste treated water.



(Ord. passed - -2002)



§ 21-275  MANDATORY CONSERVATION DURING STAGE II WATER SHORTAGE.



   All the mandatory provisions of a Stage I water shortage, as described
in § 21-274, shall remain in effect, except the following.



   (A)   Irrigation of lawns, gardens, trees or shrubs with city
supplied water applied through any system or device other than a watering can
shall be allowed only one day (Sunday) out of each week. A total of no more
than one half inch of water (as measured in a shallow container, such as an
empty tuna fish can) should be applied during any given week.



   (B)   There shall be no introduction of water into any ornamental
fountain, swimming pool or pond or other structure making similar use of
water.



   (C)   Washing of automobiles is strictly prohibited. Any person
regularly engaged in the business of washing motor vehicles and any
commercial car wash facility shall be permitted to use water for those
purposes until they have reached their maximum average monthly usage. Meters
on those businesses will be disconnected once maximum average monthly usage
has been reached.



(Ord. passed - -2002)



§ 21-276  MANDATORY CONSERVATION DURING WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY.



   All the mandatory provisions of Stage I and II water shortages, as
described in §§ 21-274 and 21-275, shall remain in effect, except the
following.



   (A)   No city supplied water shall be used for any outdoor purposes
other than emergency fire suppression.



   (B)   Water service may be discontinued or reduced, as determined by
the City Water Treatment Plant Superintendent and City Manager in designated
portions of the city service area through the manipulation of valves, pumps
and other appurtenances in order to preserve the availability of water for
public health and safety facilities, such as hospitals, medical clinics and
the like, fire protection and other critical community needs.



   (C)   Any customers that use city water for heating/cooling systems
shall reduce the heating/cooling demand in all but the most essential
facilities to the extent allowable with regard to indoor air quality
standards and employee health and safety requirements.



(Ord. passed - -2002)



§ 21-277  NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV).



   (A)   Violators will be served a written notice of violation, which
may be hand delivered or affixed to the property where the violation(s)
occurred.



   (B)   A fine will be imposed at that time, which must be paid within
ten days of NOV.



   (C)   Water meters will be cut-off if fines are not paid within ten
days of NOV.



(Ord. passed - -2002)



§ 21-278  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any violation(s) will constitute a fine of $50 for the first
offense, $100 for the second offense, $250 for the third offense. Civil
penalties of up to $500 per violation per day to any offender who shall
continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in the
aforementioned notice of violation. If a violation occurs within the ten-day
time period, additional fines will be imposed and water cut-off will be
immediate.



   (B)   After the above-outlined water shortages have terminated, the
number of violations assignable to a property owner shall not be carried over
to the next declaration of water shortage.



(Ord. passed - -2002)



§ 21-279  TAMPERING.



   (A)   Any tampering with water meters will constitute a tampering
fine. Fines will be assessed at $150 for a first offense, $200 second
offense, $250 third and each subsequent offense.



   (B)   Any tampering of the water meters will constitute a tampering
fine. TAMPERING is defined as turning water on after it has been turned off
by city staff.



(Ord. passed - -2002; Ord. passed 10-9-2018)



ARTICLE VII:  FATS, OIL AND GREASE CONTROL



§ 21-290  SCOPE AND PURPOSE.



   To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions
from contribution and accumulation of fats, oils and greases into the sewer
system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food
preparation and serving facilities.



(Ord. 04-2006, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 01-2012, passed
4-10-2012)



§ 21-291  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COOKING ESTABLISHMENTS.  Those establishments primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation
activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling,
sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching,
roasting, toasting or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing,
barbecuing and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot,
non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.



   FATS, OILS AND GREASES.



      (1)   Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant
sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These
substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures
established in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   All are sometimes referred to herein as GREASE or
GREASES.



   GREASE TRAP OR INTERCEPTOR.  A device for separating and retaining
waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the
trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These
devices also serve to collect settled solids, generated by and from food
preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. GREASE TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS
are sometimes referred to herein as GREASE INTERCEPTORS.



   MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY.  The design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and
retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public
sanitary sewer.



   NON-COOKING ESTABLISHMENTS.  Those establishments primarily engaged in
the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of
cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation and
serving establishments.



   USER.  Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional
limits of the city, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or
discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute
wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.



(Ord. 04-2006, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 01-2012, passed
4-10-2012)



§ 21-292  GREASE INTERCEPTOR MAINTENANCE, RECORD KEEPING AND GREASE REMOVAL.



   (A)   (1)   Grease interceptors shall be installed by users as
required by the Director or his or her designee. Grease interceptors shall be
installed at the user’s expense, when the user operates a cooking
establishment. Grease interceptors may also be required in non-cooking or
cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs establishments and other industrial or
commercial establishments when they are deemed necessary by the Director for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease. No user shall allow
wastewater discharge concentration from subject grease interceptor to exceed
325 milligrams per liter, as identified by method EPA Method 1664 or 275
milligrams per liter, as identified by EPA Method 413. All grease
interceptors shall be of a type, design and capacity approved by the Director
or his or her designee and shall be readily and easily accessible for user
cleaning and city inspection. All grease interceptors shall be serviced and
emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum
design capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but not less
often than every 30 days.



      (2)   Users who are required to pass water through a grease
interceptor shall:



         (a)   Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of
24 minutes at actual peak flow or 12 minutes at the calculated theoretical
peak flow rate as predicted by the Uniform Plumbing Code fixture criteria,
between the influent and effluent baffles with 20% of the total volume of the
grease interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate,
identified hereafter as a sludge pocket;



         (b)   Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge
pocket quarterly or as needed at the user’s expense. Grease interceptors
shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks, gravel,
sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags and the like, which
could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the
grease interceptor;



         (c)   Accept the following conditions that if any
skimmed or pumped wastes or other materials removed from grease interceptor
are treated in any fashion onsite and reintroduced back into the grease
interceptor as an activity of and after the on-site treatment, the user shall
be responsible for the attainment of established grease numerical limit
consistent with and contained in subsection (A)(1) above on all discharges of
wastewater from the into the city sanitary sewer collection and treatment
system;



         (d)   Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as
to maintain the device so that attainment of the grease limit is consistently
achieved. CONSISTENT shall mean any wastewater sample taken from the grease
interceptor shall be subject to terms of numerical limit attainment described
in subsection (A)(1) above. If an establishment desires, because of
documented space constraints, an alternate to an out-of-building grease
interceptor, the request for an alternative location shall contain the
following information:



            1.   Location of city sewer main and easement in
relation to available exterior space outside building; and



            2.   Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses
common plumbing for all services at that site.



         (e)   Understand and agree that the use of biological
additives as a grease degradation agent is conditionally permissible, upon
prior written approval by the Director. Any establishment using this method
of grease abatement shall maintain the trap or interceptor in a manner that
attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the
trap’s outlet, is consistently achieved;



         (f)   Understand and agree that the use of automatic
grease removal systems is conditionally permissible, upon prior written
approval by the Director, the Lead Plumbing Inspector of the city and the
County Department of Health. Any establishment using this equipment shall
operate the system in a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater
discharge limit, as measured from the unit’s outlet, is consistently
achieved; and



         (g)   Understand and agree that the Director reserves
the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need,
based on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor
performance, facility site and building plan review and to require repairs
to, or modification or replacement of those traps.



      (3)   The Director of Collections will inspect grease traps
quarterly or as needed to ensure accumulated grease has been removed.



   (B)   The user shall maintain a written record of trap maintenance
for three years. All records will be available for inspection by the city at
all times.



   (C)   No non-grease-laden sources are allowed to be connected to
sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service.



   (D)   Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following
adoption of this article, although installation of grease interceptors will
be required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under this
article for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from grease
interceptors. If, during this one-year period an obstruction of a city sewer
main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on
the environment is realized and that the overflow or failure of the sanitary
sewer collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in
whole to an accumulation of grease in the city’s sewer main(s), the city
will take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in the city’s
industrial pretreatment enforcement plan and article IV (Sewer Use) of this
chapter, against the generator or contributor of the grease.



   (E)   Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall
be provided over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall
extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent
water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable
covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal and wastewater sampling
activities.



(Ord. 04-2006, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 01-2012, passed
4-10-2012)



ARTICLE VIII:  BACKFLOW PREVENTION



§ 21-305  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this cross-connection control policy is:



      (1)   To protect the public potable water supply of the city
from the possibility of contamination or pollution, due to back siphonage or
backpressure, by isolation within the consumer’s private water system those
contaminants or pollutants, which could backflow into the public water
system; and



      (2)   To provide a continuing inspection program of
cross-connections, which may be installed in the future.



   (B)   To prevent backflow, a backflow assembly must be installed and
tested annually by a certified technician and copies of the resting results
are to be sent to the city management.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009; Ord. passed 8-9-2011)



§ 21-306  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIR-GAP SEPARATION.  An unobstructed vertical distance through the
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank plumbing fixture of other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacles. In no case shall the AIR-GAP be less than one inch.



   APPROVED.  Certified in writing by the Water and Sewer Maintenance
Superintendent as an acceptable device or methodology for the purpose of
backflow prevention.



   AUXILIARY INTAKE.  Any piping connection or other device whereby water
may be secure from a source other than public water supply.



   BACKFLOW.  Any flow of water into the public water supply from any
other source due to a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, interconnection
backpressure, back-siphonage, any combination thereof or other cause.



   BACK-PRESSURE.  Any pressure on any source of water other than the
public water supply which may be greater than the pressure on the public
water supply and may result in a backflow.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.  An approved effective device or method
used to prevent backflow from occurring in the potable water supply. The type
of device required shall be based on degree of hazard, existing or potential.



   BACKSIPHONAGE.  Any circumstance in which the pressure on the public
water supply may be reduced to the point that the elevation and atmospheric
pressure on a source of water other than the public water supply may result
in a pressure to be greater than the pressure on the public water supply and
may result in a backflow.



   CERTIFIED TESTER.  A person who has proved his or her competency to
test, repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow prevention devices as
evidenced by certification of successful completion of a training program
approved by the Superintendent of Water and Sewer Maintenance.



   CONFINEMENT DEVICE.  A backflow prevention device, as approved and
required, installed within a private plumbing or distribution system to
isolate a localized hazard from the remainder of the system.



   CONSUMER.  Any person, firm or corporation responsible for any
property at which water from the city public water supply is received. In the
absence of other parties or the failure of other parties to accept the
responsibilities herein set forth, the owner of the record shall be
ultimately responsible.



   CONTAINMENT DEVICE.  A backflow prevention device, as proved and
required, installed at the point of separation between the public water
supply and a private service or private distribution system or at the point
of metering.



   CROSS-CONNECTION.  Any physical connection whereby the public water
supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or
private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in a manner
that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through
the manipulation of valves, because of ineffective check or back-pressure
valves or because of any other arrangement.



   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL COORDINATOR. The official position established
and authorized by the city and designated by the Water and Sewer Maintenance
Superintendent to administer and interpret this article and who shall be a
certified tester.



   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.  An approved assembly
composed of two single, spring-loaded independently operating check valves,
including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly
and having suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each check
valve.



   DUAL CHECK VALVE.  An approved device containing two independently
acting check valves in series.



   FIRE LINE.  A system of pipes and equipment used to supply water in an
emergency for extinguishing fire.



   INTERCONNECTION.  Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby
the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit,
pool, heat exchanger, storage reservoir or other device which does or may
contain sewage or other waste or substance which would be capable of
imparting contamination to the public water supply.



   PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER.



      (1)   An approved assembly containing an independently
operating spring loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air
inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve.



      (2)   The assembly must be equipped with suitable connections
for testing the proper operation of the device and tightly closing shut-off
valves located at each end of the assembly.



   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.  The water and waterworks system of the city and
its customers outside the corporate limits for general use and which supply
is recognized as the public water supply by the State Department of Human
Resources.



   REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.  An
approved device containing within its structure two spring loaded
independently operating check valves, together with an automatically
operating pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves. The first check valve reduces the supply pressure a predetermined
amount so that during normal flow and at cessation of normal flow the
pressure between the checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case
of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by
discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between
the check valves less than the supply pressure. This device shall have
suitable connections for testing the proper operation of the device,
including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the device.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-307  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAW.



   The city will comply with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, the
State Drinking Water Act and State Building Code which pertain to
cross-connections, auxiliary intakes and interconnections and establish an
effective ongoing program to control potential sources of contamination of
the public water supply.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-308  UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection,
auxiliary intake or interconnection to be made or allow one to exist for any
purpose whatsoever.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-309  INSPECTION OF PROPERTY.



   It shall be the duty, upon request, of the Water and Sewer Maintenance
Superintendent to cause inspections to be made of properties served by the
public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are
deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections shall be set
by the Water and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-310  RIGHT OF ACCESS.



   The Water and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent, or authorized
representative, shall have the right to enter, at a reasonable time, any
nonresidential property served by a connection to the city public water
supply for the purpose of performing the duties of this article. In those
cases in which the property owner chooses not to provide access, the Water
and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent, or authorized representative, may
designate the location as a high hazard in accordance with this policy.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-311  HAZARDOUS USES.



   (A)   (1)   The following uses shall be classified as hazardous
uses:



         (a)   Hazardous uses include, but are not limited to,
pumps and tanks handling sewage, radioactive, lethal or toxic substances,
boiler and steam connections, sewer waste lines, low inlets to receptacles
containing toxic substances, coils or jackets used as heat exchangers, flush
valve toilets without vacuum breaks, bacterial and viral materials, private
wells or other private water supply, irrigation systems, water systems or
hose connections, with booster pumps, carbonation equipment or similar hazard
potential as determined by the Water and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent;



         (b)   Any location at which the nature or mode of
operation within a premises are so that frequent alterations are made to the
plumbing or at which there is a likelihood in the determination of the Water
and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent that protective measures may be
subverted, altered or disconnected; and



         (c)   A facility which contains, but is not limited to,
a bottling plant, cannery, building with five or more stories, battery
manufacturer; exterminator; greenhouse; chemical processing plant; dairy; dye
works; film laboratory; restaurants; car wash; commercial laboratory;
commercial laundry (except self-service laundry); metal fabricating
operation; morgue or mortuary; nursing home; swimming pool; x-ray equipment;
medical office with laboratory; dentist’s office; aspirator; hospital;
clinic; medical building; medical washing equipment; irrigation system with
chemical additives; sewage treatment plant; packing house; packing plant;
poultry house; power plant; nuclear reactor; pumped fire sprinkler or riser
system or those equipped with facilities for introduction of freeze
preventive chemicals or other substances other than water.



      (2)   All severe hazard facilities must have an approved
reduced pressure principle assembly as a minimum containment device.



   (B)   (1)   All installations described in this section shall be
deemed hazardous uses and must have a containment device in the form of a
reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device; provided that, if the
consumer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Water and Sewer Maintenance
Superintendent that sufficient internal confinement devices have been
installed and tested, the Water and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent may
require that the consumer provide engineering drawings sealed by a
professional engineer of installations within the premises, which provide
complete internal protection against cross-connection as approved by the
Water and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent. Each internal confinement device
shall be one of the following, as approved by the Water and Sewer Maintenance
Superintendent or his or her authorized representative: reduced pressure zone
principle backflow prevention device, double check valve backflow prevention
device, air gap, vacuum break-pressure type or dual check valve. Each reduced
pressure zone principle backflow prevention device serving as an internal
confinement device shall have a mesh strainer immediately upstream of the
inlet gate valve.



      (2)   If the Backflow Administrator does not have sufficient
access to every portion of a private water system to permit the complete
evaluation of the degree of hazard associated with the private water system,
an approved reduced pressure principle assembly must be installed.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-312  MODERATE HAZARD.



   All single-family residential homes will be considered a moderate
hazard and shall have a minimum of a dual check valve device installed at the
meter service.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-313  FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   All unmetered fire sprinkler system without booster facilities
or chemical additives must have a double check-detector check valve assembly
as a minimum containment device.



   (B)   All unmetered fire sprinkler systems with a booster facility
or chemical additives must have a reduced pressure principle-detector
assembly as a minimum containment device.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-314  OTHER CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Services to single-family residential units not otherwise
required by this Code to have other containment devices may have a
containment device in the form of an approved dual check valve. On all
services for which meters are applied more than 90 days following the date of
adoption of this article, the dual check valves or other containment devices
as required shall be installed by the owners’ representative prior to the
installation of the meter by the Water and Sewer Maintenance Department. The
dual check valve shall be installed by the Water and Sewer Maintenance
Department; provided that the city reserves the right to charge the owner or
occupant of any residence for the cost of the device and its installation.



   (B)   (1)   All other connections to the public water supply of
the city shall have containment devices in that form of a double check valve
backflow prevention device as set forth in this policy.



      (2)   This shall include water mains installed to city
standard and with city supervision, but which are not maintained by the city,
pursuant to other ordinances including, but not limited to, mobile home
parks, apartments, group housing projects and other private distribution
systems or similar hazard potential as determined by the Water and Sewer
Maintenance Superintendent, or his or her authorized representative.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-315  INSTALLATION OF CONTAINMENT DEVICES.



   (A)   The Water and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent shall maintain
a list of approved manufacturers and models of hazard containment devices and
drawings of standard installations, copies to be made available through the
office of the Water and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent and the Code
Enforcement office. All reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention
devices and double check valve backflow prevention devices shall be approved
by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. All
vacuum breaks and dual check valve devices shall be approved by the American
Society for Sanitary Engineers. All installation and materials shall conform
to city standards as set by the Water and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent.



   (B)   In those cases in which containment and/or confinement devices
have been previously installed by prior owners or other parties, the
responsibility for maintenance, testing and replacement as applicable shall
be with the consumer.



   (C)   The cost of the means of containment and any other plumbing
modifications necessary and convenient thereto and the testing and
maintenance thereof is to be paid for by the consumer.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-316  CHANGE IN NATURE OF USE.



   The Water and Sewer Maintenance Department shall be notified by the
consumer when the nature of use of the property changes so as to change the
hazard classification of that property, as set forth in this policy.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-317  CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The consumer shall upon notification, as defined in within
this policy, install the hazard containment device(s) as required within 90
days from the date of notification.



   (B)   If, after expiration of 90 days, the containment device has
not been installed in conformance with standards set by the Water and Sewer
Maintenance Department in a proper working condition, the Water and Sewer
Maintenance Superintendent may discontinue the public water supply service at
the premises, and service shall not be restored until the devices have been
installed. The Water and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent may permit an
extension of up to 90 additional days if compliance efforts are underway and
the existence of hardship can be demonstrated.



   (C)   The city shall bear no liability for direct or consequential
damages proximately caused by the discontinuance of service pursuant to this
section.



   (D)   The customer shall be responsible for the elimination of or
protection against all cross-connections on his or her premises.



   (E)   The customer shall maintain any backflow prevention assembly
within his or her premises in good operating condition. The customer shall
correct any malfunction of the backflow prevention which is revealed by
periodic testing.



   (F)   The customer shall be responsible for the payment of all fees
for annual testing, re-testing in the case that the assembly fails to operate
correctly and repairs.



   (G)   The customer must immediately notify the city if the customer
has reason to believe that backflow has occurred from the customer’s
private water system to the public water system.



   (H)   A customer shall send a copy of all tests within 30 days to
the City Hall, 201 Main Street, Hamlet, NC 28345.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-318  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.



   The violation of any section of this article may be punished by a civil
penalty listed as follows:



   (A)   Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system,
which has an imminent hazard, $1,000 per day, not to exceed $10,000;



   (B)   Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system,
which is of a moderate or severe hazard of $500;



   (C)   Submitting false records or failure to submit records, which
are required by this policy, $500; and



   (D)   Failure to test or maintain backflow prevention assemblies as
required, $100/day.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-319  TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF DEVICES.



   The consumer at each property at which containment and/or confinement
device(s) have been installed, except those with devices installed in
accordance with this policy, shall have each containment and/or confinement
device(s) tested on an annual basis and perform any routine maintenance to
the device as recommended by the manufacturer and provide the Water and Sewer
Maintenance Superintendent with a report of this inspection and work. The
consumer shall cause the maintenance or repairs to be made rendering the
device fully operational. Failure of the consumer to perform that testing and
maintenance shall be cause for the premises to be deemed an immediate public
health hazard. The Water and Sewer Maintenance Superintendent may immediately
thereafter discontinue public water supply service to that premises and
service shall not be restored until the devices have been rendered fully
operational.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



§ 21-320  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.



   The city shall not be held liable for any cause for failure to detect
any unit failing to operate adequately or failure to identify any specific
hazard which may result in contamination of its public water supply, nor
shall this article diminish the responsibility of any property owner from
whose property a contamination of the public water supply may originate.



(Ord. passed 9-8-2009)



ARTICLE IX:  REQUIREMENTS FOR IRRIGATION SYSTEMS AND INSTALLATION



§ 21-335  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In accordance with HB 2499, the following are requirements for
irrigation systems and installation:



      (1)   Obtain a business license from the city when applicable;



      (2)   Install a second watering meter:



         (a)   A $550 deposit;



         (b)   One-inch line; and



         (c)   Rain gauge required.



      (3)   See § 21-311.



   (B)   Irrigation meters. If the second water tap is disconnected by
a customer, a full tap fee is required before the water will be reinstated.
If the property changes ownership, the new owner will only be required to pay
a reconnect fee as set by Council to reinstate service for the secondary tap.



(Ord. passed - -2009; Ord. passed 10-9-2018)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   ANNEXATIONS



      II.   CONDEMNATIONS



      III.   STREET CLOSINGS



      IV.   VARIANCES



TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




AO-93-003
 
2-9-1993
 
Annexation of Lot 56, containing 5.04 acres.


-
 
5-10-1994
 
Annexation of property located in Richmond County, Marks Creek Township,
specifically located on aerial photo #J091, Lot 82 and being a portion of
this lot.


-
 
9-10-1996
 
Annexation of Sierra Christian Center, formerly Hallelujah Deliverance
Church, more specifically identified as aerial photo #IO83, Lots 119 and 122.


-
 
9-10-1996
 
Annexation of tract containing 6.70 acres.


-
 
1-13-1998
 
Annexation of 13.53 acres, being all of Tract No. 1, Ledbetter-Culberson
Division.


-
 
5-12-1998
 
Annexation of 5.224 acres, being a portion of the Bal-Mc Enterprises Tract
No. 1.


-
 
10-13-1998
 
Annexation of a 15,397 square foot lot fronting NC Hwy. 38, being a portion
of Lois P. Snells property.


-
 
10-13-1998
 
Annexation of 4.08 acres, more or less, located in Marks Creek Township,
Richmond County.


-
 
4-13-1999
 
Annexation.


-
 
3-14-2000
 
Annexation of 8.424 acres.


-
 
7-11-2000
 
Annexation of Lots 3 and 4 in Block B of Pine Lawn, a subdivision of Wilfred
and Marie M. Reid.


-
 
9-12-2000
 
Annexation of 6.394 acres.


2006-07
 
11-14-2006
 
Annexation of Bland-Jordan property.


 
 
 
 
 




 



 



TABLE II:  CONDEMNATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


-
 
8-13-1996
 
Condemnation of buildings located at 208 and 306 Monroe Avenue.


 
 
 
 
 



 



 



TABLE III:  STREET CLOSINGS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


Res.
 
10-14-2008
 
Closing the portion of Champlain Street located at the end of Wilson Avenue.


-
 
12-9-2008
 
Amending the description of the portion of Champlain Street that was closed.


Res. R-10-9
 
10-12-2010
 
Closing the portion of Fayetteville Street between Fourth Street and Fifth
Street.


 
 
 
 
 



 



 



TABLE IV:  VARIANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


-4
 
-20-2009
 
Denying the petition for a variance applied for by Michael Haynes of Seaboard
Containers for a variance for the use of the property located at 516 North
Highway 177.


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to North Carolina General Statutes





References to 1972 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




 



REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES



 

G.S. Section
 
Code Section




1-46
 
Charter Article XVIII


1-339.1 et seq.
 
Ch. 8


1-539.16
 
Charter Article XVIII


1-593, 1A-1, Rule 6(a)
 
1-2


1-596
 
8-1


5-119(D)
 
5-138


Chapter 7A
 
9.5-55


7A-227
 
5-117


7A-228
 
5-117, 5-138


11-7
 
Ch. 2


12-3
 
1-2


12-3(6))
 
4-45


12-4
 
1-3, 1-4


Chapter 14
 
Ch. 14


14-4
 
5-109, 5-140, 5-144, 5-181, 10-140, 10-159, 17-69


14-4(a)
 
1-6, 5-144, 12-79


14-4(b)
 
12-79


14-127
 
14-9


14-132
 
14-9


14-136 et seq.
 
Ch. 9


14-144
 
14-9


14-145
 
14-1


14-149
 
6-4


14-154
 
14-9


14-156
 
14-9


14-160
 
14-9


14-177 through 14-202.1
 
10-130


14-203 through 14-208
 
10-130


14-225.1
 
Ch. 15


14-277.2
 
Ch. 15


14-286
 
14-15


14-360 et seq.
 
Ch. 4, 4-38


14-360
 
4-33


14-399
 
Ch. 17


14-401.3
 
Ch. 6


14-409.40
 
14-18


14-410 et seq.
 
9-1


14-415.23
 
14-18


14-443 et seq.
 
3-5


15-27.2
 
Ch. 5, 5-111, 5-131, 20-45, 21-5


Chapter 18B
 
Ch. 3, 12-76


18B-100 et seq.
 
3-1


18B-100
 
3-5


18B-102
 
3-5


18B-300 et seq.
 
3-5


18B-401
 
Ch. 20


19A-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 4


Chapter 20
 
Ch. 11


20-4.01
 
11-1


20-7
 
11-232


20-10
 
Ch. 20


20-16
 
20-67


20-37
 
Ch. 20


20-37.5 et seq.
 
11-172


20-87
 
Ch. 20


20-97
 
Ch. 11, Ch. 20


20-101
 
Ch. 20


20-125
 
13-2


20-129
 
11-74


20-134
 
11-74


20-138.1 et seq.
 
11-65


20-141 et seq.
 
11-91


20-156
 
11-69


20-157
 
9-39


20-161 et seq.
 
Ch. 11


20-165.1
 
11-64


20-169
 
Ch. 11, Ch. 15


20-173
 
11-69


20-280
 
Ch. 20


42-29
 
5-117, 5-138


42-30
 
5-117, 5-138


Chapter 44A, Article I
 
11-206


Chapter 58, Article 78 et seq.
 
Ch. 9


58-83-1
 
Ch. 9


Chapter 62
 
Ch. 21


Chapter 65
 
Ch. 6


Chapter 66
 
Ch. 10


67-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 4


67-1 through 67-18
 
4-33


67-2
 
4-34


67-4.1 through 67-4.5
 
4-31, 4-45


67-4.1(c)
 
4-31


67-4.2
 
4-45


67-4.3
 
4-45


67-4.4
 
4-45


67-12
 
4-34


68-15 et seq.
 
Ch. 4


Chapter 69
 
Ch. 9


Chapter 70
 
Ch. 6


Chapter 75A
 
Ch. 12


Chapter 75B
 
Ch. 10


Chapter 87
 
Ch. 5


90-86 through 90-113.8
 
20-64, 20-67


90-113.8A through 90-113.14
 
20-64, 20-67


90-210.18A et seq.
 
Ch. 6


Chapter 93B
 
Ch. 10


95-126 et seq.
 
Ch. 10


104E-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 17


Chapter 105
 
8-79


Chapter 105, Article 3
 
8-71


Chapter 105, Subchapter 1, Article 5
 
8-52, 8-53


Chapter 105, Subchapter 1, Article 9
 
8-52, 8-77, 8-78


Chapter 105, Subchapter I
 
8-71


Chapter 105, Subchapter VIII
 
8-52


105-33 et seq.
 
Ch. 10, 10-30


105-33(b)
 
10-28


105-33(c)
 
10-32


105-103
 
10-27


105-105
 
10-28


105-109
 
10-27


105-113.77
 
3-1, 3-3


105-164.3(7a)
 
8-45


105-164.16
 
8-75


105-187.1(3)
 
8-45


105-187.1(4)
 
8-45


105-349 et seq.
 
Ch. 8


106-65.22 et seq.
 
4-2


106-403
 
Ch. 4


106-405.1 et seq.
 
4-3


106-419 et seq.
 
Ch. 17


Chapter 113, Article 22A
 
4-2


113-127 et seq.
 
Ch. 12


113-274(c)(1a)
 
4-2


113-300.1 et seq.
 
4-2


Chapter 130A, Article 9
 
9.5-16


130A-184 et seq.
 
Ch. 4, 4-31, 4-33


130A-185
 
4-31


130A-193
 
4-31


130A-196
 
4-31, 4-43


130A-196 through 130A-198
 
4-43


130A-197
 
4-31


130A-198
 
4-43


130A-280 et seq.
 
Ch. 19


130A-290 et seq.
 
Ch. 17


130A-290(a)(6)
 
9.5-16


130A-290(a)(35)
 
9.5-16


130A-290(a)(36)
 
9.5-16


130A-498(c1)
 
14-17


132-1.4
 
2-180


132-1.4A
 
2-180


Chapter 133
 
Ch. 18


Chapter 136
 
Ch. 18


136-18(20)
 
Ch. 6


136-18.3
 
Ch. 17


136-66.2
 
Charter 10.2


136-71.6 et seq.
 
11-7


136-90 et seq.
 
18-8


136-91
 
Ch. 17


136-141 et seq.
 
11-209


136-143
 
11-209


Chapter 143, Article 3
 
Charter 17.1


Chapter 143, Article 8
 
2-165


Chapter 143, Article 21
 
21-193


Chapter 143, Article 21, Part 6
 
9.5-1


143-128 et seq.
 
Ch. 5, Ch. 8


143-129(a)
 
2-166


143-129(f)
 
2-162


143-129(g)
 
2-162


143-136 et seq.
 
Ch. 5


143-138(b)
 
5-1


143-139.1(b)
 
5-108


143-143.8 et seq.
 
Ch. 5


143-143.15
 
9.5-67


143-151.8 et seq.
 
Ch. 5


143-211 et seq.
 
Ch. 21


143-213(18)
 
21-112


143-215(b)
 
21-152


143-215.1
 
21-112, 21-152


143-215.3(a)(14)
 
21-112


143-215.6B
 
21-193


143-215.6B(f)
 
21-193


143-215.6B(g)
 
21-193


143-215.6B(h)
 
21-193


143-215.6B(i)
 
21-193


143-318.12
 
2-43


143-434 et seq.
 
4-2


143-440 et seq.
 
Ch. 4


153A-1
 
1-2


153A-123
 
10-140, 10-159


153A-351
 
9-65


153A-364
 
9-65


Chapter 158
 
Ch. 2


Chapter 159
 
Ch. 2, Ch. 8


159-2
 
1-2


159-8(b)
 
10-26


159-25(b)
 
8-28


159-31
 
Ch. 8


159-80 et seq.
 
Ch. 21


Chapter 160A
 
Ch. 2, Ch. 11


Chapter 160A, Article 8
 
9.5-1


Chapter 160A, Article 10
 
5-115, 5-137


Chapter 160A, Article 19, Parts 3, 5 and 8
 
9.5-1


Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 6
 
5-108


160A-1
 
1-2


160A-59 et seq.
 
2-86


160A-64
 
Charter 4.10


160A-66 et seq.
 
Ch. 2


160A-67
 
2-86


160A-68 et seq.
 
Ch. 2


160A-68
 
2-43


160A-69
 
2-86


160A-71
 
2-43


160A-76
 
Ch. 20, Ch. 21


160A-76(b)
 
Ch. 5, Ch. 9


160A-77
 
1-1, 1-7, 1-8


160A-78
 
1-1, 2-88


160A-79
 
1-1


160A-101(7)(b)
 
2-2


160A-147 et seq.
 
Ch. 2


160A-148
 
2-87


160A-163
 
Ch. 9


160A-171
 
2-88


160A-172
 
2-88


160A-173
 
2-89


160A-174
 
1-1, 2-41, Ch. 14, 14-17, Ch. 17


Chapter 160A-174, Article 6 et seq.
 
5-156


160A-175
 
1-6, 5-109, 5-119, 5-144, 5-182, 9-63, Ch. 17


160A-176
 
Ch. 21


160A-178
 
Ch. 10


160A-179
 
14-4


160A-181
 
Ch. 10


160A-182
 
Ch. 4


160A-183
 
Ch. 9


160A-184
 
Ch. 4, Ch. 13


160A-185
 
Ch. 21


160A-186
 
Ch. 4


160A-187
 
Ch. 4


160A-188
 
Ch. 4, 4-1


160A-189
 
14-8


160A-191
 
Ch. 10


160A-193
 
Ch. 4, 5-101, 5-115, 5-119, Ch. 11, Ch. 17, Ch. 21


160A-194
 
Ch. 4, Ch. 5, Ch. 10


160A-206 et seq.
 
Ch. 8, Ch. 10


160A-207
 
10-30


160A-208.1
 
8-48


160A-211 et seq.
 
Ch. 10


160A-211
 
Ch. 4, 8-46


160A-212
 
Ch. 4


160A-215.1
 
8-55


160A-215.1(b)
 
8-51


160A-215.1(d)
 
8-53


160A-215.1(e)(1)
 
8-45


160A-215.1(e)(2)
 
8-45


160A-215.1(f)
 
8-52


160A-216 et seq.
 
Charter 9.4, Charter 9.5, Ch. 8, Ch. 18, Ch. 21, 21-235


160A-291 et seq.
 
Ch. 9


160A-293
 
Ch. 9


160A-296 et seq.
 
Ch. 11, Ch. 18


160A-296
 
Ch. 21


160A-301
 
Ch. 11


160A-302
 
Ch. 11


160A-303
 
Ch. 11, 11-196


160A-303.1
 
Ch. 17


160A-303.2
 
Ch. 11, 11-196


160A-304
 
Ch. 20


160A-307
 
18-3


160A-311 et seq.
 
Ch. 17, Ch. 21


160A-319
 
Ch. 21


160A-341 et seq.
 
Ch. 6


160A-350 et seq.
 
Ch. 12


160A-360 et seq.
 
2-121


160A-360
 
Charter 11.1


160A-361 et seq.
 
2-121


160A-362
 
2-122


160A-381 et seq.
 
Charter 11.1


160A-383.5
 
5-108


160A-400.14(a)
 
5-112


160A-411 et seq.
 
Ch. 5


160A-411
 
Ch. 5, 9-65


160A-412
 
5-67


160A-415
 
5-71


160A-420
 
5-73


160A-424
 
9-65


160A-426
 
5-101, 5-105


160A-432
 
Ch. 5


160A-433
 
5-72


160A-435 et seq.
 
Ch. 5


160A-439
 
5-126


160A-439(f)
 
5-136, 5-139


160A-439(g)
 
5-139


160A-439(i)
 
5-137


160A-441 et seq.
 
Ch. 5, 5-68


160A-441
 
5-101


160A-446(f)
 
5-112, 5-142


160A-446(i)
 
5-141


160A-460 et seq.
 
2-121


160A-493
 
Ch. 4


160A-493(f)
 
5-138


Chapter 163
 
Ch. 2, 2-1


163-288
 
2-3


163-292
 
2-2


163-294
 
2-2


164-7
 
1-7


Chapter 166A
 
Ch. 7


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1972 CODE



 

1972 Code Section
 
2014 Code Section




1-1
 
1-1


1-2
 
1-2


1-3
 
1-3


1-4
 
1-4


1-5
 
1-5


1-6
 
1-6


1-7—1-11
 
1-9


2-6
 
2-26


2-7
 
2-27


2-8
 
2-41


2-9
 
2-42


2-10
 
2-43


2-11
 
2-44


2-12
 
2-45


2-13
 
2-46


2-14
 
2-47


2-15
 
2-48


2-16
 
2-49


2-17
 
2-50


2-18
 
2-51


2-19
 
2-61


2-20
 
2-62


2-23
 
2-86


2-24
 
2-88


2-26
 
2-89


2-27
 
2-121


2-29
 
2-124


2-30
 
2-125


2-31
 
2-126


2-32
 
2-127


2-33
 
2-128


2-34
 
2-129


2-35
 
2-130


2-36
 
2-131


2-37
 
2-132


3-7
 
4-3


3-8
 
4-4


3-9
 
4-5


5-1
 
10-26


5-2
 
10-27


5-3
 
10-28


5-4
 
10-29


5-5
 
10-30


5-6
 
10-31


5-7
 
10-32


5-8
 
10-33


5-9
 
10-87


5-10
 
10-56


5-11
 
10-57


5-12
 
10-58


5-13
 
10-59


5-14
 
10-60


5-15
 
10-61


5-16
 
10-62


5-17
 
3-1


5-18
 
3-2


5-19
 
3-3


5-20
 
3-4


6-3
 
6-1


6-5
 
6-2


6-7
 
6-3


6-8
 
6-4


6-9
 
6-5


6-10
 
6-6


6-11
 
6-7


6-12
 
6-8


6-17
 
6-9


7-2
 
7-26


7-3
 
7-27


7-4
 
7-28


7-5
 
7-29


7-6
 
7-30


7-7
 
7-31


8-1
 
8-27


8-2
 
8-26


8-3
 
8-28


8-4
 
8-29


8-5
 
8-30


8-6
 
8-31


8-7
 
8-32


8-8
 
8-1


9-3
 
9-1


9-4
 
9-2


9-5
 
14-16


9-7
 
9-3


9-9
 
9-36


9-10
 
9-37


9-11
 
9-38, 11-77


9-12
 
9-39


9-13
 
9-40


9-14
 
9-41


9-15
 
14-15


9-17
 
9-42


9-18
 
9-43


9-61
 
9-55


9-62
 
9-56


9-63
 
9-57


9-64
 
9-58


9-65
 
9-59


9-66
 
9-60


9-67
 
9-61


9-68
 
9-62


9-69
 
9-63


9-70
 
9-64


9-71
 
9-65


10-1
 
17-1


10-2
 
17-31


10-4
 
17-2


10-5
 
17-33


10-6
 
17-34


10-7
 
17-35


10-8
 
17-36


10-9
 
17-37


10-10
 
17-38


10-11
 
17-3


10-12
 
17-40


11-1
 
14-13


11-2
 
4-6


11-3
 
14-14


11-4
 
17-70


12-1
 
11-1


12-2
 
11-2


12-3
 
11-36


12-4
 
11-37


12-5
 
11-38


12-7
 
11-3


12-8
 
11-4


12-9
 
11-5


12-10
 
11-6


12-11
 
11-7


12-12
 
11-8


12-13
 
11-9


12-14
 
11-10


12-15
 
11-11


12-20
 
11-132


12-21
 
11-133


12-22
 
11-151


12-23
 
11-171


12-26
 
11-134


12-27
 
11-135


12-28
 
11-136


12-29
 
11-137


12-30
 
11-138


12-31
 
11-156


12-32
 
11-139


12-34
 
11-61


12-35
 
11-62


12-36
 
11-63


12-37
 
11-64


12-38
 
11-65


12-41
 
11-67


12-42
 
11-68


12-43
 
11-69


12-45
 
11-70


12-46
 
11-71


12-47
 
11-72


12-48
 
11-73


12-49
 
11-74


12-50
 
11-75


12-51
 
11-91


12-52
 
11-76


13-1
 
12-2


13-2
 
12-4


13-3
 
12-3


13-4
 
12-31


13-5
 
12-32


13-6
 
12-33


13-8
 
12-34


13-9
 
12-35


13-10
 
12-36


13-11
 
12-37


13-12
 
12-38


13-13
 
12-39


13-14
 
12-40


13-15
 
12-41


13-16
 
12-42


13-17
 
12-43


13-18
 
12-44


13-19
 
12-48


13-20
 
12-47


14-1
 
13-1


14-2
 
13-2


15-2
 
14-1


15-3
 
14-2


15-4
 
14-3


15-5
 
14-4


15-6
 
4-1


15-7
 
4-2


15-8
 
4-2


15-9
 
14-5


15-10
 
14-6


15-11
 
3-5


15-12
 
14-7


15-13
 
9-1, 14-8


15-14
 
14-9, 14-15


15-16.1
 
17-1


15-17
 
14-10


15-19
 
14-11


15-21
 
14-12


15-22
 
13-2


18-1
 
18-1


18-1.1
 
18-2


18-2
 
18-3


18-3
 
18-4


18-4
 
18-5


18-5
 
18-6


18-6
 
18-7


18-7
 
18-8


18-8
 
18-9


18-9
 
18-10


18-9.1
 
18-11


18-10
 
18-12


18-11
 
18-13


21-1
 
21-3


21-2
 
21-4


21-3
 
21-5


21-4
 
21-6


21-5
 
21-7


21-6
 
21-8


21-7
 
21-9


21-8
 
21-10


21-9
 
21-11


21-10
 
21-12


21-11
 
21-13


21-12
 
21-14


21-13
 
21-15


21-14
 
21-16


21-15
 
21-17


21-16
 
21-18


21-17
 
21-19


21-18
 
21-20


21-19
 
21-46


21-20
 
21-47


21-21
 
21-48


21-22
 
21-49


21-23
 
21-50


21-24
 
21-51


21-25
 
21-52


21-26
 
21-53


21-27
 
21-54


21-28
 
21-55


21-29
 
21-56


21-30
 
21-57


21-31
 
21-58


21-32
 
21-1


21-34
 
21-81


21-35
 
21-82


21-36
 
21-83


21-37
 
21-84


21-38
 
21-85


21-39
 
21-86


21-40
 
21-87


21-41
 
21-88


21-42
 
21-89


21-43
 
21-90


21-44
 
21-91


21-45
 
21-92


21-46
 
21-93


21-47
 
21-94


21-54
 
21-95


21-57
 
21-96


21-62
 
21-97


21-63
 
21-98


21-64
 
21-216


21-65
 
21-217


21-66
 
21-218


21-67
 
21-219


21-68
 
21-220


21-69
 
21-231


21-70
 
21-232


21-71
 
21-233


21-72
 
21-234


21-73
 
21-235


21-74
 
21-236


21-75
 
21-237


21-76
 
21-238


21-77
 
21-239


21-78
 
21-240


21-79
 
21-251


21-80
 
21-252


21-81
 
21-253


21-82
 
21-254


21-83
 
21-255


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


-
 
1-4-1972
 
2-2


-
 
10-14-2008
 
TSO Table III


R-10-9
 
10-12-2010
 
TSO Table III


 
 
 
 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
10-9-1970
 
Charter 6.2


-
 
2-18-1975
 
Charter 6.1, 6.2


-
 
7-1-1975
 
12-1, 12-45, 12-46


-
 
1-20-1976
 
Charter 4.4


-
 
2-17-1976
 
4-3—4-5, 4-31—4-46


-
 
1-11-1977
 
11-153, 11-155


-
 
10-11-1977
 
2-122


-
 
9-14-1979
 
21-59


-
 
6-10-1980
 
11-131, 11-172


-
 
4-14-1981
 
10-111—10-114


-
 
7-14-1981
 
12-5


-
 
2-8-1983
 
11-154


-
 
9-13-1983
 
11-153


-
 
10-10-1983
 
11-152, 11-153


-
 
9-11-1984
 
6-10


-
 
10-9-1984
 
11-93—11-96


-
 
12-11-1984
 
11-131


-
 
12-10-1985
 
Charter 4.4


-
 
9-9-1986
 
17-33


-
 
10-14-1986
 
17-61, 17-63, 17-69


-
 
3-10-1987
 
11-152


-
 
9-8-1987
 
11-106—11-109


-
 
6-14-1988
 
17-4, 17-32


-
 
7-12-1988
 
17-32


-
 
8-9-1988
 
15-1—15-8


-
 
9-13-1988
 
11-173


-
 
4-11-1989
 
11-66


-
 
9-12-1989
 
20-26—20-30, 20-41—20-51, 20-61—20-68, 20-81—20-85


-
 
10-9-1989
 
11-92


-
 
1-9-1990
 
11-152


-
 
3-13-1990
 
Charter 6.1, 6.2, 7.1, 7.4, 7.5


-
 
5-15-1990
 
11-196—11-210


-
 
6-12-1990
 
17-32.5


-
 
7-1-1990
 
21-1, 21-2


-
 
1-12-1991
 
21-122


-
 
9-17-1991
 
12-71—12-79


-
 
11-12-1991
 
21-111, 21-112, 21-121, 21-123—21-126, 21-151, 21-152, 21-191—21-193,
21-201


-
 
3-10-1992
 
9.5-1—9.5-4, 9.5-16, 9.5-26—9.5-33, 9.5-51—9.5-55, 9.5-66—9.5-68


-
 
4-14-1992
 
10-126—10-140


-
 
7-14-1992
 
10-126—10-140


AO-93-003
 
2-9-1993
 
TSO Table I


93-005
 
4-13-1993
 
9-55—9-65


93-006
 
5-11-1993
 
2-2


93-007
 
5-11-1993
 
12-78


93-009
 
7-6-1993
 
21-111, 21-112, 21-121—21-134, 21-141, 21-142, 21-151, 21-152,
21-161—21-173, 21-181—21-183, 21-187, 21-191—21-194, 21-201,
21-206—21-208


93-010
 
8-10-1993
 
14-17


-
 
5-10-1994
 
TSO Table I


-
 
6-14-1994
 
Charter 4.2; 2-43


-
 
10-10-1995
 
14-18


-
 
5-16-1996
 
Charter 4.10


-
 
7-9-1996
 
21-62, 21-63


-
 
8-13-1996
 
TSO Table II


-
 
9-10-1996
 
TSO Table I


-
 
9-10-1996
 
TSO Table I


-
 
11-12-1996
 
17-42


-
 
1-13-1998
 
TSO Table I


-
 
1-13-1998
 
TSO Table I


-
 
2-10-1998
 
2-160—2-166


-
 
5-12-1998
 
TSO Table I


-
 
10-13-1998
 
TSO Table I


-
 
10-13-1998
 
TSO Table I


-
 
4-13-1999
 
TSO Table I


-
 
6-8-1999
 
21-13, 21-61


-
 
8-10-1999
 
5-155—5-160, 5-175—5-185, 5-200—5-202


-
 
3-14-2000
 
TSO Table I


-
 
6-13-2000
 
8-45—8-56


-
 
7-11-2000
 
TSO Table I


-
 
9-12-2000
 
TSO Table I


-
 
12-12-2000
 
11-66


-
 
1-9-2001
 
3-5


-
 
1-9-2001
 
18-14


-
 
3-13-2001
 
21-111, 21-112, 21-121, 21-123, 21-152, 21-192, 21-207


2001-04
 
6-12-2001
 
9-3


-
 
10-9-2001
 
11-230—11-251


-
 
- -2002
 
21-270—21-279


-
 
5-14-2002
 
21-111, 21-112, 21-121, 21-123, 21-152, 21-192, 21-207


-
 
6-10-2002
 
8-70—8-83


-
 
3-25-2006
 
20-42, 20-43


-
 
5-9-2006
 
20-42, 20-43


03-2006
 
6-13-2006
 
14-17


04-2006
 
6-13-2006
 
21-290—21-292


-
 
11-14-2006
 
2-145


2006-07
 
11-14-2006
 
TSO Table I


-
 
1-9-2007
 
10-155—10-159


-
 
6-12-2007
 
9-63


-
 
9-11-2007
 
9.5-1—9.5-4, 9.5-16, 9.5-26—9.5-33, 9.5-51—9.5-55, 9.5-66—9.5-70,
9.5-85—9.5-87


-
 
10-9-2007
 
21-290—21-292


-
 
3-1-2008
 
12-38


-
 
3-1-2008
 
1-6, 17-61, 17-64, 17-66, 17-68


-
 
8-12-2008
 
19.5-1—19.5-14, Ch. 19.5, Appendix A


-
 
11-11-2008
 
17-61


-
 
12-9-2008
 
TSO Table III


-
 
- -2009
 
21-335


2009-03
 
4-14-2009
 
5-125—5-144


2009-04
 
4-14-2009
 
19-1, 19-3, 19-7, 19-8


-
 
4-20-2009
 
TSO Table IV


-
 
7-14-2009
 
5-186


-
 
9-8-2009
 
21-305—21-320


-
 
11-10-2009
 
11-231, 11-232


2010-01
 
2-15-2010
 
5-125—5-144


-
 
11-9-2010
 
4-8


-
 
6-14-2011
 
17-41, 17-42


-
 
8-9-2011
 
21-305


2011-06
 
9-13-2011
 
2-111


07-2011
 
11-1-2011
 
14-17


-
 
3-10-2012
 
18-15


01-2012
 
4-10-2012
 
21-290—21-292


-
 
6-12-2012
 
21-8


5-2012
 
6-12-2012
 
2-111


-
 
7-14-2015
 
21-56, 21-255


-
 
8-11-2015
 
4-31—4-44, 4-46—4-48


2015-04
 
9-8-2015
 
19-1, 19-3, 19-7, 19-8


2015-07
 
9-8-2015
 
4-31—4-48


2015-09
 
11-10-2015
 
5-101—5-122


2016-03
 
3-8-2016
 
14-18


2016-03.2
 
4-12-2016
 
11-131, 11-152, 11-153, 11-156, 11-197


-
 
4-12-2016
 
4-7


2016-07
 
5-24-2016
 
Charter 4.10, 2-27


2016-08
 
5-26-2016
 
2-122


2016-10
 
6-14-2016
 
18-15


2017-07
 
10-10-2017
 
3-5


2017-08
 
11-14-2017
 
11-2, 11-78, 13-2


-
 
- -
 
5-159, 5-202


-
 
10-9-2018
 
21-61, 21-279, 21-335


-
 
11-13-2018
 
3-5


-
 
12-11-2018
 
2-122


-
 
12-11-2018
 
2-180


 
City of Hamlet
Zoning Ordinance
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I ....................................... Ordinance Established
Article II ...................................... Definitions
Article 111. ...................................... General Provisions
Article IV ....................................... Non-conforming Situations
Article V ....................................... Schedule of District Regulations
Article VI. ..................................... Table of Permitted Uses
Article VII. ..................................... Special Requirements Notes to the Table of Permitted Uses
Article Vlll ..................................... 011-Street Parking and Loading Signs
Article IX ....................................... Signs
Article X ....................................... Screening Requirements
Article XI. ...................................... Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
Article XII. ..................................... Quasi-Judicial Procedures
Article XIII. .................................... Amendment Procedure
Article XIV ..................................... General Legal Provisions
Appendices
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE I. ORDINANCE ESTABLISHED
Section 1.1 Title
This Ordinance shall be known as "The Zoning Ordinance for the City of Hamlet, North Carolina and Its
Area of Extraterritorial Jurisdiction", and may be referred to as "The Hamlet Zoning Ordinance."
Section 1.2 Jurisdiction
The regulations set forth in this Ordinance shall apply to all property within the City Limits of the City of
Hamlet and within its Area of Extraterritorial Jurisdiction as shall now or hereafter be established.
Section 1.3 Districts Established
In order to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance as set forth above, the jurisdictional area subject to
this Ordinance is hereby divided into Districts of which there shall be twelve (12) with the designations as
listed below:
R-20 Residential District
RA-20 Residential District
R-1 O Residential District
R-8 Residential District
R-6 Residential District
R-6M Residential District
0-1 Office and Institutional District
B-1 Central Business District
B-2 General Business District
B-3 Neighborhood Business District
1-1 Light Industrial District
1-2 Heavy Industrial District
Section 1.4 Official Maps Adopted - District Boundaries Established
The boundaries of the Districts are shown upon the Zoning Map accompanying this Ordinance and made
a part hereof. The Zoning Map and all the notations and other information shown thereon are hereby
made a part of this Ordinance the same as if such information set forth on the Zoning Map were all fully
described and set out herein. The previous and current versions of the Zoning Map, properly attested,
shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk in digital or paper format and available for public inspection.
Copies of the Zoning Map may be used in the administration of this Ordinance but the Zoning Map on file
and the record of City Council action shall constitute the Official Record.
In the creation, by this Ordinance, of the respective Districts, the City Council of the City of Hamlet has
given due and careful consideration to the peculiar suitability of each and every District for the particular
regulations applied thereto, and the necessary, proper, and comprehensive groupings and arrangements
of various uses and densities of population in accordance with a well-considered comprehensive plan for
the physical development of the City.
The boundaries of such Districts as are shown upon the Zoning Map adopted by this Ordinance are
hereby adopted and provisions of this Ordinance governing the use of land and buildings, the height of
buildings, building site areas, the size of yards about buildings, and other matters as hereinafter set forth,
are hereby established and declared to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each
and every District shown upon said Zoning Map.
1-1
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Section 1.5 Bona Fide Farm Exemption
This chapter shall in no way regulate, restrict, prohibit or otherwise deter any bona fide farm and its
related uses within the extraterritorial jurisdiction; except that in case of conversion of the uses to
nonagricultural or non-farm purposes, a zoning certificate shall be procured, and the new use must
comply with all regulations for the district in which it is situated.
Section 1.6 Comprehensive I Land Use Plan Required
As a condition of adopting and applying zoning regulations in accordance with N.C.G.S.1600-501, the
City shall adopt and reasonably maintain a comprehensive plan or land-use plan that sets forth goals,
policies, and programs intended to guide the present and future physical, social, and economic
development of the jurisdiction. Plans shall be adopted by the City Council with the advice and
consultation of the Planning Board. Adoption and amendment of a comprehensive plan is a legislative
decision. Plans shall be advisory in nature. Plans shall be considered by the planning board and
governing board when considering proposed amendments to zoning regulations as required by G.S.
1600-604 and G.S. 1600-605. If a zoning map amendment is adopted and the action was deemed
inconsistent with the adopted plan, the zoning amendment shall have the effect of also amending any
future land-use map in the approved plan, and no additional request or application for a plan amendment
shall be required."
Section 1.7 Expansion of Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
When the City of Hamlet proposes to exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction under this ordinance it shall
notify the owners of all parcels of land proposed for addition to the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, as
shown on the county tax records. The notice shall be sent by first-class mail to the last addresses listed
for affected property owners in the county tax records. The notice shall inform the landowner of the effect
of the extension of extraterritorial jurisdiction, of the landowners right's right to participate in a legislative
hearing prior to adoption of any ordinance extending the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, as provided in
G.S. 1600-601, and the right of all residents of the area to apply to the board of county commissioners to
serve as a representative on the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment, as provided in G.S. 1600-
303. The notice shall be mailed at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. The person or persons
mailing the notices shall certify to City Council that the notices were sent by first-class mail, and the
certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
1-2
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Section 2.1 General Rules
In the construction of this Ordinance the rules and definitions contained in this Article shall be observed
and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. In further amplification and for clarity of
interpretation of the context, the following definitions of word usage shall apply:
A.
B.
c.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
H.
I.
Section 2.2
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular
number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular;
Words or phrases not specifically defined herein shall have their customary meanings as
defined in a standard dictionary.
Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural
number include the singular, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates
otherwise.
The word "person" includes a firm, association, corporation, trust, and company as well
as an individual.
The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary;
The word "may" is permissive and discretionary;
The word "lot" shall include the words, "piece", "parcel", and "plots";
The word "building" includes all structures of every kind regardless of similarity to
buildings;
The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", and
"occupied for";
All "measured distances" shall be to the nearest "integral foot". If a fraction is one-half
foot or less, the "integral foot" next below shall be taken;
Where any other "requirement" of this Ordinance results in a fraction of a unit, a fraction
of one-half or more of such unit shall be considered a whole unit and a fraction of less
than one-half shall be disregarded except where in this Ordinance other specific
provisions are stated.
The phrase "set forth herein" refers to all Sections of the City of Hamlet Zoning
Ordinance.
Definitions
Abutting.
Having property or district lines in common. For example, two lots are abutting if they have
property lines in common. Lots are also considered to be abutting if they are directly opposite
each other and separated by a railroad, street, alley, or other transporation corridor. The terms
"adjacent", "adjoining", and "contiguous" shall be interchangeable with the term abutting".
2-1
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Access.
A way of approaching or entering a property. The term "access" shall be interchangeable with the
terms "ingress", "egress", and "access way".
Accessory Building.
A detached building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal building, and
which is located on the same zone lot as the principal building.
Accessory Dwelling.
Unit. A dwelling unit that exists either as part of a principal dwelling or as an accessory building
and is secondary and incidental to the use of the property as single family residential.
Accessory Structure.
A detached subordinate structure, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal
structure and which is located on the same zone lot as the principal structure.
Antenna. A conductor by which electromagnetic waves (telephonic, radio, television, microwave,
or otherwise) are transmitted or received.
Automobile Repair Services, Major.
An establishment primarily engaged in one or more of the following activities: 1) general repair or
service; 2) engine repair; 3) installation or repair of transmissions; 4) installation or repair of
automotive glass; 5) installation or repair of exhaust systems; 6) repair of tops, bodies, and
interiors; and 7) automotive painting and refinishing.
Automobile Repair Services, Minor.
An establishment primarily engaged in one or more of the following activities: 1) diagnostic
service and tune-ups; 2) installation or repair of air conditioners, brakes, carburetors, electrical
systems, fuel systems, generators, starters, and radiators; 3) lubricating service; and 4) front end
and wheel alignment.
Bar.
An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of beer or wine for consumption on the
premises. Such establishment must obtain an ABC license for on-premises beer or wine
consumption only. The establishment may also be engaged in the retail sale of prepared food for
on-premises consumption.
Bed and Breakfast.
A dwelling in which lodging, with or without meals, is provided for overnight guests for a fee.
Bedroom.
A fully enclosed interior room as shown on the building plan for the structure having, as a
minimum, a doorway, window and closet.
Block.
A tract of land of a lot or group of lots bounded by streets, public parks, golf courses, railroad
right-of-way, water courses, lakes, unsubdivided land, or a boundary line or lines of the county or
its towns or any combination of the above.
Board of Adjustment and Planning Board.
The Board of Adjustment and Planning Board of the City of Hamlet.
Buffer.
A strip of land established to protect one type of land use from another.
2-2
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Buffer, Watershed.
An area of natural or planted vegetation through which stormwater runoff flows in a diffused
manner so that the runoff does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the
runoff and filtering of pollutants. The buffer is measured landward from the normal pool.
Building.
Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building Height.
The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of finished grade to the topmost
section of the roof.
Building Setback Line.
A line parallel to the property line. No structure shall be erected closer to property boundary than
the setback line. The front building setback line shall be measured from the street/road right-ofway
line.
Built-Upon Area.
Built-upon areas shall include that portion of a development project that is covered by impervious
or partially impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel roads, recreation facilities (e.g.
tennis courts), etc. (Note: wooden slatted decks and the water area of a swimming pool is
considered pervious.)
Church.
Religious uses and facilities operated for worship; promotion of religious activities, including
houses of worship and education and training; and accessory uses such as living quarters for
ministers and staff, child day care facilities, full-time educational institutions, hospitals, and other
related operations.
City.
Unless the context clearly discloses a contrary intent, the word "City" shall mean the City of
Hamlet.
City Council.
The City Council of the City of Hamlet.
City Manager.
The City Manager of the City of Hamlet.
Code of Ordinances.
The City of Hamlet Code of Ordinances.
Colleges or Universities.
A post-secondary institution for higher learning that grants associate or bachelor's degrees and
may also have research facilities and/or professional schools that grant master and doctoral
degrees. This may also include community colleges that grant associate or bachelor's degrees or
certificates of completion in business or technical fields.
Conditional Zoning.
A legislative zoning map amendment with site-specific conditions incorporated into the zoning
map amendment.
Condominium.
The term condominium shall apply to residential and commercial development where portions of
2-3
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
buildings are separately owned and where land and other improvements are held in undivided
interested.
Congregate Care Facility.
A facility providing shelter and services for ambulatory individuals at least fifty-five (55) years of
age who by reason of age, functional impairment, or infirmity may require meals, housekeeping,
and personal care assistance. Congregate care facilities do not include nursing homes or similar
institutions devoted primarily to the care of the chronically ill or the incurable.
Contour Line.
A contour line is an imaginary line on the surface of the earth that connects all points that are of
equal height above some reference plane, usually sea level.
Contour Map.
A contour map is a drawing which shows the location of the contour lines for a particular parcel of
land which, in turn, show the topography of the parcel.
Convalescent Home.
An institution, which is advertised, announced, or maintained for the express or implied purpose
of providing nursing or convalescent care for persons unrelated to the licensee. A convalescent
home is a home for chronic or nursing patients who, on admission, are not as a rule acutely ill
and who do not usually require special facilities, such as an operating room, x-ray facilities,
laboratory facilities, and obstetrical facilities. A convalescent home provides care for persons who
have remedial ailments or other ailments for which continuing medical and skilled nursing care is
indicated; who, however, are not sick enough to require general hospital care, Nursing care is
their primary need, but they will require continuing medical supervision. A major factor, which
distinguishes convalescent homes, is that the residents will require the individualization of
medical care.
Dedication.
The offer to transfer property from private to public ownership. Such transaction is not completed
unless and until the appropriate public agency accepts the offer.
Demolition and Construction Debris Landfill (Major).
A disposal site (other than a minor demolition and construction debris landfill as defined in this
Ordinance) for stumps, limbs, leaves, concrete, brick, wood, and uncontaminated earth. Disposal
of any other types of wastes must be approved by the State Division of Health Services.
Demolition and Construction Debris Landfill (Minor).
A disposal site for stumps, limbs, leaves, concrete, brick, wood, and uncontaminated earth which
is less than three (3) acres in size and is in operation for less than one (1) year.
Developer.
A person, including a governmental agency or redevelopment authority, who undertakes any
development and who is the landowner of the property to be developed or who has been
authorized by the landowner to undertake development on that property.
Development.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the term means any of the following:
A. The construction, erection, alteration, enlargement, renovation, substantial repair,
movement to another site, or demolition of any structure.
B. The excavation, grading, filling, clearing, or alteration of land.
2-4
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
C. The subdivision of land as defined in G.S. 160D-802.
D. The initiation or substantial change in the use of land or the intensity of use of
land.
(May also be referred to as "land development activity").
Dish Antenna.
An accessory structure greater than three feet in diameter, which includes a combination of
A Antenna apparatus or component whose purpose is to receive communication or
other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources;
B. A low-noise amplifier which is situated at the focal point of the receiving
component and whose purpose is to magnify and transfer signals; and
C. A coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals into the interior of a
building.
The height of the dish antenna shall be the vertical distance from the ground level at the bottom
of the support base to the highest point when positioned at its lowest angle for operation. The
setback of the dish antenna shall be measured from the center mounting post.
Down-zoning
A zoning ordinance that affects an area of land in one of the following ways:
A. By decreasing the development density of the land to be less dense than was
allowed under its previous usage.
B. By reducing the permitted uses of the land that are specified in a zoning
ordinance or land development regulation to fewer uses than were allowed under
its previous usage.
Driveway.
That portion of the vehicle accommodation area that consists of a travel lane bounded on either
side by an area that is not part of the vehicle accommodation area.
Dwelling.
Any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home, or part thereof, used and occupied
for human habitation or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, except that for purposes of Article 12 of GS 160D,
it does not include any manufactured home, mobile home, or recreational vehicle, if used solely
for a seasonal vacation purpose.
Dwelling, Multi-family.
A building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for three (3) or more families living
independently of each other with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each, and
including apartments, townhouses, and condominiums.
Dwelling, Single-family Detached.
A separate, detached building designed for and occupied exclusively by one (1) family.
Dwelling, Townhouse.
A building consisting of single-family residences attached to one another in which each unit is
located on an individually owned parcel, generally within a development containing drives, walks,
and open space in common area.
Dwelling, Twin Home.
A building consisting of two single family dwelling units, each dwelling unit occupying its own
2-5
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
conventional lot and conveyed by deed in fee simple, connected along a common party wall with
no interior circulation between the two.
Dwelling, Two-family (Duplex).
A building on one zone lot arranged and designed to be occupied by two (2) families living
independently of each other.
Dwelling Unit.
A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Easement.
A right given by the owner of land to another party for specific limited use of that land. For
example, a property owner may give an easement on his property to allow utility facilities, like
power lines or pipelines; to allow light to reach a neighbor's windows; or to allow access to
another property.
Effective Date of this Ordinance.
Whenever this Ordinance refers to the effective date or this Ordinance, the reference shall be
deemed to include the effective date of any amendments to this Ordnance if the amendment,
rather than this Ordinance as originally adopted, creates a nonconforming situation.
Electronic Gaming Operations.
Any business enterprise, whether as a principal or an accessory use, where persons utilize
electronic machines, including but not limited to computers and gaming terminals, to conduct
games of chance, including sweepstakes, and where cash, merchandise or other items of value
are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such distribution is determined
by electronic games played or by predetermined odds. This term includes, but is not limited to
internet cafes, internet sweepstakes, beach sweepstakes or cyber cafes. This does not include
any lottery approved by the State of North Carolina.
Erosion.
The wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water, gravity or any combination
thereof.
Establishment.
In the context of Article IX, "Sign Regulations," "establishment" is used to denote a business,
building, or other use on a single zoning lot.
Explosive.
Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to
function by explosion. The term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite and other high
explosives, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs,
detonating cord, igniter cord, and igniters. "Explosive" shall be defined in the same manner as
set forth in 27 C.F.R. § 555.11 and 13 N.C.A.C. 7F.0702(11 ).
Facade.
The generally vertical face or wall of a building, including the front, side, and/or rear elevations.
For the purposes of this definition, a mansard or false mansard roof which extends the full width
of a facade shall be considered as part of the facade of a building so long as the deflection from
vertical is no greater than thirty (30) degrees.
Fall Area.
A circle whose center is the base of a telecommunications tower and whose radius is equal to
2-6
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
one and one-half the tower's height. A fall area of Y, :1 will be acceptable with signed and sealed
statement by a registered professional engineer licensed by the State of NC indicating such fall
area would prevent the tower's fall from encroaching onto adjoining property.
Family.
1) An individual; 2) two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption living
together in a dwelling unit, and (unless the dwelling contains an accessory dwelling unit) may also
include not more than two (2) unrelated persons; or 3) a group of not more than four (4) persons
who need not be related by blood, marriage, or adoption living together in a dwelling unit. A family
may include five (5) or fewer foster children placed in a family foster home licensed by the State
but shall not include fraternities, sororities, boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes, or family
care homes.
Family Care Home.
Pursuant to NCGS 168-21, a home for six (6) or less individuals with support and supervisory
personnel that provides room and board, personal care, and habilitation services in a family
environment for resident persons with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or mental
disability including, but not limited to, mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing
and sight impairments, emotional disturbances, and orthopedic impairments, but not including
mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in NCGS 122-58.2(1)(b).
Flea Market.
Open-air market for the sale of new and/or second-hand articles and goods by one or more
merchants, which is conducted on an open, non-residential lot.
Flood or Flooding.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of
surface waters from any source.
Group Care Facility.
A facility licensed by the State of North Carolina, (by whatever name it is called, other than
"Family Care Horne: as defined by this Ordinance), with support and supervisory personnel that
provides room and board, personal care, or habilitation services in a family environment for not
more than thirty (30) people.
Home Occupation.
Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of the immediate family residing on the
premises, in connection with which there is used no display of any type and there is no
commodity sold upon the premises; no person is employed other than a member of the
immediate family residing on the premises; and no mechanical or electrical equipment is used
except such as is permissible for purely domestic or household purposes. A professional person
may use his residence for infrequent consultation, emergency treatment, or performance of
religious rites, but not for the general practice of his profession. No accessory building shall be
used for such home occupation. There shall not be displayed or created outside the building, any
external evidence of the operation of the Home Occupation.
Hospital.
An institution where sick or injured persons are given medical care and, in the course of the
same, are housed overnight, fed, and provided nursing and related services. This definition shall
not include drug rehabilitation facilities, halfway houses, convalescent or nursing homes,
institutions for mentally ill individuals or similar facilities.
2-7
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
landowner
The holder of the title in fee simple. Absent evidence to the contrary, the City may rely on the
county tax records to determine who is a landowner. The landowner may authorize a person
holding a valid option, lease, or contract to purchase to act as his or her agent or representative
for the purpose of making applications for development approvals.
(May also be referred to as an "owner").
land Development Activity.
See "development".
land Disturbing Activity.
Per NCGS 113A-52(6), any use of the land by any person in residential, commercial, industrial,
educational or institutional development, highway and road construction and/or maintenance that
results in a change in the natural cover or topography of the land that may cause or contribute to
sedimentation.
lot.
A parcel of land which is either a "lot of record" or a "zoning lot."
lot Area.
The total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, except that when the legal instrument
creating a lot shows the boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the street rightof-
way line, or if the right-of-way line cannot be determined, a line running parallel thirty (30) feet
from the center of the traveled portion of the street, and in a residential district, when a private
road that serves more than three (3) dwelling units is located along any lot boundary, then the lot
boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the inside boundary of the traveled
portion of that road.
lot, Corner.
A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
lot Coverage.
The portion of a lot covered by building(s) or roofed structures(s),excluding allowed projected
eaves, balconies, and similar features.
lot Depth.
The distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line, measured from the midpoint of the
front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
lot Frontage.
The distance along which the front boundary of the lot and the street lines or right-of-way lines
are coincident. On a corner lot the principal frontage shall be the shorter of the street frontages,
measured from the point of intersection of the lot lines abutting such street. Where two (2) such
frontages are equal in length, the owner shall designate which is the front for building purposes.
lot Interior.
A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
Lot Line, Rear.
The rear lot line is that opposite to the front lot line. Where lot lines are irregular, the rear lot line
shall be assumed to be a line not less than twenty (20) feet long, lying withing the lot and parallel
to the front lot line at its midpoint.
2-8
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Lot of Record.
A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds of Richmond County; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in
the office of said Register of Deeds prior to the adoption of this Ordinance.
Lot Width.
The distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at right angles to the depth and at the
required front yard setback lines.
Lot, Zoning.
A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at the time of filing for a zoning permit)
is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit,
under single ownership of control. Therefore, a "zoning lot or lots" may or may not coincide with a
lot of record.
Lot, Corner.
A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior angle of such intersection hot
exceeding 135 degrees.
Lot Coverage.
The portion of a lot covered by building(s) or roofed structure(s), excluding allowed projected
eaves, balconies, and similar features.
Lot, Reversed Corner.
A corner lot the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the
first lot to its rear.
lot, Interior.
A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
Lot, Through.
A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel public streets, and which is
not a corner lot. On a "through lot" both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
Mean Sea Level.
For purposes of this ordinance, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in
1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control
datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations withing the floodplain, to which
Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. The FIRM panels are adopted
by reference and declared to be part of this Ordinance. The incorporated maps shall be kept on
file in digital or paper format with the City Clerk, and is available for public inspection during
normal business hours.
Mobile Home.
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body
feet or more in width, or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or
more square feet; and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, including
the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. The term "mobile
home" shall be synonymous with "manufactured home," as that term is defined by G.S. § 143-
145.
A. Class AA.
A mobile home that was constructed to meet or exceed the construction
2-9
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
standards promulgated by the US Department of Housing and Urban
Development that were in effect at the time of construction.
B. Other:
Any mobile home that does not meet the criteria of a Class AA mobile home.
Modular Dwelling.
A dwelling constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the NC State Residential
Building Code and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant
and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation.
Non-conforming Building or Structure.
A non-conforming situation that occurs when the height of a structure or the relationship between
an existing building or buildings and other buildings or lot lines do not conform to the dimensional
regulations applicable to the district in which the property is located.
Non-conforming Lots of Record.
A lot existing at the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment to it (and not created for
the purpose of evading the restrictions of this Ordinance) that cannot meet the minimum area
and/or lot width requirements of the district in which the lot is located.
Non-conforming Use.
A Non-conforming situation that occurs when property is used for a purpose or in a manner not
permitted by the use regulations applicable to the district in which the property is located.
Non-conforming Situation.
A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment to it, an
existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to one or more of
the regulations applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is located. Among other
possibilities, a non-conforming situation may arise because a lot does not meet minimum acreage
requirements, because structures do not satisfy minimum yard requirements, because the
relationship between existing buildings and the land (in such matters as density and setback
requirements) is not in conformity with this Ordinance, or because land or buildings are used for
purposes which are not in conformance with the list of permitted uses for the district in which the
property is located.
Nursing Home.
An institution, which is advertised, announced, or maintained for the express or implied purpose
of providing nursing or convalescent care for persons unrelated to the licensee. A nursing home
is a home for chronic or convalescent patients who, on admission, are not as a rule, acutely ill
and who do not usually require special facilities, such as an operating room, X-ray facilities,
laboratory facilities, and obstetrical facilities. A nursing home provides care for persons who have
remedial ailments or other ailments, for which continuing medical and skilled nursing care is
indicated; and who, however, are not sick enough to require general hospital care. Nursing care
is their primary need, but they will require continuing medical supervision. A major factor that
distinguishes nursing homes is that the residents will require the individualization of medical care.
Ordinance.
This Ordinance, including any amendments. Whenever the effective date of the ordinance is
referred to, the reference includes the effective date of any amendment to it.
Orphanage.
A facility for six (6) or more otherwise normal children or adolescents who for various reasons
2-10
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
cannot reside with their families and are provided with room, board, ordinary care and supervision
by adults who are not legally related to the children.
Permit-Issuing Authority.
The entity responsible for the approval of a specific type of permit as set forth in this Ordinance.
Also referred to a "permitting authority".
Plan.
A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been subdivided.
Planning and Zoning Board.
The public agency in a community empowered to prepare a comprehensive plan and to evaluate
proposed changes in land use, either by public or private developers, for conformance with the
plan. The Planning Board hears, deliberates, and makes recommendations to City Council on all
Ordinance and map amendments.
Plat.
A map showing the location, boundaries, and ownership of individual properties.
Plat, Final.
A drawing and related materials showing the layout of lots, streets, and other natural or manmade
features in a proposed subdivision which must be approved pursuant to this Ordinance
prior to recordation and prior to the transfer of any lots.
Plat, Preliminary.
A drawing and related material showing the layout of a proposed subdivision, including
improvements details, which must be approved pursuant to this Ordinance prior to the
preparation of a final plat.
Principal Building.
A building in which is conducted the principal use(s) of the zone lot on which it is located or, in a
group development, of the building site on which it is located. Any dwelling is considered a
principal building unless it is an accessory building.
Private Drive, Road, or Street.
An easement or right-of-way not dedicated to the public which provides access to not less than
two (2) abutting properties or dwelling units; and is permitted only where specifically authorized
by this Ordinance. Included also are roads or streets, within a mobile home park, travel trailer
campground, multi-family housing project, commercial center, industrial park or other planned unit
development which is not publicly maintained and is used for access by occupants of the
development, their guests and the general public.
Public Sewer.
A sewage system which is owned by the City of Hamlet, by any other unit of government or
authority, or by a private corporation, person or association and which is designed to serve uses
locating along existing lines or within the service area of the system, should additional collection
lines be constructed.
Public Water Supply System.
Any approved water supply system furnishing potable water to ten (10) or more dwelling units or
businesses or any combination thereof.
Quasi-Judicial Decision.
A decision involving the finding of facts regarding a specific application of a development
2-11
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
regulation and that requires the exercise of discretion when applying the standards of the
regulation. The term includes, but is not limited to, decisions involving variances, special use
permits, certificates of appropriateness, and appeals of administrative determinations.
Register of Deeds.
The Register of Deeds for Richmond County, North Carolina.
Reservation
An obligation by a property owner to keep certain land free from development for a stated period
of time. A reservation does not involve transfer of property rights but allows the public to acquire
such land within the stated time period. Building setback lines shall observe the reserved line of a
street during the stated time period.
Residential Development.
Buildings for residence such as attached and detached single-family dwellings, apartment
complexes, condominiums, townhouses, cottages and their associated outbuildings such as
garages, storage buildings, gazebos, and customary home occupations.
Retreat Centers ..
A facility used for study or instruction to improve health and wellness or for groups to discuss
strategy, build stronger teams or formulate goals.
Roadway.
The portion of a street, road, highway or alley intended for vehicular use. The surface that
vehicles normally travel on; i.e., the surfaced portion within the right-of-way.
Salvage Yard, Auto Parts.
Any establishment listed in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual under Industry Number
5015. Also, any land or area used, in whole or in part, for the storage, keeping, accumulation,
dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of inoperable vehicles or parts therefrom.
Salvage Yard, Scrap Processing.
Any establishment listed in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual under Industry Number
5093. Also, any land or area used, in whole or in part, for the storage, keeping, or accumulation of
scrap or waste materials, including scrap metals, wastepaper, rags, building materials,
machinery, or other scrap materials.
Screening Device.
A screen that is at least ninety percent (90%) opaque from the ground to a height of at least six
(6) feet. The screen is intended to exclude completely all visual contact between uses and to
create a strong impression of special separation. The screen may be composed of a wall, fence,
landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, or existing vegetation. Compliance of planted
vegetative screens or natural vegetation will be judged on the basis of the average mature height
and density of foliage of the subject species, or field observation of existing vegetation. In any
case where vegetation, either existing or proposed, is to be used as the required screening
device, if the vegetation is to be less than ten (10) feet in width (thickness), a fence, wall or similar
device at least fifty (50) percent opaque and six (6) feet in height shall be used in combination
with the vegetation. In all cases, the screen must be at least ninety (90) percent opaque in all
seasons of the year.
Sedimentation.
The process by which sediment resulting from accelerated erosion has been or is being
transported off the site of the land disturbing activity or into a lake or natural watersource.
2-12
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Sexually Oriented Business.
An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center
(including adult massage parlor) or any combination of the foregoing or any similar business. As
used in this Ordinance the following definitions shall apply:
A. Adult Arcade (also known as "peep show"). Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other imagine-producing devices are maintained to show images to
persons in booths or viewing rooms where the images so displayed depict or
describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
B. Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store. A commercial establishment which as
one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations that depict or describe "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities".
C. Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial establishment
that regularly features, exhibits or displays as one of its principal business
purposes:
1. Persons who appear nude or semi-nude; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
3. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."
D. Adult Motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
1. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproduction that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" as one of its principal busines purposes; or
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten
(10) hours; or
3. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub rent the room for a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
E. Adult Motion Picture Theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown as one of its principal business
2-13
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
purposes that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
F. Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features, exhibits or displays, as one of its
principal business purposes, persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude,
or live performances that expose or depict "specified anatomical areas" or
"specified sexual activities".
G. Escort. A person who, for any tips or any other form of consideration, agrees or
offers to act as a date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
H. Escort Agency. A person or business that furnishes, offers to furnish, or
advertises to furnish escorts as one of its principal business purposes, for a fee,
tip, or other consideration.
I. Nude Model studio. Any place where a person who appears nude or seminude,
or who displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude Model studio
shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of North Carolina or a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public
taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
1. That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for
viewing; and
2. Where in order to participate· in a class a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
3. Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at
any one time.
J. Nude or State of Nudity.
1. The appearance of a human anus, male genitals, or female genitals; or
2. A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus, male
genitals, or female genitals.
K. Semi-nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals,
pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body
covered by supporting straps or devices.
L. Sexual Encounter Center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration physical
contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex,
2-14
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
or similar activities between male and female persons and/or between persons of
the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
M. Specified Anatomical Areas. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
N. Specified Sexual Activities. Is and includes any of the following:
Sign.
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or
2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation, or sodomy; or
3. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in 1. through 3. above.
Any words, lettering, parts of letters, pictures, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems,
devices, design, trade names, or trademarks by which anything is made known and which is
visible from any public right-of-way.
Sign Area.
The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a regular
geometric form or combinations or regular geometric forms comprising all of the matter displayed.
However, in computing sign area only one (1) side of a double-faced sign structure shall be
considered. Frames and structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included
in computation of the surface area. Signs erected in a "V" shape shall be considered to be
double-faced as long as the angle of the "V" is ninety (90) degrees or less.
Sign, Business Identification.
Any sign which advertises an establishment, a service, commodity, goods or entertainment sold
or offered on premises other than that on which such sign is located.
Sign, Freestanding.
A sign supported by a structure placed in the ground and which is wholly independent of any
building or object other than the sign structure for support. A freestanding sign may include
changeable copy and a digital sign face.
Sign, Marquee.
A sign designed to have changeable copy. Marquee signs may include a digital sign face.
Sign, Off-premises.
A sign that directs attention to an establishment, goods, or services not primarily located on the
same premises as the sign. Off-premises signs do not include signs that are primarily designed to
express an idea or concept, not to advertise an establishment, goods, or services.
Sign, Outdoor Advertising.
An off-premises sign that is either freestanding or attached to a building and is owned by a
person, corporation, or other entity that engages in the business of selling the advertising space
on that sign. Except as required by North Carolina state law, digital sign faces are not permitted
on outdoor advertising signs.
2-15
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Sign, Snipe.
A sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes,
fences, or other objects. This definition does not include roof signs or wall signs.
Sign, Temporary.
A non-electrified sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.
Sketch Plan.
A crude conceptual map indicating a subdivider's intent to subdivide a tract.
Sleeping Unit.
A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living,
eating, and either sanitation or kitchen facilities but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are
also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
Sign, Under Canopy.
A sign placed under a building canopy or arcade area within a shopping center. Under canopy
signs may include a digital face.
Solar Energy System (SES).
The components and subsystems required to convert solar energy into electric or thermal energy
suitable for use. The area of the system includes all the land inside the perimeter of the system,
which extends to any fencing. The term applies, but is not limited to, solar photovoltaic (PV)
systems, solar thermal systems, and solar hot water systems. A system fits into one of three
system types: Level 1 SES, Level 2 SES, and Level 3 SES.
Level 1 Solar Energy System - Level I SESs include the following:
1. Roof-mounted on any code-compliant structure.
2. Building integrated solar (i.e., shingle, hanging solar, canopy, etc.)-; and
3. Ground-mounted solar panels installed for educational purposes.
Level 2 Solar Energy System - Level 2 SESs are ground-mounted systems not included
in Level 1 that meet the area restriction listed below:
1. Light Industrial (1-1): SES of any size
2. Heavy Industrial (1-2): SES of any size
Level 3 Solar Energy System - Level 3 SESs are systems that do not satisfy the
parameters for a Level 1 or Level 2 Solar Energy System.
Solid Waste Disposal Site.
As defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by
incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method.
Special Use Permit.
A permit issued to authorize development or land uses in a particular zoning district upon
presentation of competent, material, and substantial evidence establishing compliance with one
or more general standards requiring that judgment and discretion be exercised as well as
compliance with specific standards. This definition includes permits previously referred to as
"conditional use permits" or "special exceptions."
2-16
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Start of Construction.
The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on
a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filing; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundation of the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Street, Alley.
A strip of land providing secondary access to properties otherwise abutting a street.
Street, Cul-de-Sac.
A street that terminates in a vehicular turnaround.
Street Frontage.
A lot line abutting on the side of a street, or on a permanent turnaround at the end of a street;
also, the distance along such line.
Street, Marginal Access.
A street that is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street or thoroughfare and that is designed to
provide access to abutting properties so that these properties are somewhat sheltered from the
effects of the through traffic on the arterial street and so that the flow of traffic on the arterial
street is not impeded by direct driveway access from a large number of abutting properties.
Street, Public.
A dedicated public right-of-way in which the roadway has been accepted or constructed to public
standards for vehicular traffic but not an alley.
Street, Thoroughfare.
A traffic artery designed primarily to carry heavy volumes of through vehicular traffic as shown on
the major street plan.
Structure.
Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something
having a fixed location on the ground.
Subdivider.
Any person, firm, or corporation who creates or proposes to create a subdivision as defined
herein.
Subdivision.
All divisions of tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for
the purposes of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all
divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets; but
pursuant to NCGS 1600-802, the following shall not be included within the definition:
(1) The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the
2-17
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
(2) total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to exceed
the standards of the municipality as shown in its subdivision regulations;
(2) The division of and into parcels greater than ten (10) acres where no street rightof-
way dedication is involved;
(3) The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of
streets; and
(4) The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is not greater than
two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street extension or rightof-
way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed
the standards of this Ordinance.
(5) The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms of a probated will
or in accordance with intestate succession
Subdivision, Major.
Any subdivision other than a minor subdivision.
Subdivision, Minor.
A division of land that creates not more than three (3) lots (excluding the parent tract where no
new street right-of-way dedication is required, and all resultant lots conform to the requirements
set forth in this Ordinance.
Taxed Value.
The official value assigned to real property by the Richmond County Tax Assessor for ad valorem
tax purposes.
Telecommunications Tower.
Any tower or structure erected for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas designed to
transmit or receive signals (e.g., telephonic, radio, television or microwave).
Temporary Family Health Care Structure.
A transportable residential structure, providing an environment facilitating a caregiver's provision
of care for mentally or physically impaired person that is primarily assembled at a location other
than its site of installation, (ii) is limited to one occupant who shall be the mentally or physically
impaired person, (iii) has no more than 300 gross square feet, and (iv) complies with applicable
provisions of the State Building Code and G.S. 143-139.l(b). Placing the temporary family health
care structure on a permanent foundation shall not be required or permitted. See also, section
152-150, Accessory Uses.
Tower Height.
The vertical distance measured from ground to the uppermost point of the tower and any
antenna, structure, or appendage fixed thereto.
Tract.
The term is used interchangeable with the term lot, particularly in the context of subdivisions,
where one "tract" is subdivided into several "lots".
Use.
The purpose for which land or structures thereon is designed, arranged, or intended to be
occupied or used, or for which it is occupied, maintained, rented or leased.
2-18
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Use, Accessory.
Any use which is clearly incidental, secondary, and/or supportive of a principal use.
Use, Principal Permitted.
Any use listed as Permitted Use in any Zoning District, except those which by definition or their
nature are accessory uses.
Utility Facilities.
Any above-ground structures or facilities (other than buildings, unless such buildings are used as
storage incidental to the operation of such structures or facilities) owned by a governmental
entity, a nonprofit organization, a corporation, or any entity defined as a public utility for any
purpose by the [the appropriate provision of state law] and used in connection with the
production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity,
gas, oil, or electronic signals.
Variance.
Official permission from the Board of Adjustment to depart from the requirements of this
Ordinance.
Vested Right.
The right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and
conditions of an approval secured as specified in G.S. 1600-108 or under common law.
Yard.
An open space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure, unoccupied and unobstructed
from its lowest to the sky, except as otherwise permitted herein. A "yard" extends along a lot line,
and to a depth or width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district in which such
zoning lot is located.
Yard, Corner Side.
A side yard which adjoins a public street.
Yard, Front.
A yard extending along the full width of the zoning lot between the side lot lines.
Yard, Rear.
A yard extending along the full width of the zoning lot between the side lot lines.
Yard, Side.
A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard.
Yard, Interior Side.
A side yard which is located immediately adjacent to another zoning lot or to an alley separating
such side yard from another zoning lot.
Yard Sale.
An occasional sale conducted by a household or a group of households. or by a nonprofit
organization on its own premise, at which surplus and primarily used household goods and/ or
clothing are sold. Yard sales conducted by a household or group of households shall be those
conducted on residential premises or one or more of those households.
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
The person, officer, or official and his authorized representative, whom the City Manager has
2-19
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
designated as the agent for the administration and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Hamlet, North Carolina.
Zoning Ordinance.
The City of Hamlet Zoning Ordinance.
2-20
ARTICLE Ill. GENERAL PROVISIONS
The following general provisions shall apply in all situations unless otherwise indicated.
Section 3.1 Relationship of Buildings to Lot
Every building hereafter erected, moved or placed shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be
more than one (1) principal residential building on a lot except pursuant to the provisions of Article VII,
Note 3.
Section 3.2 Open Space Requirements
No part of a yard, court or other open space provided around any building or structure for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space
required under this Ordinance for another building or structure. Every part of a required yard shall be
open and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except for the ordinary projection of sills,
chimneys, flues and eaves; provided, however, that none of the aforesaid projections shall project into a
minimum side yard more than one-third (1/3) of the width of such yard nor more than twenty-four (24)
inches, whichever is the least. Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fire proof outside stairways, and
balconies opening upon fire towers projecting into a yard not more than five (5) feet shall be permitted
where placed so as not to obstruct light and ventilation. In addition, certain accessory structures are
permitted to be placed in the required yard area as provided for in the Schedule of District Regulations.
Section 3.3 Reduction of Lot and Yard Areas Prohibited
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in size or area below the
minimum requirements set forth in this Ordinance. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance.
Section 3.4 Access to Property
No building, structure or use of land shall be established on a lot nor shall any lot be created that does not
abut upon a public street to which it has legal access. The public access requirement shall not apply to
land exempt from public street access by this Ordinance or the Subdivision ordinance nor to existing lots
of record to which other access is available.
Section 3. 5 Interpretation of District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any District shown on the Zoning Map the following rules
shall apply:
A. Where such District boundaries are indicated as approximately following street lines,
railroad lines, lot lines, creeks, and other features shown on the Map such lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where such District boundaries are indicted on the Map to be a certain distance from a
certain feature (such as a stated distance from a street), such distance shall be the
determining factor in establishing the District boundary.
C. Where such District boundary is not indicated by a feature and is not the result of a stated
dimension, the boundary shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the same
Map.
D. In case any further uncertainty exists, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the intent of
3-1
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
the Map as to the location of such boundary.
Section 3.6 Interpreting Permitted Uses
The listings of Permitted Uses in the various Districts in this Ordinance are considered to be specific in
regard to the types of uses intended for each of the various Districts. In interpreting proposed uses, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall refer to the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual as a guide.
When a proposed use is not specifically listed in the Table of Permitted Uses, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall use the SIC Manual to determine if the use is the same as, or manifestly similar to, a listed
use in form and function. If the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds that a proposed use is not the same as,
or is not manifestly similar to, a listed use, he shall classify the proposed use as not permitted. In each
such case, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall maintain a written record of such interpretations.
Any person who is aggrieved by any such interpretation by the Zoning Enforcement Officer may appeal
such interpretation to the Board of Adjustment as provided for in Article XII.
Section 3.7 Water and Sewer Requirements
The lot sizes required for the various Districts in this Ordinance were drawn based upon the assumption
that adequate water supply and sewage disposal systems are available to each and every lot. The lack of
adequate systems for one or both facilities, however, may require larger lot areas or, in some instances,
not permit development as intended.
Section 3.8 Height Limitation Exceptions
Except as may otherwise be prohibited by Federal Aviation Authority Regulations, the height limitations of
this Ordinance shall not apply to public buildings, church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not
intended for residential purposes, or to monuments, water towers, observation towers, power
transmission towers, silos, grain elevators, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flag poles, radio,
television and communication towers, masts, aerials and similar structures, provided such structures meet
the required North Carolina Building Code.
Section 3.9 Building Setback Exceptions
Setback distances shall be measured from the property line or street right-of-way line to the nearest
portion of any building, or structure excluding:
A. The outermost four feet of any uncovered porch, step, eave, gutter, canopy, or similar fixture; and
B. A deck or patio if no portion of the same extends more than twelve inches off the ground;
C. Any structure that is a mere appendage to a building, such as a flagpole, or fountain; and
D. Fences six (6) feet in height or less.
Section 3.10 Temporary Buildings
The Zoning Enforcement Officer may permit temporary buildings, including mobile structures, incidental to
a construction project to be used concurrent with the permit for permanent building(s) or construction.
Section 3.11 Fees
Applicants for permits and other procedures as provided for by this Ordinance may be required to pay
such fees as may be established by the City Council for the administration of this Ordinance.
3-2
ARTICLE IV. NON-CONFORMING SITUATIONS
The purpose of this Article is to avoid undue hardship by permitting the continued use of any building,
structure, or property that was lawful at the time of the enactment of this ordinance or any applicable
amendment thereof even though such use, structure or property does not conform with the provisions of
this Ordinance. However, this Article is also established to require that non-conforming situations be
terminated under certain circumstances.
Section 4.1 Continuation of Non-conforming Situations
Non-conforming situations that were othe.rwise lawful on the effective date of this Ordinance may be
continued, subject to the restrictions and qualifications set forth in Sections 4.2 through 4. 7 of this Article.
Section 4.2 Non-Conforming Lots of Record
Where the owners of a lot of record at the time of the adaption of this Ordinance or his successor in title
thereto does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the area or lot width requirements of this
Ordinance, such lot may be used as a building site provided all other dimensional requirements are met
and provided that the use to be made of the property is not one to which larger than minimum lot area
requirements are called for in the list of Permitted Uses.
Section 4.3
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Extension or Enlargement of Non-conforming Situations
Except as specifically provided in this Section, it shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of non-conformity of a nonconforming
situation.
Subject to Paragraph 4 of this Section, a non-conforming use rnay be extended through
any portion of a completed building that, when the use was made non-conforming by this
Ordinance, was manifestly designed or arranged to accommodate such use. However, a
non-conforming use may not be extended to additional buildings or to land outside the
original building.
A non-conforming use may not be extended to cover more land than was occupied, or
manifestly designed and arranged to be occupied, by that use when it became nonconforming.
The volume, intensity, or frequency of use of property where a non-conforming situation
exists may be increased and the equipment or processes used at a location where a nonconforming
situation exists may be changed if these or similar changes amount only to
changes in the degree of activity rather than changes in kind and no violations of other
paragraphs of this Section occur.
Physical alteration of non-conforming structure or structures containing a non-conforming
use is unlawful if it results in:
1. An increase in the total amount of space devoted to a non-conforming use.
2. Greater non-conformity with respect to dimension restrictions such as yard
requirements, height limitations, or density requirements.
3. The enclosure of previously unenclosed areas, even though those areas are or
were used in connection with non-conforming activity.
4-1
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
F. Minor repairs to and routine maintenance of property where non-conforming situations
exist are permitted and encouraged. Major renovation - i.e., work estimated to cost more than ten
percent (10%) but less than sixty percent (60%) of the taxed value of the structure to be
renovated may be done provided that the work will not result in a violation of any other
paragraphs of this Subsection particularly Paragraph 5. In no case however shall work
costing more than sixty percent (60%) of the taxed value of the structure be done,
singularly or cumulatively, within any five (5) year period.
Section 4.4 Reconstruction Prohibited
Any non-conforming building or structure or any building or structure containing a non-conforming use for
which major repair or reconstruction is proposed in an amount equal to sixty percent (60%) or more of the
taxed value of the building or structure or which has been damaged by any cause to an extent equal to
sixty percent (60%) or more of its taxed value shall only be repaired and/ or reconstructed and used as a
conforming structure and a conforming use.
Section 4.5 Change in Kind of Non-conforming Use
A. A non-conforming use may be changed to a conforming use. Thereafter, the property
may not revert to a non-conforming use.
B. A non-conforming use shall not be changed to another non-conforming use except upon
a finding by the Board of Adjustment that the new use is more in character with the uses
permitted in the District than the previous use.
C. If a non-conforming use and a conforming use, or any combination of non-conforming
uses exist on one lot, the use made of the property may be changed into a conforming
use.
D.
Section 4.6
A.
B.
Conforming uses, except sexually oriented businesses, may be established or reestablished
in non-conforming buildings or structures provided that off-street parking is
provided as required by this Ordinance and provided no other provision of this Ordinance
for the establishment of new uses is violated.
Discontinuance of Non-conforming Uses
When active operation or occupancy of a non-conforming use is discontinued regardless
of the purpose or reason for a consecutive period of one hundred eighty (180) days, the
property involved may thereafter be used only for conforming uses.
For purposes of determining whether a right to continue a non-conforming situation is lost
pursuant to this Subsection, all of the buildings, activities, and operations maintained on a
lot are generally to be considered as a whole. For example, the failure to rent one
apartment in a non-conforming apartment building or one space in a non-conforming
mobile home park for one hundred eighty (180) days shall not result in a loss of the right
to rent that apartment or space thereafter so long as the apartment building or mobile
home park as a whole is continuously maintained. But if a non-conforming use is
maintained in conjunction with a conforming use, cessation of operation or occupancy of
the non-conforming use for the required period shall terminate the right to maintain it
thereafter.
4-2
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Section 4.7 Discontinuance of Non-conforming Sexually Oriented Businesses and Bars
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4.6 above, Sexually Oriented Businesses and Bars shall be
governed by the following:
A. Any sexually oriented business or bar that fails to comply with the use and locational
requirements of this Ordinance, but which was lawfully operating before the effective date
of this ordinance, shall not be deemed to be in violation of this Ordinance but shall be a
non-conformity. Any such business which ceases active operation for a period of thirty
(30) days regardless of the purpose or reason shall be subject to all the requirements of
this Ordinance and the property may thereafter be used only for conforming uses.
B. Any sexually oriented business or bar lawfully operating as of the effective date of this
Ordinance, but which subsequently fails to comply with the use and locational
requirements of this ordinance as the result of changes within the vicinity or amendment
to this Ordinance, shall not be deemed to be in violation of this Ordinance but shall be a
non-conformity. Any such business which ceases active operation for a period of thirty
(30) days regardless of purpose or reason shall be subject to all the requirements of this
Ordinance and the property may thereafter be used only for conforming uses.
4-3
ARTICLE V. SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Within the Districts as established by this Ordinance, requirements as set forth in this Article shall be
complied with in addition to any other general or specific requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 5.1 R-20 Residential District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
1. Single-Family Dwelling Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 square feet.
2. Two Family and Multi-Family Dwellings Minimum Lot Area:
9,000 square feet for- each additional dwelling unit.
See Article VII, Note 3 for additional requirements for multi-family
developments.
3. Minimum Required Lot Width- 100 feet
4. Minimum Required Front Yard- 40 feet
5. Minimum Required Side Yarda.
Interior side- 15 feet
b. Corner side- 15 feet
6. Minimum Required Rear Yard- 30 feet
7. Maximum Building Height- 35 feet
8. Maximum Lot Coverage- 35%
9. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures.
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
line) and, in any case of a corner. Lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the lots in
the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish antennas.
C. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one/half (2 Y,) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two points of the
right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight triangle as
5-1
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
established by NCDOT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VII.
E. Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
Section 5.2 RA-20 Residential District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
1. Single-Family Dwelling Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 square feet
2. Two Family and Multi-Family Dwellings Minimum Lot Area: 
9,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
See Article VII, Note 3 for additional requirements for multi-family
developments.
3. Minimum Required Lot Width- 100 feet
4. Minimum Required Front Yard- 40 feet
5. Minimum Required Side Yard
5. Interior side - 15 feet
b. Corner side - 15 feet
6. Minimum Required Rear Yard - 30 feet
7. Maximum Building Height - 35 feet
8. Maximum Lot Coverage - 35%
9. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
5-2
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
line) and, in any case of a corner lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the
lots in the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish
antennas.
C. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one/half (2 Y,) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two
points of the right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight
triangle as established by NCDOT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VI 11.
E. Signs
Signs shall he regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
Section 5.3 R-1 O Residential District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
1. Single Family Dwelling Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet
2. Minimum Required Lot Area For Two Family and Multi-Family Dwellings - (Not
Permitted)
3. Minimum Required Lot Width - 80 feet
4. Minimum Required Front Yard-. 30 feet
5. Minimum Required Side Yard -
a. Interior Side- 1 O feet
b. Corner Side- 15 feet
6. Minimum Required Rear Yard - 30 feet
7. Maximum Building Height- 35 feet
5-3
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
8. Maximum Lot Coverage - 35%
9. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
line) and, in any case of a corner lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the lots in
the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish antennas.
C. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot nothing shall be ·erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one/half (2 Y.) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two points of the
right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight triangle as
established by NCDOT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VI 11.
E. Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
Section 5.4 R-8 Residential District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
1. Minimum Required Lot Area For a Single Family Dwelling or Any Non-Residential
Use- 8,000 square feet
2. Minimum Required Lot Area For Two Family and Multi-Family Dwellings - (Not
Permitted)
3. Minimum Required Lot Width - 60 feet
4. Minimum Required Front Yard - 30 feet
5. Minimum Required Side Yard
a. Interior side - 8 feet
5-4
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
b. Corner side - 15 feet
6. Minimum Required Rear Yard - 30 feet
7. Maximum Building Height - 35 feet
8. Maximum Lot Coverage - 35%
9. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
line) and, in any case of a corner lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the lots in
the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish antennas.
C. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one/half (2 1/2) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two points of the
right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight triangle as
established by NCDOT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VIII.
E. Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
Section 5.5 R-6 Residential District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
1. Single Family Dwelling Minimum Lot Area: 6,000 square feet.
2. Two Family Dwellings Minimum Lot Area: 4,500 square feet for
each dwelling unit.
3. Multi-Family Dwellings Minimum Lot Area: 2,000 square feet for each dwelling unit
over two (2)
5-5
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
See Article VII, Note 3 for additional requirements for multi-family developments.
4. Minimum Required Lot Width - 50 feet
5. Minimum Required Front Yard - 25 feet
6. Minimum Required Side Yard
a. Interior side - 6 feet
b. Corner side - 12 feet
7. Minimum Required Rear Yard - 30 feet
8. Maximum Building Height - 35 feet
9. Maximum Lot Coverage - 35%
10. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
line) and, in any case of a corner lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the lots in
the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish antennas.
C. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one/half (2 Y,) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two points of the
right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight triangle as
established by NCDOT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
E.
F.
Section 5.6
A.
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VI 11.
Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
R-6M Residential District
Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
5-6
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
1. Single Family Dwelling Minimum Lot Area: 6,000 square feet
2. Two Family Dwellings Minimum Lot Area: 4,500 square feet for each dwelling unit
3. Multi-Family Dwellings Minimum Lot Area: 4,500 square feet each for the first two (2) dwelling units.
See Article VII, Note 3 for additional requirements for multi-family developments.
4. Minimum Required Lot Width - 50 feet
5. Minimum Required Front Yard - 25 feet
6. Minimum Required Side Yard
a. Interior side - 6 feet
b. Corner side - 12 feet
7. Minimum Required Rear Yard - 30 feet
8. Maximum Building Height - 35 feet
9. Maximum Lot Coverage - 35%
10. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
line) and, in any case of a corner lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the lots in
the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish antennas.
C. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one/half (2 Y,) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two points of the
right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight triangle as
established by NCDOT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VIII.
E. Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
5-7
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Section 5.7 0-1 Office and Institutional District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
1. Single Family Dwelling Minimum Lot Area: 8,000 square feet
2. Two Family Dwellings Minimum Lot Area: 4,500 square feet for each dwelling unit
3. Multi-Family Dwellings Minimum Lot Area: 2,000 square feet for each dwelling unit over two (2)
See Article VII, Note 3 for additional requirements for multi-family developments.
4. Minimum Required Lot Width - 60 feet
5. Minimum Required Front Yard - 15 feet
6. Minimum Required Side Yard
None required except when abutting a residential district in which case a ten (10)
foot side yard shall be provided.
7. Minimum Required Rear Yard - 15 feet
8. Maximum Building Height - 35 feet
9. Maximum Lot Coverage - None
10. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
line) and, in any case of a corner lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the lots in
the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish antennas.
C. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or al I owed to grow in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one/half (2 1/2) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two points of the
right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight triangle as
established by NCDOT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VIII.
5-8
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
E. Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
Section 5.8 B-1 Central Business District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements

2. Multi-Family Dwellings Minimum Lot Area: 1,000 square feet for
each dwelling unit.
See Article VII, Note 3 for additional requirements for multi-family developments.
3. Minimum Required Lot Width - 25 feet
4. Minimum Required Front Yard - None
5. Minimum Required Side Yard
None required except when abutting a residential district in which case a ten (10)
foot side yard shall be provided.
6. Minimum Required Rear Yard - 15 feet when abutting a residential district and
twelve ( 12) feet when abutting an alley.
7. Maximum Building Height - None
8. Maximum Lot Coverage - None
9. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
line) and, in any case of a corner lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the lots in
the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish antennas.
C. Visibility at Intersections
Does not apply in the B-1 District.
5-9
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking is not required in this District. Off-street loading shall be· provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII.
E. Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
Section 5.9 B-2 General Business District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
1. Minimum Required Lot Area For Any Non-Residential Use - None
2. Minimum Required Lot Area for Multi-Family Dwellings - 4,000 square feet for
each ground floor dwelling unit. 2,000 square feet for each above ground floor
dwelling unit.
See Article VI I, Note 3 for additional requirements for multi- family
developments.
3. Minimum Required Lot Width - 50 feet
4. Minimum Required Front Yard - 25 feet
5. Minimum Required Side Yard
None required except when abutting a residential district in which case a twenty
(20) foot side yard shall be provided.
6. Minimum Required Rear Yard - 20 feet
7. Maximum Building Height - 35 feet
8. Maximum Lot Coverage - None
9. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
line) and, in any case of a corner lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the lots in
the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish antennas.
5-10
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
C. Visibility at intersections
On a corner lot. nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner- as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one/half (2 1 /2) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two Points of the
right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight triangle as
established by NCDOT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VIII.
E. Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
Section 5.10 B-3 Neighborhood Business District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
1. Minimum Required Lot Area for Any Non-Residential Use - None
2. Minimum Required Lot Area for Multi-Family Dwellings - 4,500 square feet for
each of the first two dwelling units. 2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling
unit.
See Article VII, Note 3 for additional requirements for multi- family developments.
3. Minimum Required Lot Width - 25 feet
4. Minimum Required Front Yard - 5 feet
5. Minimum Required Side Yard
None required except when abutting a residential district in which case a ten (10)
foot side yard shall be provided.
6. Minimum Required Rear Yard - 20 feet
7. Maximum Building Height - 35 feet
8. Maximum Lot Coverage - None
9. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
5-11
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
line) and, in any case of a corner lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the lots in
the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish antennas.
C. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot. nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner- as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one/half (2 1/2) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two Points of the
right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight triangle as
established by NCDOT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VI 11.
E. Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
Section 5.11 1-1 Light Industrial District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
1. Minimum Required Lot Area - 20,000 square feet
2. Minimum Required Lot Width - 100 feet
3. Minimum Required Front Yard - 30 feet
4. Minimum Required Side Yard - 15 feet
5. Minimum Required Rear Yard - 30 feet
6. Maximum Building Height - 35 feet
7. Maximum Lot coverage - None
8. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard or within 15 feet of any street line or within 5 feet of a lot line (not a street
line) and, in any case of a corner lot with reversed frontage, no accessory
5-12
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
building or structure shall extend beyond the required front yard line of the lots in
the rear. See Article VII, Note 7 for specific requirements for dish antennas.
C. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of- two and one/half (2 1/2) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two points of the
right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight triangle as
established by NCDDT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VIII.
E. Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
Section 5.12 1-2 Heavy Industrial District
A. Permitted Uses
See Article VI, Table of Permitted Uses.
B. Dimensional Requirements
1. Minimum Required Lot Area - 20,000 square feet
2. Minimum Required Lot Width - 100 feet
3. Minimum Required Front Yard - 15 feet
4. Minimum Required Side Yard
None required except when abutting a residential district in which case a fifteen
(15) foot side yard shall be provided.
5. Minimum Required Rear Yard - None required except when abutting a residential
district in which case a thirty ( 30) foot rear yard shall be provided.
6. Maximum Building Height- 35 feet
7. Maximum Lot Coverage - None
8. Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures.
On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in
5-13
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of- two and
one/half (2 1/2) feet and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal
line between two points of the right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they
intersect or a sight triangle as established by NC DDT, whichever is greater.
C. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of- two and one/half (2 1 /2) feet
and ten (10) feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two points of the
right-of-way lines, twenty (20) feet from where they intersect or a sight triangle as
established by NCDDT, whichever is greater.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article VI 11.
E. Signs
Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Article IX.
F. Screening
Screening shall be regulated by the provisions of Article X.
5-14
ARTICLE VI. TABLE OF PERMITTED USES
Section 6.1
A.
General
The District or Districts in which a particular listed use is permitted with a zoning permit is
indicated by a "P" in the District column(s) opposite the listed use. Uses permitted with
the issuance of a special use permit are indicated by and "S" in the District Column(s)
opposite the listed use. See Section 3.6 for information on interpreting permitted uses.
In any case where a note reference such as "Note 3" appears in the "Special
Requirements" column opposite a particular listed use, that means there are special
additional performance requirements that use must comply with in the development. See
Article VI I and the numbered note in that Article for the special additional performance
standards for the use.
The listing of a use as permitted with a zoning permit or special use permit in the Table of
Permitted Uses in no way relieves that use of having to meet all local, State and Federal
laws pertaining to the establishment and operation of that use.
B. Unless prohibited by subsections (C) and (D) below, any use not listed in the Table of
Permitted Uses shall be permitted with the issuance of a special use permit.
C. The following uses are specifically prohibited in all districts:
1. Any use that involves the manufacture, handling, sale, distribution, or storage of
any highly combustible materials in violation of the North Carolina Fire
Prevention Code;
2. Any use that involves the manufacture, handling, sale, distribution, or storage of
explosives as a primary use is prohibited. Explosives may be stored as an
accessory use only in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and all
State and Federal requirements, including but not limited to 27 C.F.R. Part 555,
"Commerce in Explosives":
3. Stockyards, slaughterhouses, and rendering plants.
D. All commercial, industrial, and other nonresidential uses not specifically authorized by the
Table of Permitted Uses or otherwise authorized by this ordinance shall be prohibited in
residential zoning districts, including the R-20, RA-20, R-10, R-8, R-6 and R- 6M districts.
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
6-1
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
Agricultural Uses
Agricultural production (crops) 100 p p
Agricultural production (livestock) 200 p p
Animal feeder/breeder 210 p
Animal services (livestock) 751 p
Animal services (other) 752 p
Fish hatcheries 920 p
Forestry 810 p p
Horticultural specialties 180 p p
Pinestraw buying/balinq stations I I I I I I I I IP IP
Residential Uses
Boarding and rooming houses 20 p p p p p
Common area recreation & service p p p p p p p p p p
facilities
Family care homes- 6 or less persons p p p p p p p p p p
mobile homes on individual lots p p I I I Note 1
mobile home parks p p I I I Note2
multifamily dwelling (including p p p p p p p p
condominiums; townhouses) I I I Note 3
two family dwellings (twin homes or p p p p p p jP IP I I I Note 3 duplexes)
single family detached dwellings p p p p p p IP
Accessory Uses and Structures
accessory dwelling units p p p p I Note 4
accessory uses and structures p p p p p p p p p p p p
(customary)
athletic facilities p
'
caretaker dwelling P IP I Note 5
fencing p p p p p p p p p p P IP I Note 32
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
home occupation p p p p p p p
I I Note 6
office p
satellite dishes p p p p p p p p p p p p Note 7
solar energy system- level 1 p p p p p p p p p p p p Note 34
swimming pools p p p p p p p p p p p p Note 8
Temporary family healthcare p p p p p p
structures
yard sales I IP IP IP IP IP IP IP
Recreational Uses
amusement or water parks, I I I I I I I I I IP I Note 9
fairgrounds
Athletic fields I I IP
batting cages p I I IP
billiard parlors p p
bingo games p p
bowling centers p p
clubs or lodges (non-profit) p p p I IP
coin operate amusements p p p
country clubs and golf courses p p p p p p p p p p I IP I Note 10
dance schools p p p
electronic gaming operation p I I I Note 29
fortune tellers/astrologers p p
go-cart raceways I I IP I Note 9
golf courses, miniature p
golf courses p p p p p p p p p
I IP I Note10
golf driving ranges p I I IP
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
martial arts instructional schools p p p
physical fitness centers p p p
public parks p p p p p p p p p p
public recreation facilities p p p p p p p p p p
riding stables, non-commercial p p 1 Note 11
riding stables, commercial p I Note 11
shooting ranges, indoor p
shooting ranges, outdoor, local p
government only
skating rinks p p
sports and recreation clubs, indoor p p 1 p
swim and tennis clubs p p p p p p p p p l p I I I Note 12
Educational and Institutional Uses
ambulance services p p p p p
auditoriums, coliseums, or stadiums p p
cemeteries/mausoleums p p p p p p p p p p Note 13
churches p p p p p p p p p Note 14
colleges or universities p p p p p p p p Note 14
correctional institutions p
'
day care centers, adult (5 or less, p p p p p p p I Note15
home occupation)
day care centers, adult (6 or more) p p p p p p p p p Note 15
day care centers, child (5 or less, p p p p p p p Note 15
home occupation
day care centers, child (6 or more) p p p p p p p p p l I l note 15
elementary or secondary schools p p p p p p p p p p
fire stations p p p p p p p p p p IP IP
government offices p p p p
hospitals p p p p p p I 1 l Note 14
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
libraries p p IP p p p
museums or art galleries p p p p p p
nursing and convalescent homes; p p p p p p
congregate and group care I I I Note 14
orphanages p p p p p p I I I Note 14
police stations, neighborhood p p p p p p p p p p IP IP
post offices p p p p
psychiatric hospitals p p
retreat centers p p p
I I I I Note 14
school administration facilities p p p I I I Note 14
specialty hospital p p p
Business,.Professional & Personal Services
accounting, auditing, or bookkeeping p p p p
administrative or management p p p p
services
advertising agencies or I I I I I IP IP IP IP
representatives
advertising services, outdoor p p p p
automobile rental or leasing p p
automobile repair services and sales, p I IP
major
automobile repair services and sales- I I I I I I I I IP IP IP
car detailing, non-automated, minor
automobile parking (commercial) p p p p
automobile towing and storage p
services
banks, savings, & loans, or credit I I I I I Ip IP IP Ip
union
barber shops I I I I I I I I I: I: I: beauty shops
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
boat repairs p IP I IP
building maintenance services p p
car washes p
clothing alterations or repairs p p p
computer maintenance and repairs p p 1 p -p
computer services p p p I . p
economic, socio, or educational p p p p
research
employment agencies, personnel I I I I IP IP IP IP
agencies
engineering, architect, or survey I I I I I I I IP IP IP IP
services
' I I I I i i '
IP '1 p equipment rental & leasing (no I I I I I I IP
outdoor storage)
equipment rental & leasing (with I I I I I I IP I I IP
outdoor storage)
equipment repairs, heavy I
I I I I I I I Ip Ip I I IP
equipment repairs; light engine repair, I
light
finance or loan offices p p p IP
funeral homes or crematoriums p p p
furniture repair shops p p
hostels or motels p p lP
insurance agencies (no on-site claims p p p IP
insp.)
insurance agencies (carries/on-site I I I I I I I I IP \p
claims insp.)
Kennels or pet grooming services p I I IP
landscape and horticultural services p p
laundromats coin operated p p IP
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
laundry or dry cleaning plants p p p l p l p
laundry or dry cleaning substations p p p I IP
law offices p p p p
medical, dental or related offices p p p p p p p
medical, dental laboratories p p p p
motion picture productions p p 1 1 p
noncommercial research organization p p p p I IP
office uses not otherwise classified p p p p
pest or termite control services p p I IP
photocopying and duplicating services p p p
photofinishing laboratories p p IP IP
photography, commercial p p p
photography, studios p p p
real estate offices p p p p
recreational vehicle parks or l \p
campsites
refrigerator or large appliance repairs p p I l P IP
rehabilitation or counseling services p p p
research, development, or testing I I IP
services
septic tank services l p IP
shoe repair or shoeshine shops p p p
stock, security, or commodity brokers p p p p
tanning salons p p p
taxidermists p p l 1 p
television, radio, or electronic repairs p p p
theaters, outdoor p p
theaters, outdoor p p p
tire recapping l lP
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
tourist homes (bed and breakfast) p p p p p p p p I I I Note16
travel agencies p p p p
truck driving schools
- - p
truck and utility trailer rental & leasing, p -
IP
light
truck and utility trailer rental & leasing, I I I I I I I I I I I I IP
heavy
-
truck washing I IP
veterinary services p i p
vocational, business or secretarial p p p
schools
watch or jewelry repair shops I I I I I I I I IP IP IP
Retail Trade ·. .. .
ABC stores (liquor) p p p
antique stores p p p
appliance stores p p p
arts & crafts p p p
auto/supply sales p p p
bakeries p p p
bars p p p 1 1 1Note17
boat sales p
bookstores p p p
building supply sales (no storage p p p
yard)
building supply sales (with storage I I I I I IP
yard)
camera stores p p p
candy stores p p p
clothing, shoe and accessory stores p p p
computer sales p p p
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
convenience stores (with gasoline I I I I I IP IP
pumps)
convenience stores (without gasoline I I I I I I I IP IP IP
pumps)
dairy products stores p p p
department, variety of qeneral p p p
merchandise stores
drugstores p p p
fabric or piece goods stores p p p
fiea markets p p p I I [ Note 31
floor covering, drapery or upholstery p p p
florist p p p
food stores p p p
fuel oil sales p
furniture sales p p p
garden centers or retail nurseries p p p
gift or card shops p p p
hardware stores p p p
hobby shops p p p
home furnishing , miscellaneous p p p
jewelry stores p p p
luggage or leather good stores p p p
manufactured home sales p
miscellaneous retail sales p p p
I
motorcycle sales p I IP
musical instrument sales p p p
newsstands p p p
office machine sales p p p
optical goods sales p p p
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
paint and wallpaper sales p p p
pawnshops/used merchandise stores p p p I IP
pet stores p p p
record and tape stores p p p
recreational vehicle sales p p
restaurants (w/drive-thru) p p p
restaurants (no drive-thru) p p p p
service station, gasoline p p p
sporting goods stores p p p
stationary stores p p p
television, radio, or electronic sales p p p
tire sales p p p
tobacco stores p p p
truck stops p p p
video tape rental and sales p p p
Wholesale Trade .. .
agricultural chem/pesticide/fertilizer p
agricultural products, other p
ammunition p
animals and animals products, other p
apparel, piece goods and notions p
beer wine distilled alcoholic p
beverages
books. Periodicals, and newspapers p
chemical and allied products p
drugs and sundries p
durable goods, others p
electrical goods p
farm supplies other p
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
flowers, nursery stock & florist I I I I I I I I I IP IP
supplies
forest supplies p
furniture and home furnishings p
grain and field beans p
groceries and related products p
hardware p
jewelry, watches, precious stones & p
metals
livestock p
lumber and other construction p
materials
machinery, equipment and supplies p
market showroom (furniture, apparel, p p p
etc.)
metals and minerals p
motor vehicle, parts and supplies p
points and varnishes p
paper and paper products p
petroleum and petroleum products p l Note 25
plastic materials p
plumbing and heating equipment p
professional and com. Equipment and p
supplies
resins
scrap and waste materials I I I I I I I I I I I I I~
sporting and recreational goods and
supplies
tobacco and tobacco products
I I I I I I I I I
I
I I
IP
toys and hobby goods and supplies I IP
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
Transportation, Warehousing and Utilities
airports or air transportation facilities p
bulk mail and packaging p
bus terminals p p p
communication or broadcastinri p p p I Note 33
facilities
courier services, central facility p
courier service substations p p p p
demolition debris landfills, major p I Note 19
demolition debris landfills, minor p p p I Note 19
heliports p
moving and storage services p p
radio, television or communication p p p P{Ro11 I Note 33
towers
railroad terminals or yards p
refuse and raw material hauling p
sewage treatment plants p
solar energy system-level 2 s s I Note 34
solid waste disposal (nonhazardous), p
public
taxi terminals p p p
trucking or freight, terminals p
utility company offices p p p p p
utility equipment and storage yards p
utility lines and related appurtenances p p p p p p p p p p p p
utility service facilities p p
utility substations p p p p p p p p p p p p
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
warehouses (general I I I I I I I I I I IP
storage/enclosed)
warehouses (self-storage) p p p
water treatment plants p
Manl.lfacttiring and industrial l.lses
aircraft and parts p
ammunition, small arms p I Note 22
animal feeds (including dog & cat) p
animal slaughter or rendering p
apparel and finished fabric prod. p
arms and weapons p
asbestos, abrasive and related p
products
asphalt plants
I I I I I I I I I I I I~ I Note 23
audio, video and communications
equipment
bakery products p
batteries p
beverage products (alcoholic) p p
beverage products (nonalcoholic) p p
bicycle assembly p
bicycle parts and accessories p p
boat and ship building p p
brooms and brushes p p
burial caskets p p
chemicals, paints and allied products p
coffee p p
computer and office equipment p p
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
concrete, cut stone and clay products, I I I I I I I I I IP IP
ready-mix plants
contractors (no outside storage) p p p
contractors, general building p
contractors, heavy construction p
contractors, special trade p
costume jewelry and notions p p
dairy products p p
drugs p
electrical industrial apparatus, p p
assembly
electrical industrial apparatus, I I I I I I I I I I I jp jp
manufacturing
electrical components p p
electrical equipment p p
fabricated metal products (including p
can manufacturing)
fabricated valve and wire products p p
facts and oils, animal p
facts and oils, plant p p
fish, canned, cured or frozen p
floor coverings (excluding carpet) p
food and related products, p p
miscellaneous
furniture framing p p
furniture and fixtures assembly p p
furniture and fixtures p p
glass p
glass products from purchased glass p p
grain mill products p p
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
heating equipment and plumbing I I I I I I I I I IP IP
fixtures
household appliances p p
ice p p p
industrial and commercial machinery p p
jewelry and silverware (no plating) p p
lighting and wiring equipment p p
logging and wood, raw materials p p
manufactured housing and wood p p
buildings
measurement, analysis and control I I I I I I I I I I IP IP
instruments
meat/poultry, packing and processing I I I I I I I I I I I IP
(no rendering)
medical, dental and surgical I I I I I I I I I I IP IP
equipment
metal coating and engraving p p
metal fasteners (screws, bolts, etc.) p p
millwork, plywood and veneer p p
mining and quarrying p I Note 24
motor vehicle assembly p
motor vehicle parts and accessories p p
motorcycle assembly p p
musical instruments p p
paper products (no coating or p p
laminating)
paper products (coating or laminating) p
paperboard containers and boxes p p
pens and art supplies p p
petroleum and related products p I Note 25
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
pharmaceutical preparations p p
photographic equipment p p
photographic supplies p p
pinestraw buying/baling stations p p
pottery and related products p p p
preserved fruits & vegetables (no can p p
manufacturing)
primary metal products and foundries p
printing and publishing p p
pulp and paper mills p
rubber and plastics miscellaneous p p
rubber and plastics, raw p
salvage yards auto parts p I Note 26
savage yards, scrap processing p 1 Note 26
sawmill or planing mills p
signs p p
soaps and cosmetics p p
solar energy system-level 3 (special s s s s s s s s s s s s I Note 34
use permit required)
sporting goods and toys p p
sugar and confectionary products p p
surface active agents p
textile products (no dyeing & finishing) p p
texting products (with dyeing & p
finishing)
tires and inner tubes p
tobacco products p
wood containers p p
wood products, miscellaneous p p
Section 6.2 Table of Permitted Uses
Other Uses
automotive parking (subject to Article IP IP IP IP IP IP IP IP IP IP IP IP
VIII)
christmas tree sales p p p p p p
outdoor retail sales p p
sexually oriented business p I Note 28
temporary construction, storage or offices; p p p p p p p p p p p p
real estate sales or rental offices (with current
building permit for permanent building)
temporary events, including but not
limited to
arts and crafts shows p p p p p p
carnivals and fairs p p p p p
concerts, stage shows p p p p p
conventions, trade shows p p p p
outdoor religious events p p p p p
yard sales (see accessory uses and p p p p I Note 30
structures)
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE VII. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS NOTES TO THE TABLE OF PERMITTED
USES
The following Notes provide the special requirements for the indicated use as required for the
development of that use by the Table of Permitted Uses.
Note 1. Mobile Homes on Individual Lots
A. Shall be occupied only as a single family dwelling and meet the dimensional and other
requirements of the district in which located; mobile home cannot be a recreational
vehicle, No mobile home shall be used for storage;
B. Shall be set up in accordance with the standards established by the North Carolina
Department of Insurance;
C. Shall be constructed according to Class AA mobile home specifications.
D. Shall meet the following design standards:
1. The pitch of the roof of the mobile home shall have a minimum vertical rise of two
(2) feet for each twelve (12) feet of vertical run.
2. The exterior materials shall be of wood, hardboard, hardiplank, vinyl or
aluminum, comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to site-built
houses in the vicinity.
3. A continuous, permanent masonry foundation unpierced except for required
ventilation and access shall be installed under the mobile home; and
4. The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus shall be
removed subsequent to final placement.
Note 2. Mobile Home Parks
No zoning permit or building permit shall be issued for the development of any mobile home park or the
placement of any mobile home in any such park except in accordance with a site plan approved by the
Planning Board in accordance with the standards required for the submittal of Preliminary Subdivision
Plans. In any case where land is to be conveyed or public street right-of-way or other land is to be
dedicated in a Mobile Home Park, a Final Plat may be required by the Article 14 of this Ordinance.
A. Mobile Home Park Standards
1. Minimum Mobile Home Park site size - 80,000 square feet
2. Minimum Number of Spaces - 6
3. Minimum frontage on a Public Street for site -100 feet
4. Minimum lot areas for each mobile home space - 5,000 square feet
5. Minimum Mobile Home Space Width - 50 feet
6. Minimum number of parking spaces per mobile home space (located on the
space) - 2
7-1
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
7. Hard surface walk width required to connect each mobile home to parking
spaces - 2 feet
8. Minimum required paved private street width: two-way - 21 feet
9. Maximum number of mobile home spaces driveways connected to public streets
-0
10. Each mobile home to be placed within a new mobile home park and each mobile
home intended to replace an existing mobile home within an existing mobile
home park shall meet the design standards for Class AA mobile homes on
individual lots and shall also meet the design standards for mobile homes on
individual lots set forth Article 7, Note 1.D.
Note 3. Multi-family, Townhouse and Condominium Dwellings
A. In the R-20, RA-20, R-6, R-6M and O&I Districts, no multi- family dwelling or series of
attached single-family, multi-family buildings or other such arrangements shall exceed a
length of two hundred fifty (250) feet when measured along the longest axis of the
building ·or series of attached units when placed in a theoretical straight alignment,
provided, however, the Planning Board may permit as a modification a greater length
where in the opinion of the Board the greater length will result in a better utilization of the
site, better serve the intended occupants, and not; because of its length, adversely affect
the value of adjoining property.
B. An individual multi-family building or a single series of attached dwelling units to be
located on an individual lot shall be developed in accordance with the area, yard and
height requirements of the district in which located the same as any other individual
building on an individual lot. The conveyance of ground space for single-family attached
units and for common area or similar purposes shall not preclude development under this
subsection. Such conveyances however shall be subject to the requirements· of the
Subdivision Ordinance and may be subject to the North Carolina. Unit ownership Act.
C. In any case where more than one multi-family building or more than one series of
attached dwelling units are proposed to be constructed on one lot, such development
shall be in conformance with the following residential group development standards.
D. Residential Group Development Standards
1. No zoning permit or building permit shall be issued for any construction in a
group residential development except in accordance with a site plan approved by
the Planning Board, in accordance with the standards herein. Site plans shall be
submitted in the same manner as that required for Preliminary Subdivision Plans.
In any case where land is to be dedicated in a group residential development, a
Final Plat may be required by the Subdivision Ordinance. Developments that are
proposed to be developed under the North Carolina Unit Ownership Act shall
meet the requirements of the Act by recoding the declaration and plan with the
Richmond County Register of Deeds. Where land is to be conveyed in
accordance with such declaration and plan, the developer shall first comply with
the Subdivision Ordinance.
2. The minimum total lot area for a residential group development of more than two
(2) principal buildings in an R-20, R-20A, R-6, R-6M or 0-1 District shall be 30,000
square feet. Public street right-of-way or land proposed or required for public
7-2
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
street right-of-way shall not be included when calculating the minimum total lot
area or in calculating the number of dwelling units.
3. The number of dwelling units per unit of land area shall not exceed the number of
dwelling units per unit of land area permitted in the district in which the
development is located. Fractional units above one half (1/ 2) may be rounded
to the next highest number once the basic number of units exceeds twenty (20).
4. The front yard, rear yard and side yard; the frontage in feet; and the maximum
height of structure shall be as determined by the requirements of the district in
which located.
5. The minimum distance between multi-family buildings or between individual
series of attached dwellings, or any combination thereof, shall be twenty (20)
feet. In addition, in any residential group development of more than two (2)
principal buildings any structure which has a fa9ade of two or more stories in
height shall comply with the following spacing requirement:
On the site plan an isosceles triangle (yard space triangle) shall be drawn from
each building facade of two (2) stories or more which at its closest point, lies
within one hundred (100) feet of a lot line other than a street right-of-way line or
within one hundred (100) feet of another building in the development.
Facades shall be designated on each building so that a minimum number,
normally four, results. The base of the triangle shall be a line connecting the
extreme ends of the fa9ade (ignoring one-story storage rooms and other onestory
protrusions of one hundred (100) square feet or less, exterior stairways,
and docks), and its altitude shall be the length of the base line multiplied by a
factor related to the height of the building as shown below:
Number of Stories Altitude Factor
2 0.5
3 0.6
4 or more 0.7
An isosceles triangle thus established shall not overlap any portion of another
residential building, another triangle, or another property, unless that property is
public parkland, dedicated drainageway and open space, or street right-of-way.
(See Exhibit I for an illustration of yard space triangles.)
6. To permit adequate fire protection, all portions of every building or series of
attached buildings shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of a public
street that furnishes direct access to the property unless the Fire Chief
determines that fire hydrants and service drives will offer adequate protection.
7. All common service drives shall have approved two-way traffic circulation and
shall be kept available for emergency and public service use. All common service
drives shall be paved to withstand anticipated traffic usage.
8. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this
Ordinance.
9. All electric, communications, water and sewer utility lines shall be placed
underground.
7-3
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
10. Arrangement of buildings in barracks-like rows shall not be allowed.
11. Stationary sanitary containers shall be located so as not to interfere with sight
distance or the free movement of vehicles on streets or service drives and so as
to allow collector trucks adequate maneuvering space to empty the containers
and to leave the property without excessive backing. Concrete pads in
conformance with the public works department's stationary container location
standards shall be located beneath of and in the approach to each stationary
sanitary container. Where single family attached units make up the total
development and are all located along a public streei in a manner similar to a
typical single-family development, the Public Works Director may approve an
individual household pick-up system where such is provided.
12. Storm water drainage shall be provided in the same manner as required in the
Subdivision Ordinance.
7.4
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
EXHIBIT I
YARD SPACE TRIANGLES
..,.,...-----....,.,,,.
In this illustration all buildings are 2 story.
Refer to Article VII, Note 3 for application.
Scale 1 '=40'
Note 4. Accessory Dwelling Units
I I ' / " ;
I
\ I
\ I
\' -
A No accessory dwelling shall be constructed or occupied prior to the construction and
occupancy of the principal use structure.
7-5
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
B. The accessory dwelling shall occupy no more than twenty-five percent (25%) or more
than 400 square feet of the heated floor of the principal building.
C. An accessory dwelling which is contained within the principal structure shall not alter any
principal single- family residential structure in such a way as to make the structure appear
to be other than a single-family dwelling.
0. A detached accessory dwelling unit may be:
1. a dwelling unit which is part of an accessory garage; or
2. a freestanding dwelling unit meeting the NC Building Code.
E. The detached accessory dwelling unit shall:
1. have an approved sewage disposal connection of system;
2. meet all setbacks applicable to the principal building;
3. be erected behind and at least ten (10) feet from the principal building; and
4. not exceed six hundred (600) square feet in floor area.
F. Temporary family health care structures
1. On lots zoned for single-family detached dwellings (i.e. the R-20, RA-20, R-10,
R-8, R-6, R-6M and the O&I zoning distracts), a temporary family health care
structure shall be regarded as an accessory use to a single-family detached
dwelling to the extent authorized and in accordance with the provisions of G.S.
1600-915 (S.L. 2014-94 ).
2. Prior to installing a temporary family health care structure, the owner must first
obtain a zoning permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. This permit must be
renewed annually. The city may not withhold a permit if the applicant provides
sufficient proof of compliance with this subsection and G.S. 1600-915. The
owner shall be required to provide proof of compliance on an annual basis as
long as the temporary family health care structure remains on the property. The
evidence may involve the inspection by the city of the temporary family health
care structure at reasonable times convenient to the caregiver, not limited to any
annual compliance confirmation, and annual renewal of a doctor's certification
that the person living in the structure remains physically or mentally impaired, as
those terms are used in G.S. 1600-915.
Note 5. Caretaker Dwellings
A. No caretaker dwelling shall be constructed or occupied prior to construction and
occupancy of the principal use structure.
B. No more than one (1) caretaker dwelling is permitted per principal use.
Note 6. Home Occupations
A. There shall be no display of any type and there shall be no commodities sold on the
premises.
7-6
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
B. No person other than those residing on the premises shall be employed in the home
occupation.
C. No electrical or mechanical equipment except that which is used for domestic purposes
may be used in the home occupation.
D. A professional person may use the residence for infrequent consultation, emergency
treatment, or performance of religious rites but not for the general practice of the
profession.
E. No accessory structure may be used in connection with the home occupation.
F. There shall not be created or displayed outside the home any external evidence of the
home occupation.
Nole 7. Satellite Dishes
A. A Zoning permit and Building Permit are required when installing, moving or
substantially constructing or reconstructing a dish antenna.
B. A dish antenna must be installed in compliance with the manufacturer's specifications at
a minimum, but in no case shall the hole for the support post be less than 3 feet deep
and filled with less than 400 pounds of dry concrete premixed with water.
C. In all residential districts dish antennas must be installed on the ground in the rear yard
only, except as provided in below.
D. Large-scale multi-family structures may mount a dish antenna on the roof provided they
obtain architect's and engineer's statement verifying:
1. that the roof can support the added weight and
2. that the dish antenna will be anchored so as to withstand wind gusts likely to be
experienced in severe local weather.
E. In the B-1. B-2, B-3, 0-1, 1-1 and 1-2. districts, dish antennas may be installed on the roof
of a building. If installed on the roof the dish shall not be larger than twelve feet in
diameter, shall not project higher than ten feet above the maximum building height of the
zoning district or more than one-third the actual building height above the roof, whichever
is less. It shall be set back from the front and sides of the building at least the same
distance as one and one-half times the diameter of the dish, and shall not be used for
any advertising purpose. In the B-3 and 1-1 districts only, a dealer selling dish antennas
may have a maximum of one such dish installed in the front of side yard for display
purposes providing all other requirements are met.
F. If a dish antenna is repainted, the only permissible colors are the original color used by
the manufacturer, off-white, pastel beige, pastel gray, or pastel gray-green. The paint
must have a non-glossy finish and no patterns, lettering, or numerals shall be permitted
on the dish surface.
G. No dish antenna shall be installed in any public right-of-way or in any drainage or utility
easement.
H. The minimum required side yard setback for dish antennas shall be the same as for the
7-7
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
principal building in the same zoning district, except on corner lots, on the side abutting
the street, the minimum required setback shall be the same as the required front yard
setback along that street.
I. The minimum required rear yard setback for dish antennas shall be five (5) feet, but in no
case shall any part of the antenna come closer than one (1) foot to the property line.
J. In districts where there are no side yard requirements, a minimum of five (5) feet from the
side lot line shall be required, but in no case shall any part of the antenna come closer
than one (1) foot to the property line.
K. No dish antenna shall be located within ten (10) feet of the principal building except as
provided in D. above.
L. In all residential districts the maximum height of dish antennas shall be twenty (20) feet or
the height of the principal structure, whichever is less.
M. In the B-1, B-2, B-3, 0-1, 1-1, and 1-2 districts, dish antennas mounted on the roof of a
building shall not project higher than ten (10) feet above the maximum building height of
the district or more than one-third of the actual building height above the roof, whichever
is less.
Note 8. Swimming Pools
A Reference Chapter 19 of the City of Hamlet Code of Ordinances.
Note 9. Amusement or Water Parks, Go-cart Raceways
A Minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres.
B. No principal buildings or structures shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any property
line.
C. Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be provided along the entire
boundary of the park activities.
D. No amusement equipment, machinery, or mechanical device of any kind may be
operated within two hundred (200) feet of any residentially zoned property.
Note 10. Golf Courses and Country Clubs with Golf Courses
A There shall be a fifty (50) foot minimum setback between clubhouses, swimming pools,
lighted tennis courts, or athletic fields and adjacent residentially zoned property.
B. Outdoor swimming pools shall be protected by a fence, or equal enclosure, a minimum of
four (4) feet in height and equipped with a self-closing and positive self-latching gate
provided with hardware for permanent locking.
Note 11. Riding Stables, Commercial and Non-Commercial
A. The minimum area required for a riding stable shall be fifteen (15) acres in the RA-20 and
R-20 Districts.
B. There shall be a minimum one hundred (100) foot distance between manure storage
7-8
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
areas, barns, or stables and any adjacent residentially zoned property:
C. All unpaved areas shall be maintained in a manner which prevents dust from adversely
impacting adjacent properties.
Note 12. Swim and Tennis Clubs
A. In any residential district the minimum area shall be two (2) acres unless located in the
common area of a development in which case it shall be one (1) acre.
B. There shall be a fifty (50) foot minimum setback between clubhouses, swimming pools,
lighted tennis courts, or athletic fields and adjacent residentially zoned property.
C. Outdoor swimming pools shall be protected by a fence, or equal enclosure, a minimum
four (4) feet in height, and gate equipped with a self-closing and positive self-latching
provided with hardware for permanent locking.
Note 13. Cemeteries, Mausoleums
A. A minimum of three (3) contiguous acres shall be required to establish a cemetery or
mausoleum not located on the same tract of land as a church.
B. Primary access shall be to a collector or thoroughfare street.
Note 14. Congregate Care Facilities; Group Care Facilities; Churches; Colleges or Universities;
Hospitals; Museums or Art Galleries; Nursing and Convalescent Homes; Orphanages;
and Retreat Centers
A. In any residential district:
1. A minimum of one (1) acre shall be required to establish any one of the above
uses.
2. All structures including secondary and accessory structures shall be located a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from any street line and property line.
3. Any use listed above located in a residential district on a site greater than three
(3) acres shall have frontage on a collector or thoroughfare street.
4. Existing uses as described above-- which do not meet the one (1) acre minimum·
requirement of A. above at the time of the adoption of that provision may expand
or be reconstructed provided such expansion or reconstruction meets the
minimum dimensional requirements of the district in which located.
Note 15. Day Care Centers, Adult or Child
A. An adult or child day care center with five (5) or fewer attendees may be operated as a
home occupation subject to the development standards for a home occupation.
B. An adult or child day care center with six (6) or more attendees shall be operated as a
principal use and subject to the following development standards:
7.9
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
1. An indoor activity area shall be provided equivalent to at least twenty-five (25)
square feet per attendee.
2. An outdoor activity area shall be provided equivalent to at least seventy-five (75)
square feet per attendee and located outside of the street setback.
3. Outdoor activity area(s) for children shall be enclosed by a security fence at least
four (4) feet in height and located outside the street setback.
4. Centers in a residential district on a site greater than three (3) acres shall have
frontage on a collector or thoroughfare street.
Note 16. Tourist Home (Bed and Breakfast)
A. In any residential or O&I District:
Note 17. Bars
1. No tourist home shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of a rooming
house, a boarding house, another tourist home.
2. The maximum number of guest bedrooms shall be six (6).
3. The Tourist home shall be operated by a resident manager.
4. The use shall be located in a structure which was originally constructed as a
dwelling.
5. The tourist home shall contain only one (1) kitchen facility. Meals served on the
premises shall be only for overnight guests and residents of the facility.
6. The use of such a facility by any one patron shall be limited to no more than
fifteen (15) days per sixty (60) day period.
7. There shall be no exterior advertising except that which is permitted for a home
occupation.
A. No such establishment shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of a church,
elementary or secondary school, public park, or residentially zoned property.
B. The main entrance of the building shall be toward a street zoned predominantly for
nonresidential uses.
C. A minimum six (6) foot high opaque fence shall be erected adjacent to the property line of
abutting residences.
D. Parking areas related to the establishment shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet
to the property line of abutting residences.
Note 18. Airports or Air Transportation Facilities
A. The minimum area shall be fifty (50) acres for Basic Utility stage 1 airport with two
thousand (2,000) foot runway. More area is required for larger airports. Airport size and
layout shall conform to FAA Advisory Circular 150/5300-48.
7-10
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
B. There shall be a minimum three hundred (300) foot distance between airport property
and the nearest residence.
C. Security fencing shall be provided sufficient to control access to runways and taxiways.
The fencing shall be a minimum six (6) feet in height.
Note 19. Demolition Debris Landfills, Major or Minor
Demolition Debris Landfills (minor):
A. The landfill shall have a maximum area of three (3) acres.
B. The operation shall be closed out in one-year or less.
C. Conditions C., D., E., F. and G. of major landfills below shall apply.
Demolition Debris Landfills (major):
A There shall be a fifty (50) foot minimum distance from any property line.
B. There shall be a three hundred (300) foot minimum separation from any residence.
C. Access to the landfill shall be controlled with gates, chains, fences, ditches and/or trees
to prevent unregulated dumping.
D. All unpaved areas shall be maintained in a manner which prevents dust from adversely
impacting adjacent properties.
E. No filling is permitted in any flood hazard area. No filling is permitted in minor
drainageways unless the drainage has been piped or re-routed in accordance with
approved plans. No filling is permitted in utility easements.
F. Landfills shall be closed with a minimum of two (2) feet of clean soil, graded to a
maximum slope of three (3) to one (1 ), and stabilized with vegetation or by other
approved means.
G. An information board sign shall be posted and maintained at the entrance, listing the
name and phone number of the current operator, the types of material accepted, and the
hours of operation.
Note 20. RESERVED
Note 21. Utility substations
A All buildings shall observe accessory building setbacks. Transformer stations shall
observe principal buildings setbacks.
B. Equipment producing noise or sound in excess of seventy (70) decibels shall be located
no closer than one hundred (100) feet to the nearest residence.
C. Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be provided around transformer
stations.
7-11
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Note 22. Ammunition, Small Arms
A. No such facility shall locate within a five hundred (500) foot radius of any residentially or
O&I zoned property.
B. Security fencing shall be provided along the entire boundary of such a facility.
C. The facility and its operation shall observe all Fire Prevention and Protection
requirements.
Note 23. Asphalt Plants
A. Any asphalt plant operations shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line.
B. Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be provided around the
perimeter of the operation.
C. Rehabilitation:
1. Within one (1) year after the cessation of production, all equipment and stock
piles incidental to such operation shall be dismantled and removed by and at the
expense of the owner.
2. The site shall be drained to prevent the accumulation of standing water, and
channelization of the drainage shall be designed and controlled so as not to
cause erosion or silting of neighboring properties or public drainageways, nor to
appreciably increase the turbidity of any natural water course, or to occlude any
existing drainage course.
D. All unpaved storage areas shall be maintained in a manner which prevents dust from
adversely impacting adjacent properties.
E. Access:
1. Access roads leading to any part of the operation shall be constructed with a
gravel or asphalt stone surface and maintained in a dust-free manner.
2. Access roads shall be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet to any
property line other than a railroad right-of-way line.
3. A plan shall be submitted showing truck routes to and from the site. Such routes
shall be designed to minimize impacts on residential areas, schools, or other
uses negatively affected by truck traffic. Such routes shall be adhered to.
Note 24. Mining and Quarrying
A. Setback:
1. The edges of any pit where a mining operation is taking place, any equipment
used in the processing of rock and gravel, any asphalt plant, or other
industrial use operated in conjunction with the mine or quarry shall be located at
least fifty (50) feet from any property line.
2. Where the mining operation site is bounded by a railroad right-off-way currently
7-12
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
being used for rail service to the mining operation, no setback shall be required
between the railroad right-of-way and such operation.
B. Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be provided around the
perimeter of both existing and abandoned.
C. Rehabilitation:
1. Within one (1) year after the cessation of production at all mining operations, all
equipment and stock piles incidental to such operation shall be dismantled and
removed by and at the expense of the owner.
2. Except in a case where redevelopment for another permitted use is in progress
on the site of an abandoned extractive operation, all excavations shall be graded
to reduce the surface to gently rolling topography in substantial conformity to the
land area immediately surrounding, and shall be planted with a cover of sod,
trees, shrubs, legumes, or grasses which will minimize erosion due to wind or
rainfall.
3. The site shall be drained to prevent the accumulation of standing water, and
channelization of the drainage shall be designed and controlled so as not to
cause erosion or splitting of neighboring properties or public ways, not to
appreciably increase the turbidity of any natural water course, or to occlude any
existing drainage course.
D. All operations involving blasting discernible beyond the external property line of a quarry
shall only be conducted between the hours of 7:00 am and 6:00 pm.
E. All unpaved storage areas shall be maintained in a manner which prevents dust from
adversely impacting adjacent properties.
F. Access:
1. Access roads leading to any part of the operation shall be constructed with a
gravel or asphalt stone surface and maintained in a dust-free manner.
2. Access roads shall be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet to any property line
other than a railroad right-of-way line.
3. A plan shall be submitted showing truck routes to and from the site. Such routes
shall be designed to minimize impacts on residential areas, schools, or other
uses negatively affected by truck traffic. Such routes shall be adhered to.
Note 25. Petroleum and Related Products (Wholesale or Manufacturing)
A. Setback:
1. Storage tanks protected by either an attached extinguishing system approved by
the Fire Marshal, or an approved floating roof, shall not be located closer to an
exterior property line than a distance of either the diameter or height of the tank,
except that such distance need not exceed one hundred and twenty (120) feet.
2. Storage tanks not equipped as indicated in (1) above shall not be located closer
to an exterior property line than a distance equal to one and one-half (1 1/2.
7-13
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
times the greater dimension of either the diameter or height of the tank, except
that such distance need not exceed one hundred and seventy-five (175) feet.
B. Storage tanks and loading facilities shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet
from any existing residence or residentially zoned property.
C. Gravel or paved roadways shall be provided to all storage tanks.
D. Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be provided along the entire
boundary of such facilities.
E. Dikes:
1. Tanks or groups of tanks shall be diked to prevent the spread of liquid onto
other property, waterways, or drainageways. The volumetric capacity of the
diked area shall not be less than the capacity of the largest tank within the diked
area.
2. Dikes or retaining walls shall be of earth, steel, concrete, or solid masonry
designed and constructed to be liquid-tight and to withstand a full hydraulic head.
Earthen dikes three (3) feet or more in height shall have a flat section at the top
not less than two (2) feet in width. The slope shall be consistent with the angle or
repose of the material of which the dikes are constructed. Dikes shall be
restricted to an average height of not more than six (6) feet above the exterior
grade unless means are available for extinguishing a fire in any tank. Dikes
enclosing such tanks shall be provided at the top with a flareback section
designed to turn back a boil-over wave. A flareback section shall not be required
for dikes and walls enclosing approved floating roof tanks. No loose combustible
material, drums, or barrels shall be permitted within the diked area.
3. Where provision is made for draining rainwater from diked areas, such drains
shall normally be kept closed and shall be designed so that when in use they will
not permit flammable liquids to enter natural watercourses, public sewers, or
public drains. Where pumps control drainage from the diked area, they shall not
be self-starting.
F. Tank Maintenance:
7. All storage tanks shall be maintained in a leak-proof condition with an adequately
painted, rust-free exterior surface.
2. A firm substratum shall be constructed under each storage area to eliminate
differential subsidence and to prevent the product from seeping.
G. For wholesale operations in the 1-1 District, the product shall be sold in the same form as
received and shall not be altered, except that two or more products may be blended.
Any other alteration of the product shall be deemed a manufacturing use.
H. All storage facilities shall comply with the latest edition of the "Flammable and
Combustible Liquids Code, NEPA 30" of the National Fire Protection Association.
Note 26. Salvage Yards, Auto Parts of Scrap Processing
A. The minimum area to establish a salvage yard shall be three (3) acres.
7-14
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
B. The salvage yard shall be screened on the entire periphery with six (6) foot high fencing
or equivalent screening devices that provide ninety ( 90) percent opaqueness. Entrances
shall be baffled.
C. Salvage yards shall be operated in such a manner as to prevent excessive dust and
tracking of mud and debris onto adjoining streets.
Note 27. Temporary Events
A. All temporary events such as those listed shall require a permit. The purpose of this
permit is to authorize a specific use for a defined period of time and to coordinate
health, traffic, and other inspections necessary to the safe and healthful operation of the
event.
B. Application for a temporary event permit shall be made to the Enforcement Officer at
least three (3) working days prior to the start of the event.
C. A temporary event permit shall be obtained for nonpermanent facilities and activities with
a duration of more than three (3) days for not more than thirty (30) days.
D. Requirement for Permit Issuance:
1. Ample parking is provided for the event, in addition to required parking for any
permanent use or uses located at the event site;
2. Written authorization from the property owner or his agent for the event to take
place;
3. Any event held outside of a building and within five hundred (500) feet of any
residence shall cease operation by 10:00 pm;
4. Noise shall be controlled so that no adjoining property owner or occupant is
unduly disturbed by the event; and
5. Licenses and/or permits required by other agencies have been obtained prior to
the issuance of the temporary event permit.
E. Not more than three (3) temporary event permits may be issued for the same event on
the same property. in any one calendar year.
Note 28. Sexually Oriented Businesses
A. No such business shall locate within 1,200 feet of any other sexually oriented
business, as measured in a straight line from property line to property line;
B. No sexually oriented business shall be located within 1000 feet of a church, public or
private elementary or secondary school, child day care or nursery school, public park,
residentially zoned property, or any establishment with an on-premise ABC license,
as measured in a straight line from property line to property line;
C. The gross floor area of any sexually oriented establishment shall not exceed 3,000
square feet;
7-15
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
D. Except for an adult motel, no sexually oriented business may have sleeping quarters;
E. There shall not be more than one sexually oriented business in the same building,
structure, or portion thereof. No other principal or accessory use may occupy the same
building, structure, property, or portion thereof with any sexually oriented business.
F. The main entrance of the building shall be toward a street used predominantly for nonresidential
uses.
G. A minimum six (6) foot high opaque fence shall be erected adjacent to the property line of
abutting residences.
H. Parking areas related to the establishment shall be located no closer than thirty(30) feet
to the property line of abutting residence.
Note 29. Electronic Gaming Operations
The following standards shall be met as minimum standards prior to the approval of any business
engaging in electronic gaming operations in the B-2 (General Business) zoning district.
A. Days/Hours of Operation. Businesses engaging in electronic gaming operations activities
may operate from 8:00 am until 12:00 midnight each day, seven (7) days per week.
B. The maximum number of machines/terminals/computers for any electronic gaming
operations business is 2.
1. Minimum off-street parking spaces as defined in Article VIII. Off-Street Parking
and Loading
2. One (1) space per every terminal or one (1) space for every one hundred (100)
square feet or total floor area, whichever is greater.
3. One (1) handicapped space per every twenty-five (25) or fewer spaces.
4. One (1) additional space per each (1) employee.
C. The establishment must be a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any building being
used as a dwelling.
D. The establishment must be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any other
organization engaged in electronic gaming operations business, tattoo and body piercing
establishment, or adult and sexually oriented business.
E. The establishment must be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any established
religious institutions/synagogue, school, daycare center/home; library, public park,
recreation area, cemetery, skating rink, video arcade, motion picture theater which shows
G or PG-rated movies to the general public or locations frequented by minors.
F. Measurement of distance separation shall be in a straight line from the closest point of
the buildings at which the electronic gaming business is located.
Note 30. Yard Sales
A. Yard sales shall be a permitted use in zoning districts defined as residential by the City of
7-16
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Hamlet Zoning Ordinance, so long as they are conducted on a tract of land that has an
occupied dwelling.
B. Each yard sale shall be limited to the daylight hours of 2 consecutive days.
C. Yard sales shall be limited to a maximum of 2 per calendar year per property.
D. The yard sale operator shall provide parking for his or her yard sales so as to not impede
the normal flow of traffic the Roadways in the area around the yard sale.
E. Yard sales shall not include items purchased elsewhere expressly for resale.
F. Goods intended for sale shall not be stored or displayed in the front or side yards or a
dwelling except on the day(s) of the sale.
G. Commercial outdoor sales activities are prohibited at yard sales.
Note 31. Flea Markets
A Flea Markets shall be permitted uses only in non-residential zoning districts or as
conditional uses in the Business-2 Districts as defined by the Hamlet Zoning Ordinance.
B. Off street parking shall be provided at a ratio of 2 spaces per vendor table, exhibit,
display or area. Absolutely no off-site parking or parking in the right-of-way shall be
permitted.
C. Flea market operators must have the appropriate business licenses and permits from the
City of Hamlet Zoning and Business License Offices.
D. Flea market operators shall provide sanitary conditions at all times. Permanent restrooms
or port-a-johns shall be provided. Running water must be available. Any food vendors
shall apply for and receive all appropriate health permits from the Richmond County
Health Department.
E. Flea market operators shall maintain at all times a current list of vendors that are renting
space within the Flea Market area. Such list shall include name, address and phone
number of the vendor, location (or booth) at which vendor is located, and type of products
or material being sold by vendor. Such information shall be kept by the flea market
operator for a period of 1 year. The flea market operator shall make such list available to
inspection by the Zoning Officer as well as law enforcement agencies at any time during
hours of operation.
F. Flea markets are allowed to operate only 3 days a week.
G. Flea markets shall operate only during daylight hours.
H. Flea markets shall comply at all times with all state and local law, and regulations.
including (but not limited to) Health Department regulations.
Note 32. Fencing
A A fence, wall, or shrubbery screen for the purpose of privacy and/or security may be
located in any yard provided the following conditions are met:
7-17
1 .
2.
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Types of fences allowed, but not limited to:
a. Open picket fence
b. Post and rail fence
c. Wrought iron/Ornamental fence
d. Brick or stone (solid or pierced) fence
e. Open wire fencing (such as hurricane or chain link)
f. Stockade/Privacy Fence
Restriction on placement and dimensions of fences:
a. No fence located in the front yard may exceed six (6) feet in height.
b. Fences enclosing rear and side yards may be eight (8) feet high.
c. No fence, post or hedge, shall be installed so as to obstruct visibility at a
street intersection or driveway entrance.
B. No open wire fence of a type that could inflict injury from casual contact (such as a
barbed-wire fence) shall be permitted in the R-6, R-6M, R-8, R-10, and R-20 districts.
However, due to the nature of the agriculture use in the RA-20 (Residential/ Agriculture-
20) district, barbed-wire fences may be permitted in this residential district only. Barbedwire
fences may also be permitted in the commercial and industrial districts.
C. Height of a fence or other obstruction shall be measured from the average level of the
ground adjacent to the fence or screening.
D. Guidelines:
1. Fences must be erected with the posts, supports, stringer, and all unfinished
materials facing the owners residence and property.
2. A building permit is required to erect a fence.
Note 33. Radio, Television or Communication Towers1
[Ro1][M1<21
A General Provisions.
1. Purpose. The City Council of the City of Hamlet finds that the construction of
towers may cause unusual problems and hazards to the residents and visitors of
the City of Hamlet. The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate the construction
of towers to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure, and
falling ice or other such debris, to maximize the use of existing and new towers in
order to reduce the number of towers needed, to minimize potential hazards to
low flying law enforcement and medical helicopters, to restrict towers that
adversely detract from the natural beauty of the city by discouraging visual
eyesores and to minimize the negative economic impact on tourism.
2. Jurisdiction. The regulations and the procedures contained herein shall apply to
7-18
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
and govern each and every lot, parcel or tact of land within the city limits and
extra-territorial jurisdiction of the City of Hamlet.
B. Regulation of Towers in the City of Hamlet.
1. Permits Required.
a. No tower over fifty feet (50') shall be constructed, altered, reconstructed
or expanded until a City of Hamlet tower permit is obtained as provided
in this Article. No tower permit shall be issued that is not in compliance
with this Ordinance. No building permit shall be issued for any tower
subject to this ordinance that has not received a tower permit.
b. Communication towers are to be placed in the following zoning
jurisdictions: B-1 (Central Business), B-2 (General Business), RA -20
(Residential -Agricultural), and 1-2 (Heavy Industrial).
2. Enforcement Officer. For purposes of this Ordinance, the City Manager of the
City of Hamlet shall designate the Enforcement Officer of this Ordinance. The
Enforcement Officer or his or her appointee shall administer and enforce all
provisions of this Ordinance.
3. Permit Application. Tower Permit Applications are available from the office of the
City Manager of the City of Hamlet.
4. Application Fee. A fee for reviewing tower permit applications shall be
established by the City Council.
5. Issuance of Permit. Following his or her approval of any tower permit application
not requesting a variance, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a tower permit. All
tower permit conditions shall appear on the face of the Site Development Plan.
The permitee shall acknowledge and agree to permit conditions approved by the
Enforcement Officer. If a building permit is not obtained within twelve (12) months
after the tower permit is issued, the tower permit shall expire.
6. Variances.
a. Following the final decision by the Enforcement Officer to deny a permit,
a tower permit applicant may request that the Board of Adjustment and
Planning Board of the City of Hamlet grant a variance from the Tower
Approval Standards listed in Subsection D, below.
b. Before determining whether to, or not to, grant a variance, the Board of
Adjustment and Planning Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board of
Adjustment and Planning Board shall grant a variance if and only if it
concludes that:
(1 ). Adherence to the Ordinance's development standards will cause
extraordinary economic hardship to the applicant;
(2). The proposed use of the site will not substantially diminish the
public health or safety or be detrimental to the general welfare of
the city; and
7-19
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
(3). The proposed use of the site will not substantially detract from
the natural beauty of the area and the city's future economic
growth and development.
c. Should the Board of Adjustment and Planning Board grant the requested
variance, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a tower permit. The permit
applicant shall acknowledge and agree to permit conditions approved by
the Board of Adjustment and Planning Board. If a building permit is not
obtained within twelve (12) months after the tower permit is issued, the
tower permit shall expire.
d. Should the Board of Adjustment and Planning Board deny the requested
variance, the permit applicant may seek review by the Courts as
provided by law.
C. Procedures.
1. Application Submission and Review Process.
a. A completed tower permit application and five (5) copies of all supporting
documentation identified in Subsection D- 2, below, shall be submitted to
the Enforcement Officer for review.
b. The Enforcement Officer shall review the completed tower permit
application for compliance with Subsection D-2, below. Any application
not containing all information required by Subsection D-2, below, shall be
deemed incomplete and returned to the applicant for correction and
resubmission. If the Enforcement Officer shall provide notice that the
application is incomplete in writing to the applicant within ninety (90)
days of submission. The notice shall identify the deficiencies in the
application which, if cured, would make the application complete. If the
Enforcement Officer deems it necessary, he may retain, at the permit
applicant's expense, one or more professional engineers to assist him in
reviewing any technical requirements.
c. The Enforcement Officer shall take formal action to approve, or
disapprove the tower permit application within ninety (90) working days
of the application. However, he or she may take up to sixty (60)
additional days (150 days in total from the date the application is
submitted), if necessary. If the action is to disapprove the tower permit
application, the Enforcement Officer shall include in his notification letter
to the applicant the reasons for such action and specific reference shall
be made to why the requirements are not met.
d. The permitee or his agent shall record the Site Development Plan in the
Register of Deeds' office before obtaining a building permit for the
subject tower.
2. Requirements for Site Development and Preliminary Tower Design Plans. The
site development plan and preliminary design plan shall contain the following
information and be part of the tower permit application:
a. The site development plan shall be prepared by a North Carolina
Registered Land Surveyor and contain the following:
7-20
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
(1 ). The tower applicant's name and property owner's name and their
addresses, scale, north arrow, vicinity map, tax parcel
identification number, and the tower's latitude and longitude
coordinates;
(2). The name, address, signature and seal of the surveyor
preparing the site development plan;
(3). The surveyed boundary lines of the parcel(s) that will contain the
proposed tower and its fall area;
(4). .The name, addresses and tax parcel identification numbers of all
owners of property abutting the subject property;
(5). All identifiable structures located on the parcel, all private and
public roads, highways, and underground and overhead utilities;
(6). All existing towers on the property or any towers whose fall area
encroaches onto the property;
(7). The proposed tower's location, the proposed fall area and the
location of all support structures and guy line anchors;
(8). The ground elevation of the proposed tower's base, all proposed
support structures, property corners, and a permanent site
branch mark. All elevations shall be determined by using the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929; and
(9). All proposed access roads, easements or rights-of-way on or to
the site, and any other improvements to the site.
b. The preliminary tower design plan shall be prepared by a North Carolina
Registered Professional Engineer and contain the following:
(1 ). The tower permit applicant's name and address, scale, north
arrow, vicinity map and tax parcel identification number;
(2). The name, address, signature and seal of the engineer preparing
the preparing the preliminary tower design plan;
(3). A plan showing the base of the tower and the foundations for all
guy line anchors and support structures, all proposed buildings
and any other proposed improvements including access roads
and utility connections within and to the proposed site;
(4). A tower elevation showing the proposed lighting, all proposed
antennas and other appendages;
(5). An elevation of each proposed set of guy line anchors; and
(6). The proposed tower design loads.
c. A map and description showing the service areas(s) for the proposed
7-21
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
tower's antenna(s) and/or other devices.
d. The applicant shall provide written statements from the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) showing that the proposed tower complies with all permit
regulations administered by that agency or evidence that the proposed
tower is exempt from those regulations.
e. The applicant shall identify all other possible alternative considered
within the service area for the proposed tower's antenna(s) and/or other
devices and explain why the proposed tower is necessary and why
existing towers and structures (e.g., Duke Power or Carolina Power &
Light transmission towers) cannot accommodate the proposed
antenna(s) and/pr other devices.
f. The applicant shall identify any variance(s) to the ordinance, the
reason(s) for seeking the variance(s) and any measures that are
proposed to mitigate possible adverse affects of the proposed
variance(s).
3. Tower Approval Standards.
a. Any proposed tower shall provide a needed service or benefit to the
residents of the City of Hamlet and the surrounding area that cannot
otherwise be met.
b. Towers shall be sited to all ice-fall or debris from tower failure on-site.
The designated fall area is 1 Y, times the tower height or a minimum of
100 feet from property lines. A fall area of Y, :1 will be acceptable with a
signed and sealed statement by a registered professional engineer
licensed by the State of NC indicating such fall area would prevent the
tower's fall from encroaching onto adjoining property.
c. A tower shall be set-back from other on-site and off-site towers and
supporting structures, or other arrangements shall be made, such that
one tower will not strike another tower or its support if it falls.
d. Tower lighting shall not exceed the minimum standards of the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) for a red obstruction lighting system
contained in Advisory Circular No. 70/7460-IF, dated September 27,
1978, as amended.
e. To defeat unauthorized access, the base of the tower shall be
surrounded by a fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height unless the
tower is constructed entirely on a building over eight (8) feet in height.
f. Any telecommunications tower shall be engineered and constructed to
accommodate two (2) additional antennas that are at least as large as
the largest proposed antenna identified in Section D-2.b(4).
g. Tower permit approval is conditional subject to the owner(s)' agreeing to
allow future collocation of other antenna(s) or transiting devices. This
agreement shall be submitted in writing and recorded in the Register of
Deeds' office.
7-22
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
h. No tower shall exceed two hundred feet (200') in height.
i. Towers shall be blended with the natural surroundings as much as
possible. Colors and materials shall be used that are compatible with the
surrounding area, except when otherwise required by applicable Federal
or State regulations.
j. The tower and equipment shall be located, designed, and/or screened to
blend with the existing natural, or build surroundings to reduce the visual
impacts as much as possible, and to be compatible with neighboring land
uses and the character of the community.
k. Any tower not in use for two (2) continuous years shall be removed
within 120 days after the tower owner and the current property owner
have received written notice by the Enforcement Officer of the City
Manager. The written notice, mailed return receipt requested, shall be
delivered to both the tower owner identified on the tower permit
application and the current property owner.
I. Property located within the tower's fall area shall not be subdivided as
long as the tower is standing.
m. A sign identifying the owner(s) and/or operator(s) of the tower and an
emergency telephone number shall be displayed in a clearly visible
location on the tower's premises.
D. Collocation of small wireless facilities.
1. Except as expressly provided in this Section, the City shall not prohibit, regulate,
or charge for the collocation of small wireless facilities.
2. The city may not establish a moratorium on (i) filing, receiving, or processing
applications or (ii) issuing permits or any other approvals for the collocation of
small wireless facilities.
3. Small wireless facilities that meet the height requirements of G.S. 160D-936(b)(2)
shall only be subject to administrative review and approval under subsection (d)
of this section if they are collocated (i) in a city right-of-way within any zoning
district or (ii) outside of city rights-of-way on property other than single-family
residential property.
4. The City of Hamlet may require an applicant to obtain a permit to collocate a
small wireless facility. The city shall receive applications for, process, and issue
such permits subject to the following requirements:
a. The city may not, directly or indirectly, require an applicant to perform
services unrelated to the collocation for which approval is sought. For
purposes of this section, "services unrelated to the collocation," includes
in-kind contributions to the city such as the reservation of fiber, conduit,
or pole space for the city.
b. The wireless provider shall complete an application as specified in form
and content by the city. A wireless provider shall not be required to
provide more information to obtain a permit than communications service
providers that are not wireless providers.
7-23
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
c. A permit application shall be deemed complete unless the city provides
notice otherwise in writing to the applicant within 30 days of submission
or within some other mutually agreed- upon time frame. The notice shall
identify the deficiencies in the application which, if cured, would make the
application complete. The application shall be deemed complete on
resubmission if the additional materials cure the deficiencies identified.
d. The permit application shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis
and shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the
application within 45 days from the time the application is deemed
complete or a mutually agreed upon time frame between the city and the
applicant.
e. A city may deny an application only on the basis that it does not meet
any of the following:
(1) The city's applicable codes,
(2) Local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety,
objective design standards for decorative utility poles, city utility
poles, or reasonable and nondiscriminatory stealth and
concealment requirements, including screening or landscaping
for ground-mounted equipment,
(a) Public safety and reasonable spacing requirements
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment in
a right-of-way, or
(b) The historic preservation requirements in G.S. 160D-
936(i). The city must (i) document the basis for a denial,
including the specific code provisions on which the
denial was based and (ii) send the documentation to the
applicant on or before the day the city denies an
application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies
identified by the city and resubmit the application within
30 days of the denial without paying an additional
application fee. The city shall approve or deny the
revised application within 30 days of the date on which
the application was resubmitted. Any subsequent review
shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the prior
denial.
f. An application shall include an attestation that the small wireless facilities
must be collocated on the utility pole, city utility pole, or wireless support
structure and that the small wireless facilities must be activated for use
by a wireless services provider to provide service no later than one year
from the permit issuance date, unless the city and the wireless provider
agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by a lack of commercial
power at the site.
g. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities at multiple
locations within the jurisdiction of the city shall be allowed, at the
applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application for no more than
7-24
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
25 separate facilities and receive a permit for the collocation of all the
small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of this section. A city
may remove small wireless facility collocations from a consolidated
application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations (i) for
which incomplete information has been provided or (ii) that are denied.
The city may issue a separate permit for each collocation that is
approved.
h. The permit may specify that collocation of the small wireless facility shall
commence within six months of approval and shall be activated for use
no later than one year from the permit issuance date, unless the city and
the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by
a lack of commercial power at the site.
5. Subject to the limitations provided in G.S. 160A-296(a)(6), a city may charge an
application fee that shall not exceed the lesser of (i) the actual, direct, and
reasonable costs to process and review applications for collocated small wireless
facilities, (ii) the amount charged by the city for permitting of any similar activity,
or (iii) one hundred dollars ($100.00) per facility for the first five small wireless
facilities addressed in an application, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional
small wireless facility addressed in the application. In any dispute concerning the
appropriateness of a fee, the city has the burden of proving that the fee meets
the requirements of this subsection.
6. Subject to the limitations provided in G.S. 160A-296(a)(6), a city may impose a
technical consulting fee for each application, not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00), to offset the cost of reviewing and processing applications required by
this section. The fee must be based on the actual, direct, and reasonable
administrative costs incurred for the review, processing, and approval of an
application. A city may engage an outside consultant for technical consultation
and the review of an application. The fee imposed by a city for the review of the
application shall not be used for either of the following:
(1) Travel expenses incurred in the review of a collocation
application by an outs"1de consultant or other third party.
(2) Direct payment or reimbursement for an outside consultant or
other third party based on a contingent fee basis or resultsbased
arrangement. In any dispute concerning the
appropriateness of a fee, the city has the burden of proving that
the fee meets the requirements of this subsection.
7. The city may require a wireless services provider to remove an abandoned
wireless facility within 180 days of abandonment. Should the wireless services
provider fail to timely remove the abandoned wireless facility, the city may cause
such wireless facility to be removed and may recover the actual cost of such
removal, including legal fees, if any, from the wireless services provider. For
purposes of this subsection, a wireless facility shall be deemed abandoned at the
earlier of the date that the wireless services provider indicates that it is
abandoning such facility or the date that is 180 days after the date that such
wireless facility ceases to transmit a signal, unless the wireless services provider
gives the city reasonable evidence that it is diligently working to place such
wireless facility back in service.
7-25
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
8. The city shall not require an application or permit or charge fees for:
(a) routine maintenance,
(b) the replacement of small wireless facilities with small wireless facilities
that are the same size or smaller, or
(c) installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless
facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility
poles or city utility poles in compliance with applicable codes by or for a
communications service provider authorized to occupy the city rights-ofway
and who is remitting taxes under G.S. 105-164.4(a)(4c) or G.S. 105-
164.4(a)(6).
9. Nothing in this section shall prevent a city from requiring a work permit for work
that involves excavation, affects traffic patterns, or obstructs vehicular traffic in
the city right-of-way.
E. Use of public right-of-way.
1. A city shall not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any person for use of
city rights-of- way for the construction, operation, marketing, or maintenance of
wireless facilities or wireless support structures or the collocation of small
wireless facilities.
2. Subject to the requirements of G.S. 1600-935, a wireless provider may collocate
small wireless facilities along, across, upon, or under any city right-of-way.
Subject to the requirements of this section, a wireless provider may place,
maintain, modify, operate, or replace associated utility poles, city utility poles,
conduit, cable, or related appurtenances and facilities along, across, upon, and
under any city right-of-way. The placement, maintenance, modification,
operation, or replacement of utility poles and city utility poles associated with the
collocation of small wireless facilities, along, across, upon, or under any city rightof-
way shall be subject only to review or approval under G.S. 160D-935{d) if the
wireless provider meets all of the following requirements:
a. Each new utility pole and each modified or replacement utility pole or city
utility pole installed in the right-of-way shall not exceed 50 feet above ground
level.
b. Each new small wireless facility in the right-of-way shall not extend more
than 10 feet above the utility pole, city utility pole, or wireless support
structure on which it is collocated.
3. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a city from allowing utility
poles, city utility poles, or wireless facilities that exceed the limits set forth in
subdivision (1) of subsection b. of this section.
4. Applicants for use of a city right-of-way shall comply with a city's undergrounding
requirements prohibiting the installation of above-ground structures in the city
rights-of-way without prior zoning approval, if those requirements (i) are
nondiscriminatory with respect to type of utility, (ii) do not prohibit the
replacement of structures existing at the time of adoption of the requirements,
and (iii) have a waiver process.
7-26
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
5. Notwithstanding subsection (d) of this section, in no instance in an area zoned
single-family residential where the existing utilities are installed underground may
a utility pole, city utility pole, or wireless support structure exceed 40 feet above
ground level, unless the city grants a waiver or variance approving a taller utility
pole, city utility pole, or wireless support structure.
6. Except as provided in this Part, a city may assess a right-of-way charge under
this section for use or occupation of the right-of-way by a wireless provider,
subject to the restrictions set forth under G.S.160A-296(a)(6). In addition,
charges authorized by this section shall meet all of the following requirements:
a. The right-of-way charge shall not exceed the direct and actual cost of
managing the city rights-of-way and shall not be based on the wireless
provider's revenue or customer counts.
b. The right-of-way charge shall not exceed that imposed on other users of
the right-of-way, including publicly, cooperatively, or municipally owned
utilities.
c. The right-of-way charge shall be reasonable and nondiscriminatory.
7. Nothing in this subsection is intended to establish or otherwise affect rates
charged for attachments to utility poles, city utility poles, or wireless support
structures. At its discretion, a city may provide free access to city rights-of-way
on a nondiscriminatory basis in order to facilitate the public benefits of the
deployment of wireless services.
8. Nothing in this section is intended to authorize a person to place, maintain,
modify, operate, or replace a privately owned utility pole or wireless support
structure or to collocate small wireless facilities on a privately owned utility pole,
a privately owned wireless support structure, or other private property without the
consent of the property owner.
9. A city may require a wireless provider to repair all damage to a city right-of-way
directly caused by the activities of the wireless provider, while occupying,
installing, repairing, or maintaining wireless facilities, wireless support structures,
city utility poles, or utility poles and to return the right-of- way to its functional
equivalence before the damage. If the wireless provider fails to make the repairs
required by the city within a reasonable time after written notice, the city may
undertake those repairs and charge the applicable party the reasonable and
documented cost of the repairs. The city may maintain an action to recover the
costs of the repairs.
10. This section shall not be construed to limit local government authority to enforce
historic preservation zoning regulations consistent with Part 4 of Article 9 of this
Chapter, the preservation of local zoning authority under 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7),
the requirements for facility modifications under 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a), or the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 U.S.C. § 300101, et seq., as
amended, and the regulations, local acts, and city charter provisions adopted to
implement those laws.
11. A wireless provider may apply to a city to place utility poles in the city rights-ofway,
or to replace or modify utility poles or city utility poles in the public rights-ofway,
to support the collocation of small wireless facilities. A city shall accept and
7-27
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
process the application in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 160D-935(d),
applicable codes, and other local codes governing the placement of utility poles
or city utility poles in the city rights-of-way, including provisions or regulations that
concern public safety, objective design standards for decorative utility poles or
city utility poles, or reasonable and nondiscriminatory stealth and concealment
requirements, including those relating to screening or landscaping, or public
safety and reasonable spacing requirements. The application may be submitted
in conjunction with the associated small wireless facility application.
F. Access to city utility poles to install small wireless facilities.
1. The city may not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any person for the
right to collocate small wireless facilities on city utility poles. A city shall allow any
wireless provider to collocate small wireless facilities on its city utility poles at
just, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory rates, terms, and conditions, but in no
instance may the rate exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per city utility pole per year.
The North Carolina Utilities Commission shall not consider this subsection as
evidence in a proceeding initiated pursuant to G.S. 62-350(c).
2. A request to collocate under this section may be denied only if there is
insufficient capacity or for reasons of safety, reliability, and generally applicable
engineering principles, and those limitations cannot be remedied by rearranging,
expanding, or otherwise reengineering the facilities at the reasonable and actual
cost of the city to be reimbursed by the wireless provider. In granting a request
under this section, a city shall require the requesting entity to comply with
applicable safety requirements, including the National Electrical Safety Code and
the applicable rules and regulations issued by the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration.
3. If the city that operates a public enterprise as permitted by Article 16 of Chapter
160A of the General Statutes has an existing city utility pole attachment rate, fee,
or other term with an entity, then, subject to termination provisions, that
attachment rate, fee, or other term shall apply to collocations by that entity or its
related entities on city utility poles.
4. Following receipt of the first request from a wireless provider to collocate on a
city utility pole, a city shall, within 60 days, establish the rates, terms, and
conditions for the use of or attachment to the city utility poles that it owns or
controls. Upon request, a party shall state in writing its objections to any
proposed rate, terms, and conditions of the other party.
5. In any controversy concerning the appropriateness of a rate for a collocation
attachment to a city utility pole, the city has the burden of proving that the rates
are reasonably related to the actual, direct, and reasonable costs incurred for use
of space on the pole for such period.
6. The city shall provide a good-faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary
to enable the city utility pole to support the requested collocation, including pole
replacement, if necessary, within 60 days after receipt of a complete application.
Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall be completed within 60
days of written acceptance of the good-faith estimate by the applicant. For
purposes of this section, the term "make-ready work" means any modification or
replacement of a city utility pole necessary for the city utility pole to support a
7-28
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
small wireless facility in compliance with applicable safety requirements,
including the National Electrical Safety Code, that is performed in preparation for
a collocation installation.
7. The city shall not require more make-ready work than that required to meet
applicable codes or industry standards. Fees for make-ready work shall not
include costs related to preexisting or prior damage or noncompliance. Fees for
make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall not exceed actual costs
or the amount charged to other communications service providers for similar
work and shall not include any consultant fees or expenses.
8. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to apply to an entity whose poles, ducts,
and conduits are subject to regulation under section 224 of the Communications
Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151, et seq., as amended, or under G.S. 62-350.
9. This section shall not apply to an excluded entity. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to affect the authority of an excluded entity to deny, limit, restrict, or
determine the rates, fees, terms, and conditions for the use of or attachment to
its utility poles, city utility poles, or wireless support structures by a wireless
provider. This section shall not be construed to alter or affect the provisions of
G.S.62-350, and the rates, terms, or conditions for the use of poles, ducts, or
conduits by communications service providers, as defined in G.S. 62-350, are
governed solely by G.S. 62-350. For purposes of this section, "excluded entity"
means (i) a city that owns or operates a public enterprise pursuant to Article 16 of
Chapter 160A of the General Statutes consisting of an electric power generation,
transmission, or distribution system or (ii) an electric membership corporation
organized under Chapter 117 of the General Statutes that owns or controls
poles, ducts, or conduits, but which is exempt from regulation under section 224
of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151, et seq., as amended.
G. Applicability.
1. The city shall not adopt or enforce any ordinance, rule, regulation, or resolution
that regulates the design, engineering, construction, installation, or operation of
any small wireless facility located in an interior structure or upon the site of any
stadium or athletic facility. This subsection does not apply to a stadium or athletic
facility owned or otherwise controlled by the city. This subsection does not
prohibit the enforcement of applicable codes.
2. Nothing contained in this Part shall amend, modify, or otherwise affect any
easement between private parties. Any and all rights for the use of a right-of-way
are subject to the rights granted pursuant to an easement between private
parties.
3. Except as provided in this Section or otherwise specifically authorized by the
General Statutes, a city may not adopt or enforce any regulation on the
placement or operation of communications facilities in the rights-of-way of Statemaintained
highways or city rights-of-way by a provider authorized by State law
to operate in the rights-of-way of State-maintained highways or city rights-of-way
and may not regulate any communications services.
4. Except as provided in this Part or specifically authorized by the General Statutes,
7-29
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
a city may not impose or collect any tax, fee, or charge to provide a
communications service over a communications facility in the right-of-way.
5. The approval of the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of a small
wireless facility pursuant to this Part does not authorize the provision of any
communications services or the installation, placement, maintenance, or
operation of any communications facility, including a wireline backhaul facility,
other than a small wireless facility, in the right-of-way.
Note 34. Solar Energy Systems
A. General.
1. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to facilitate the construction,
installation, and operation of Solar Energy Systems (SESs) in the City of Hamlet
in a manner that promotes economic development and ensures the protection of
health, safety, and welfare while also avoiding adverse impacts to important
areas. It is the intent to encourage the development of SESs that reduce reliance
on foreign and out-of-state energy resources, bolster local economic
development and job creation, support the diversification of the state's energy
portfolio, strengthen energy and grid security, reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
reduce local air and water pollution, and aid North Carolina in meeting its
Renewable Portfolio Standard. These regulations are not intended to abridge
safety, health or environmental requirements contained in other applicable
codes, standards, or ordinances. The provisions herein shall not be deemed to
nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
2. Applicability.
a. This ordinance applies to the constriction of any new SES within the
planning and zoning jurisdiction of the City of Hamlet.
b. An SMS permitted prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall
remain exempt, except that modifications to an existing SES that
increases the SES area by more than 5% of the original footprint or
changes the solar panel type (e.g., photovoltaic to solar thermal) shall be
subjected to this ordinance.
c. Maintenance and repair are not subject to this ordinance.
d. This ordinance does not supersede regulations from local, state, or
federal agencies. Some important examples of such regulations include,
but are not limited to:
(1) Building/Electrical Permits Required. Nothing in this ordinance
modifies already established building standards required to
construct a SES;
(2) Onsite Wastewater System Avoidance. Nothing in this ordinance
modifies already established Department of Health and Human
Services requirements. A SES shall not be constructed over
onsite waste water systems (e.g. septic systems) unless
approved by the Department of Health and Human Services;
7-30
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
(3) Stormwater Permit Required. Nothing in this ordinance modifies
the requirements or exempts any SES of complying with the
various stormwater jurisdictions and regulations established by
the Department of Environment and Natural Resources. North
Carolina statute requires the acquisition of stormwater permits
for construction projects that impact stormwater runoff; and
(4) Historic Districts. Nothing in this ordinance modifies already
established State Historic Preservation Office requirements. May
require additional permitting (certificates of appropriateness) to
install solar in Historic Districts.
3. Permits Required
a. Level 1 Solar Energy System. Roof mounted- Zoning Compliance
Permitted Use
b. Level 2 Solar Energy System.
(1) Light Industrial (1-1 ): SES of any size - Special Use Permit
(2) Heavy Industrial (1-2): SES of any size- Special Use Permit
c. Level 3 Solar Energy System. Systems that do not satisfy the
parameters for a Level 1 or Level 2 Solar Energy System =Special Use
Permit
B. Parcel Line Setbacks. The Special Use Permit shall determine the parcel line setback to
fencing for ground mounted SES equipment, excluding any poles, and wires necessary to
connect to facilities of the electric utility. The setbacks shall be measured from the
exterior of the fencing and gates which are required around the perimeter of all solar
energy systems.
C. Height Limitations. The height of systems will be measured from the highest natural
grade below each solar panel and shall be limited as follows:
Table 1
Level 1 Shall not project vertically above the peak of the sloped roof to
Roof Mounted which it is attached; or projected vertically more than 5 feet above
a flat roof installation. May not exceed the maximum height for the
zonina district.
Level 2 20'
Liqht Industrial
Level 2 20'
Heavv Industrial
D. Aviation Notification. (See Subsection I. for more information related to Airports)
The requirements below apply only to Level 1, 2, & 3 systems over half (1/2) an acre in
size:
1. A map analysis showing a radius of five (5) nautical miles from the center of the
SES with any airport operations within this area highlighted shall be submitted
with permit application.
2. For consideration of potential impacts to low altitude military flight paths,
7-31
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
notification of intent to construct the SES shall be sent to the NC Commanders
Council at least 30 days before the SUP hearing for Level 3 SESs and at least 45
days before starting construction for applicable Level 1 & Level 2 SESs.
Notification shall include location of SES (i.e., map, coordinates, address, or
parcel ID), technology (i.e. roof-mounted PV, ground- mounted fixed PV, tracked
PV, solar thermal, etc.), arid the area of system (e.g. 5 acres). Proof of delivery of
notification and date of delivery shall be submitted with permit application.
3. The latest version of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool (SGHAT) shall be
used per its user's manual to evaluate the solar glare aviation hazard. The full
report for each flight path and observation point, as well as the contact
information for the zoning administrator, shall be sent to the authority indicated
below at least 30 days before the SUP hearing for Level 3 SESs and at least 45
days before starting construction for Level 1 & Level 2 SESs. Proof of delivery of
notification and date of delivery shall be submitted with permit application:
a. Airport operations at airport in the National Plan of Integrated Airport
Systems (NPIAS) within 5 nautical miles of the center of SES: provide
required information to the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA)
Airport District Office (ADO) with oversight of North Carolina.
b. Airport operations at airport not in the NPIAS, including military airports,
within 5 nautical miles of the center of SES: provide required information
to the NC Commanders Council for military airports and to the
management of the airport for non-military airports.
4. Any applicable SES design changes (e.g., module tilt, module reflectivity, etc.)
after initial submittal shall be renin in the SGHAT tool and the new full report shall
be sent without undue delay to the contact specified in 7.b.i and 7.b.ii above for
accurate records of the as-built system.
E. Level 1 Solar Energy System Requirements
1. Level 1 SESs are a permitted use provided they meet the applicable height,
setback, aviation notification, and related district standards.
2. Ground-mounted solar panels may be installed for educational purposes
provided that,
a. The primary purpose of the panels is educational and not commercial in
nature;
b. The panels are installed as an accessory use to a school; and
c. The area of the installed panels is no greater than fifteen (15) feet by
twenty (20) feet.
F. Levels 2 & 3 Solar Energy System Requirements. The following requirements are in
addition to height, setback, aviation notification, and applicable district standards:
1. Site Plan. A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
demonstrating compliance with:
a. Setback and height limitations established in Table subsection B and
Table 1.
7-32
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
b. Applicable zoning district requirements such as lot coverage, and
c. Applicable solar requirements per this ordinance.
2. Safety Fencing.
a. All SESs in Levels 2 and 3 shall be fenced around the exterior of the
SES with as opaque or semi opaque fence of earth tone colors which
shall be at least 6 feet in height and which shall additionally have at least
3 strands of barbed wire run above such six feet.
b. All fencing shall be constructed so as to substantially lessen the
likelihood of entry into a SES by unauthorized individuals.
c. The fencing and barbed wire required hereunder shall be maintained in
good condition. failure to maintain the fencing and barbed wire required
hereunder shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
d. The fencing and barbed wire requirements specified hereunder shall
continue notwithstanding the fact that a SES is no longer operational
and/or falls into disuse unless and until the SES is dismantled and
removed from the parcel or parcels of land upon which it was
constructed.
3. Gates and Locks.
a. All gates to the fences of all SESs shall be at least 6 feet in height and
which shall additionally have at least three strands of barbed wire run
above such six feet.
b. All gates to the fences of all SESs shall be equipped with locks and shall
remain locked at all times except for those times when the owner and/or
operator, or their respective agents is/are using the gate for ingress
and/or egress or is/are otherwise present and monitoring the solar
energy system.
c. All gates to fences of all SESs shall be constructed so as to substantially
lessen the likelihood of entry into a SES by unauthorized individuals.
d. The gates and barbed wire required hereunder shall be maintained in
good condition. Failure to maintain the gates required hereunder shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance.
e. The gate, barbed wire and lock requirements specified hereunder shall
continue notwithstanding the fact that a SES is no longer operational
and/or falls into disuse unless and until such SES is dismantled and
removed from the parcel or parcels of land upon which it was
constructed.
4. Evergreen Vegetative Bulfer.
a. A continuous evergreen buffer shall be present and maintained at all
times around the perimeter of the exterior of the fencing and gates which
are required for all SESs in Levels 2 and 3. Nothing contained herein
7-33
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
shall be construed so as to require such continuous evergreen
vegetative buffer to block reasonable access to SES.
b. The evergreen vegetative buffer shall be composed of evergreen trees or
shrubs of a type which at planting shall be a minimum of 4 feet in height
and which shall be maintained at maturity at a height of not less than 6
feet in height. The evergreen trees or shrubs shall be spaced no more
than ten feet apart (from the base of tree or shrub to the bass of tree or
shrub).
c. The evergreen vegetative buffer shall be carefully planted and shall be
maintained in good condition. Failure to maintain the evergreen
vegetative buffer shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
d. The evergreen vegetative buffer requirements specified hereunder shall
continue notwithstanding the fact that a SES is no longer operational
and/or falls into disuse unless and until such SES is dismantled and
removed from the parcel or parcels of land upon which it was
constructed.
5. Electrical Disconnect Switch. The electrical disconnect switch shall be clearly
identified and unobstructed, and the owner must file a map with the City of
Hamlet Police Department and City of Hamlet Fire Department showing where
the disconnect switch is located. Owner must supply all current emergency
contact information to the Police and Fire Departments. Owner shall update
emergency contact information as soon as emergency contact information
changes.
6. Signage. A sign not to exceed 2.25 square feet shall be attached to the fence
adjacent to the main access gate and shall list the facility name, owner and
phone number. All other signage shall be prohibited.
7. Noise. The inverter noise of the SES shall not exceed 40dBA at the property line.
8. Completion. Construction must be completed within 18 months of Zoning
Compliance Issuance date. Should delays occur, permit extensions must be
approved by the City of Hamlet in the same manner they were originally
approved by the City.
9. Decommissioning (See Subsection G: Decommissioning Plan and Subsection H.
for abandonment clause and information on decommissioning).
a. A decommissioning plan signed by the party responsible for
decommissioning and the landowner (if different) addressing the
following shall be submitted with permit application -
(1) Defined conditions upon which decommissioning will be initiated
(i.e., end of land lease, no power production for 6 months, etc.).
(2) Removal of all non-utility owned equipment, conduit, structures,
fencing, roads, and foundations.
(3) Restoration of property to condition prior to development of the
SES.
7-34
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
(4) The timeframe for completion of decommissioning activities.
(5) Description of any agreement (e.g., lease) with landowner
regarding decommissioning.
(6) The party currently responsible for decommissioning.
(7) Plans for updating this decommissioning plan.
b. Before final electrical inspection, provide evidence decommissioning plan
was recorded with the Richmond County Register of Deeds.
10. Annual Reporting. The owner of the SES will provide annually on July 151 to the
City of Hamlet an Energy Production Report from their purchaser to verify
continued energy production.
G. Decommissioning Plan
1. Decommissioning will occur as a result of any of the following conditions:
a. The land lease ends
b. The system does not produce power for 6 months
c. The system is damaged and will not be prepared or replaced
2. The owner of the Facility, as provided for in its lease with the landowner, will do
the following as a minimum to decommission the project.
a. Remove all non-utility owned equipment, conduits, structures, fencing,
and foundations to a depth of at least three feet below grade.
b. Remove all graveled areas and access roads unless the owner of the
leased real estate requests in writing for it to stay in place.
c. Restore the land to a condition reasonably similar to its condition before
SES development, including replacement of top soil removed or eroded.
d. Revegetate any cleared areas with warm season grasses that are native
to the Sandhills region, unless requested in writing by the owner of the
real estate to not revegetate due to plans for agricultural planting.
3. All said removal and decommissioning shall occur within 6 months of the facility
ceasing to produce power for sale.
4. The owner of the Facility, currently, is responsible for this decommissioning.
Nothing in this plan relieves any obligation that the real estate property owner
may have to remove the facility in the event the operator of the farm does not
fulfill this obligation.
5. The owner of the Facility will provide the City of Hamlet Zoning Department and
7-35
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
the Richmond County Register of Deeds with an updated signed
decommissioning plan within 30 days of change in the Facility Owner.
6. This plan may be modified from time to time and a copy of any modified plans will
be provided to the planning staff and filed with the City of Hamlet Zoning
Department and the Register of Deeds by the party responsible for
decommissioning.
H. Abandonment Clause. A SES ceases to produce energy on a continuous basis for 6
months will be considered abandoned unless the current responsible party (or parties)
with ownership interest in the SES provides substantial evidence (updated every 6
months after 6 months of no energy production) to the Zoning Administrator of the intent
to maintain and reinstate the operation of that facility. It is the responsibility of the
responsible party (or parties) to remove all equipment and facilities and restore the Parcel
to its condition prior to development of the SES (including removal of gravel, roads, and
fencing).
1. Upon determination of abandonment, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
party (or parties) responsible they must remove the SES and restore the site to
its condition prior to development of the SES within one hundred and eighty (180)
days of notice by the Zoning Administrator.
2. If the responsible party (or parties) fails to comply, the Zoning Administrator may
remove the SES, sell any removed materials, and initiate judicial proceedings or
take any other steps legally authorized against the responsible parties to recover
the costs required to remove the SES and restore the site to a non-hazardous
condition.
I. Airport. A new FAA interim policy (published 10-23-2013) for on-airport solar
development requires the use of this glare assessment tool and defines the below criteria
to assess acceptable risk of glare. The proposed solar energy system meets the following
standards:
1. No potential for glint or glare in the existing or planned Airport Traffic Control
Tower (ATCT) cab, and
2. No potential glare or "low potential for after-image" along the final approach path
for existing landing threshold or future landing thresholds (including any planned
interim phases of the landing thresholds) as shown on the current FAA-approved
Airport Layout Plan (ALP). The final approach path is defined as two (2) miles
from fifty (50) feet above the landing threshold using a standard three (3) degree
glidepath.
The following are recommended steps required to complete the aviation notification
requirement in the template solar ordinance for NC for SESs near an airport
3. OFF AIRPORT solar projecta.
Determine if you are required to submit a filing with the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) in accordance with CFR Title 14 Part 77.9 & follow
instructions.
( https :oeaaa. faa. gov /oeaaa/externa l/g is T ools/gisAction .jsp ?action=s how
NoNoticeRequiredToolForm)
7-36
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
b. Use internet/software mapping tool (such as Google Earth or Google
Map) to identify airports within 5 nautical miles of the center of the
proposed solar project site.
c. If search results indicate no airport within 5 nautical miles of the project
site, append research results to the permit application.
d. If research results indicate airport(s) within 5 nautical miles of the project
site, 8 to www.faa.gon/airports/planning
capacity/npias/reports/media/2013/npias2013AppendixB Part4.pdf to
determine if it is in the National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems
(NPIAS), i.e., an FAA "obligated" airport. If you are unable to determine if
the airport is in the NPIAS or require assistance, contact the FAA's local
ADO.
(1) Notification of airports in the NPIAS should be sent to the local
ADO.
(2) Notification of military airports should be sent to the NC
Commander's Council via mail or email.
(3) Notification of all other airports should be sent to the
management of the airport.
e. Run the latest version of the SGAHT according to the user manual.
Unless otherwise directed in the user's manual, use the tool to assess for
glare hazards at:
(1) the Airport Traffic Control Tower {ATCT) cab, and
(2) the final approach path for any existing landing threshold or
future landing thresholds (including any planned interim phases
of the landing thresholds) as shown on the current FAAapproved
Airport Layout Plan (ALP). The final approach path is
defined as two (2) miles from fifty (50) feet above the landing
threshold using a standard three (3) degree glidepath.
On airport solar projects at FAA obligate airports must follow FAA requirements. The
following are recommended steps to facilitate meeting the FAA requirements.
4. ON AIRPORT Solar Projects
a. Contact the ADO to discuss big picture concept (type if system, siting,
size, environmental requirements, FAA Form 7460, etc.). This way FAA
can give the proponent a general "roadmap" for the way forward
(General FAA areas of concern, introduce the SGHAT Too1, if an onairport
project; give a feel for which areas ON AIRPORT can be
considered for siting (per FAA safety & design standards); lease
requirements on obligated airports, etc. Also, the ADO can facilitate
contact between the solar proponent, the sponsor (and NCDOA if project
location is on or near a State Block airport. In this case the ADO will be
available to support NCDOA as requested.
b. If the preliminary discussion, the solar proponent is still interested,
7.37
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
collaborate with the FAA (or NCDOA) until conceptual agreement by all
parties with the FAA's lease requirements.
c. Develop National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) documentation to
support siting alternatives & run the SGHAT Tool for all site alternatives
carried forward for analysis.
d. Submit 7460 with Proposed Lease, NEPA analysis & SGHAT Tool
Results attached to FAA ADO Review & acceptance via Obstruction
Evaluation/Airport Airspace (OE/AAA) filing.
J. Water Infiltration. The prevailing interpretation of ground-mounted solar energy systems
is that the solar arrays do not count towards impervious allowance. In other words, the
solar arrays are pervious. The State definition of built-upon area states built-upon area
does not include a wooden slatted deck or pervious or partially pervious paving material
to the extent that the paving material absorbs water or allows water to infiltrate through
the paving material. Therefore, if the solar panels can be constructed in such a manner
as to promote the effective infiltration of rainfall then they could be considered pervious,
similar to a slatted deck or pervious pavement. The following criteria could be used at a
minimum in establishing a solar panel pervious cover:
1. Panels must be positioned to allow water to run off their surfaces.
2. Soil with adequate vegetative cover must be maintained under and around the
panels.
3. The area around the panels must be adequate to ensure proper vegetative
growth under and between the panels.
7-38
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE VIII. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section 8.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements
There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is
enlarged or increased in capacity by adding Dwelling Units, guest rooms, seats, or floor area; or before
conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another, permanent off-street parking space in the
amount specified by this Section. Such parking space may be provided in a parking garage or properly
graded open space.
A. Certification of Minimum Parking Requirements
Each application for a Zoning Permit submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer as
provided for in this Ordinance shall include information as to the location and dimensions
of off- street parking and the means of entrance and exit to such space. This information
shall be in sufficient detail to enable the Zoning Enforcement Officer to determine
whether or not the requirements of this Section are met.
B. Definition of a Parking Space
The storage space of one (1) automobile. The size of a parking space shall be in
accordance with generally accepted geometric design principles for the type space and
angle. (See Table 1, Geometric Design Standards).
C. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
The following off-street Parking Space shall be required:
Class1f1calion Off-Street Parking Requirement
Residential (Any fractional space e.g., 47.3 shall be
considered the next whole number, e.Q., 48)
Housing designed for and used by the 1 space per 4 dwelling units
elderly
Incidental Home Occupations 1 space in addition to the residential requirement
Multi-family residences 1.5 spaces per Dwelling unit
Rehabilitation homes 1 space per two beds
Conareoate Care 1 soace oer 2 Dwellina units
Single-family and Two-Family residences 2 spaces per dwelling unit
(may be in a single drive with one car behind
the other
Commercial and Industrial .· '< ,:' :-- .. --,-, ' '' -,':_':; __ :_-_., -; ' /,' -'
Auto service station and or repair shop 4 spaces per service bay, plus 1 space per wrecker
or service vehicle
Auto sales 1 space per 400 square feet of building area
devoted to sales
Bank and Consumer financial services 1 soace per 200 square feet of aross fioor area
Barber shoo and other oersonal services 2 spaces oer ooerator
Beautv shops 3 spaces oer operator
Car washes 1 space per 2 employees
Delivery, ambulance and other similar 1 space per vehicle, plus 1 space for each 2
services employees
Drive-through service such as banks,
automobile service stations, dry cleaners,
car washes and similar uses (in addition to
use Re uirements
Eating establishments and night clubs
servin meals
Fire Stations
Hotel, motel, motor court and similar uses
Mobile home sales
Manufacturing, industrial, warehousing and
wholesalin
Post offices
Retail sales exce t those listed below
Retail sales of bulky items which require
high rates offloor space to the number of
items offered for sale such as antiques,
appliances, art, bicycles, carpet, floor
covering, furniture, motorcycles, paint,
u holste , and similar uses
Retail uses dealing primarily in service
and/or re air
Designed shopping centers
Radio, TV stations
Transportation terminals such as airports,
bus terminals and railroad passenger
stations
Wholesale with related retail
ilOffice and Institutional:,.
Child care and kindergarten less than 6
children
Child care and kindergarten, more than 6
children
Churches
Dormitories
Fraternity, sorority houses
Elementa and ·unior hi h schools
Funeral homes
General Offices
Medical, dental, and similar offices
Nursing, convalescent homes designed and
used rimaril for the elderl
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Stacking for 4 vehicles at each bay, window or lane
1 space per Person on Duty on a normal shift
1 space per unit, plus 2 spaces per 3 employees
on a normal shift
5 spaces, plus 1 space per 10,000 square feet of
ross area
1 space per 3 employees on the largest shift
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
(optional to computing parking on a store by store
basis.
1 space per 4 seating accommodations for waiting
passengers, plus 1 space for each 2 employees on
the lar est shift.
1 space per 3 employees on the largest shift, plus
additional spaces per square foot of gross floor
area devoted to retail sales as applicable from
"retail sales" schedule above.
room.
1 s ace per 2 beds.
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Senior high schools, trade and vocational 7 spaces per classroom.
schools, colleqe or universitv campus
Auditoriums, stadiums, assembly halls and 1 space per 12 fixed seats and 1 space per 12
gymnasiums located on a high school, movable seats in the largest assembly room.
colleqe or university campus
Recreation: .
Amusement, dance halls, nightclubs not 1 space per 3 persons in designed capacity, plus 2
servinq meals spaces per 3 employees on the larqest shift
Auditoriums, stadiums, assembly halls, 1 space per 3 fixed seats and 1 space per 3
convention centers, gymnasiums, fraternal movable seats in the largest assembly room.
or social clubs or lodges, community
recreation center
Bowline allevs 4 soaces oer lane.
Golf courses 4 spaces per tee.
Indoor movie theaters 1 space per 3 fixed seats and 1 space per 3
movable seats.
Public swimming pools 1 space per 100 square feet of water area and
deck.
Recreation uses such as golf driving range, 1 space per tee, green, court and/or other method
miniature golf, tennis, billiards or pool of participation however styled.
centers or similar recreation uses
Recreation facilities such as community 1 space per 25 memberships or tenants.
center, swimming pool, tennis courts, and
similar activities when located in conjunction
with a townhouse, condominium, group
housing or homeowner association
development
D. Combination of Required Parking Spaces
The required parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one
lot or parking structure, but the required parking spaces assigned to one use may not be
assigned to another use at the same time.
E. Day Time/Night Time Assignments
One-half (1/2) of the required parking spaces for churches, theaters, or assembly halls
whose peak attendance is at night or Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be
closed at night or Sundays.
F. lighting
If parking areas are lighted, the lighting fixtures shall be so installed as to protect the
street and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
G. Remote Parking
On all off-street parking lots, the required space shall be provided on the same plot with
the use or on a lot separated therefrom by not more than four hundred (400) feet, except
for residential uses which must be provided on the same plot.
Where provision of required off-street parking for a building or other uses established
subsequent to the adoption of this Section involves one (1) or more parcels or tracts of
land that are not a part of the plat on which the principal use is situated, the applicant for
a permit for the principal use shall submit with his application for a Zoning Permit an
8-3
Section 8.2
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
instrument duly executed and acknowledged, which subjects the parcels or tracts of land
to parking uses in connection with the principal use for which it is made available. The
applicant shall cause said instrument to be registered in the office of the Register of
Deeds upon the issuance of a Zoning Permit.
Parking one Zoning District in connection with a use not permitted in that District shall be
permitted in accordance with the following:
1. Business and Office and Institutional uses may park in Industrial Districts.
2. Industrial and Office and Institutional uses may park in Business Districts.
3. Residential uses may park in Business, Office and Institutional and Industrial
Districts.
In addition, any use located in one Zoning District which is also a permitted use in
another Zoning District may also park in such other Zoning District in which the use is
permitted.
Parking Lot Improvement, Design and Locational Requirements
All off-street parking lots including exits, entrances, drives and parking areas shall:
A. Be designed to allow for traffic movement in accordance with generally accepted
geometric design principles;
B. Have physical access to a public street;
C. Be so designed that all access to public street is by forward motion;
D. Be graded, properly drained, stabilized and maintained to prevent dust and erosion;
E. Be continuously provided and maintained as long as the use which they serve exists.
No parking lot designed or provided for more than six (6) cars shall be located in the required front yard
within the R-10 or R-8 Residential Districts.
Within the 0-1 Office and Institutional District, parking lots may be located in the front yard but lots of six
(6) or more cars shall not be located within 10 (ten) feet of any public right-of-way line. When a parking lot
with space for more than ten (10) cars adjoins any plot zoned for residential purposes, a screening device
as defined in article X shall be provided to protect residences from light, glare, noise and fumes.
Any open-air parking lot which provides twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces shall set aside, in
addition to any required screens, setbacks or buffers, ten (10) percent of the total area of the parking lot
in planted, permeable landscaped areas such as median strips and islands. Parking spaces must be
shaded by trees (either retained or planted by the developer) that have or will have when fully mature, a
trunk at least twelve inches in diameter. Trees shall be evenly distributed throughout vehicle
accommodation areas so as to maximize the number of parking spaces that receive shade. When trees
are planted by the developer to satisfy the requirements of this subsection, the developer shall choose
trees that meet the standards set forth in the City of Hamlet Tree Ordinance (See Appendices; Appendix
A). and must be approved by the City Horticulturist or officer as designated by the City Manager.
Each tree of the type described in this subsection shall be presumed to shade a circular area having a
radius of fifteen feet with the tree as the center, and there must be sufficient trees so that, using this
standard, twenty percent of the vehicle accommodation will be shaded.
8-4
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Section 8.3 Commercial Motor Vehicle Parking Prohibited
The parking of commercial motor vehicles is prohibited on all residential lots and other residential
properties. This subsection shall not prevent (i) a vehicle from being parked while being loaded or
unloaded; (ii) the temporary parking of a vehicle being used by persons working at a residence {for
example an electrician's or carpenter' s van, or a landscaping truck and trailer); or (iii) the temporary
parking of a vehicle driven to and from work, provided that such vehicle does not meet the definition of
"commercial motor vehicle."
Section 8.4 Off-Street Loading Requirements
Every structure or building used for trade, business or industry hereafter erected shall provide space as
indicated herein for the loading, unloading and maneuvering space of delivery vehicles off the street or
public al1ey. Such space shall have access to a public alley, private driveway, or if such cannot
reasonably be provided, to a public street. For the purpose of this Section an off-street loading space
(exclusive of adequate access drives and maneuvering space) shall have a minimum dimensions of
twelve (12) feet by forty (40) feet and an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet in height above the
alley or street grade.
Type of Use Required Off-Street Loading Spaces
Retail Business 1 space for each 20,000 square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof
Wholesale and Industries 1 space for each 20,000 square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof
Office and Institutions 1 space for each 50,000 square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof
8-5
D!Dl'm
a
Parking Stall Width
Angle (ft)
(Degrees)
0 8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
30 8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
45 8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
60 8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
90 8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
(*) 8.5' Minimum
(*) 9.0' Recommended
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Stall to Curb Aisle Width Curb Length Center-to-Center Width of
(ft)
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
16.9
17.3
17.8
18.2
19.4
19.8
20.1
20.5
20.7
21.0
21.2
21.2
19.0
19.0
19.0
19.0
(ft) (ft)
12.0 23.0
12.0 23.0
12.0 23.0
12.0 23.0
11.0 17.0
11.0 18.0
11.0 19.0
11.0 20.0
13.5 12.0
13.0 12.7
13.0 13.4
13.0 14.1
18.5 9.8
18.0 10.4
18.0 11.0
18.0 11.5
25.0 8.5
25.0 8.5
24.0 9.5
24.0 10.0
fl
d
I
I . .P? ,
-----~---·___,,j
92
8-6
Two Row Bin with Access
Road Between (ft)
Curb-to-Curb Overlao C-C
29.0 -
30.0 -
31.0 -
32.0 -
44.8 37.4
45.6 37.8
46.6 38.4
47.4 38.7
52.3 46.3
52.6 46.2
53.2 46.5
54.0 46.9
59.9 55.6
60.0 55.5
60.4 55.6
61.0 56.0
63.0 -
63.0 -
62.0 -
62.0 -
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IX SIGN REGULATIONS
Section 9.1
A.
B
Purpose
The purpose of this Article shall be to coordinate the type, placement, and physical
dimensions of signs within the different land-use zones; to recognize the commercial
communication requirements of all sectors of the business community; to encourage the
innovative use of design; to promote both renovation and proper maintenance; to allow
for special circumstances; and to guarantee equal treatment under the law through
accurate record keeping and consistent enforcement. These shall be accomplished by
regulation of the display, erection, use and maintenance of signs. No sign shall be
permitted as a main or accessory use except in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.
Refer to Article II, Section 2.2, "Definitions," for terms relating to signage.
Section 9.2 General Requirements
A. Unless otherwise provided by this Article, all signs shall require a sign permit and the
payment of an application fee in accordance with the fee schedule set by the City
Council.
B. No permit is required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on painted,
printed, or marquee signs.
C Application for a permit for the erection, alteration, or relocation of a sign shall be made to
the zoning officer u pan a form provided by the zoning officer and shall include the
following information:
1. Name and address of the owner of the sign;
2. Street address or location of the property on which the sign is to be located,
along with the name and address of the property owner;
3. The type of sign or sign structure as defined in this Ordinance;
4. A site plan showing the proposed location of the sign along with the locations and
square footage areas of all existing signs on the same zoning lot; and
5. Specifications and scale drawings showing the materials, design, dimensions,
structural supports, and electrical components of the proposed sign.
D. All applications for permits filed with the zoning officer shall be accompanied by a
payment of the permit fee for each sign according to the fee schedule as set by the City
Council.
E. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the North Carolina
State Building Code.
F. Anchoring
1. No sign, permanent or temporary, shall be suspended by non-rigid attachments
that will allow the sign to swing in the wind.
9-1
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
2. All free-standing permanent signs shall have a self-supporting structure erected
on or permanently attached to a foundation.
3. All temporary signs on display shall be braced or secured to prevent motion.
G. Solid signs, other than wall signs, and skeleton signs shall be designed to withstand a
wind load as required by the North Carolina State Building Code.
H. Additional Construction Specifications
1. No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire
escape, required exit, window or door opening used a means of egress.
2. No sign shall be attached in any form, shape, or manner which will interfere with
any opening required for ventilation, except that signs may be erected in front of
and may cover transom windows when not in violation of the provisions of the
North Carolina State Building Code.
3. Signs shall be located in such a way as to maintain horizontal and vertical
clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with the North
Carolina State Building Code.
4. Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and
noninterference with all above ground and underground facilities and conduits for
water, sewage, gas, electricity, or communications equipment or lines.
Furthermore, placement shall not interfere with natural or artificial drainage, of
surface or underground water.
5. No sign or sign structure shall impair the visibility of intersecting streets and
driveways.
6. Setbacks. All signs shall be placed in accordance with the setback regulations of
each zone found in the Hamlet Zoning Ordinance.
I. All signs shall be properly maintained. Exposed surfaces shall be clean and painted, if
paint is required. Defective parts shall be replaced.
J. Any sign causing a public nuisance may be summarily abated in accordance with the
process set forth in Hamlet Code of Ordinances Chapter 17, Article Ill, "Nuisances."
Temporary signs placed on City-owned property or in the right-of-way of a Citymaintained
public street may be summarily removed, unless said signs are lawfully
placed in accordance with this Article. All other violations of this Article shall be enforced
in accordance with Section 11.5 of this ordinance.
Section 9.3 Exemptions
The following types of signs are exempt from permit requirements but must be in compliance with all other
requirements of this ordinance:
A. Sign unlighted, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and bearing only property
numbers, post box numbers, and the name of the owner or occupant of the zoning lot.
Such signs shall not exceed two (2) feet in area per occupant. If more than one (1) sign
or nameplate is required, the total allowable sign area shall not exceed eight (8) square
feet for each zoning lot.
9-2
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
8. Any flag in the R-20, RA-20, R-10, R-8, R-6, or R6-M zoning districts, provided that it
does not exceed a total area of 100 square feet (100) square feet or a height of thirty-five
(35) feet. Any flag in 0-1, B-1, 8-2, 8-3, I- I , or 1-2 zoning districts, provided that it does
not exceed a total area of 200 square feet or a height of fifty (50) feet.
C. Legal notices and warning, traffic, and other regulatory signs erected by any public
agency or utility.
D. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, including signs which denote
only the building name, date of erection or street number.
E. Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on public or private property.
F. The repair and maintenance of a conforming sign including replacement of copy which
otherwise conforms with this ordinance.
G. Historical markers or plaques.
H. Temporary signs painted or displayed on the interior or exterior of buildings located in the
B- I, 8-2, 8-3, 0-1, 1-1, and 1-2 zoning districts.
I. Temporary signs, subject to the following restrictions:
1. No more than five (5) temporary signs may be placed on a property at one time;
2. Temporary signs shall not be greater than eight (8) square feet in size;
3. Temporary signs shall not be lighted or have digital copy;
4. Temporary signs may be two-sided;
5. No temporary sign may be placed on a property for more than sixty (60) days
within a single four-month period;
6. Temporary signs are allowed on property only with the permission of the property
owner or the owner's agent;
7. All temporary signs are prohibited from flashing; and
8. This subsection shall be preempted by applicable State and federal law.
This subsection is in addition to temporary signs authorized with a permit pursuant to
section 9.5 of this ordinance.
J. Political Signs in NC DOT Rights-of-Way. Temporary political signs are subject to the
same regulations as other temporary signs except that they may be placed in the rightof-
way of the State highway system (i.e. in NC DOT rights-of-way) in accordance with
G.S. § 136-32(b)-(f).
K. Temporary Signs for Special Events.
1. In addition to other temporary signs authorized by this ordinance, a zoning lot
may have temporary signs and associated decorations for special events such as
grand openings and holiday celebrations. Although this subsection primarily
9-3
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
regulates special event signs, other content may be utilized on any sign
permitted by this subsection.
2. Signs permitted under this subsection include portable signs, banners, and
changeable copy signs.
3. The area of a sign permitted by this subsection shall not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet.
4. Only one (1) sign shall be allowed for each 100 lineal feet of road frontage. Such
signs shall be securely anchored so as to prevent motion and comply with all the
applicable NC State Building Code requirements.
5. No flashing lights may be used as part of or otherwise in connection with a sign.
6. Signs and associated decorations may be erected for no more than twelve (12)
weeks in a single year, with the year period beginning on the date the sign is
erected.
7. No permit shall be required for these signs, but a log sheet for each sign shall be
kept in the office of the code enforcement officer. It shall be the responsibility of
property owner or tenant to notify the office of the code enforcement officer when
one (1) of the twelve (12) weeks is to be used. Such notification shall be twentyfour
(24) hours prior to the erection of the sign.
8. Signs (i) placed in the public right-of-way, (ii) attached to utility poles, (iii) posted
in excess of the authorized twelve-week period, and/or (iv) posted without the
required twenty-four hour advance notice shall be deemed illegal and may be
removed by the code enforcement officer immediately. Upon removal, the code
enforcement officer shall hand deliver notice of such removal to the property
owner or tenant. The code enforcement officer shall make a good-faith effort to
securely store all removed signs for a minimum of thirty (30) days, but the city
has no obligation to do so and said signs may be summarily disposed of
Moreover, the city shall have no liability whatsoever for damage to signs
removed pursuant to this subsection. A storage and administrative fee shall be
charged for each sign retrieved from the city.
L. Signs Erected While a Building or Other Structure is Under Construction.
1. In addition to the other signs authorized by this ordinance, during the
construction of a building or other structure, in residential zoning districts a
property may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area
on each street frontage of the property.
2. In addition to the other signs authorized by this ordinance, during the
construction of a building or other structure, in all other zoning districts a property
may have one (1) sign not exceeding sixty four (64) feet square feet in area on
each street frontage of the property. Such signs must be removed two (2) days
following completion of construction.
M. Pursuant to G.S. 1600-908, fence wraps displaying signage when affixed to perimeter
fencing at a construction site are exempt from zoning regulation until the certificate of
occupancy is issued for the final portion of any construction at that site or twenty-four (24)
9-4
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
months from the time the fence wrap was installed, whichever is shorter. If construction is
not completed at the end of twenty-four (24) months from the time the fence wrap was
installed, the fence wrapping shall be subject to regulation under this Article but fence
wrapping materials shall continue to be allowed to be affixed to the perimeter fencing. No
fence wrap affixed pursuant to this subsection may display any advertising other than
advertising sponsored by a person directly involved in the construction project and for
which monetary compensation for the advertisement is not paid or required.
Section 9.4 Permitted Signs
A. Signs are allowed as follows in residential zones:
1. One (1) freestanding sign per entrance to any subdivision. Such signs shall not
exceed forty (40) square feet in area, shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet,
and shall be set back a minimum of ten (1 O) feet from any public right-of-way.
2. In addition to the sign authorized by subsection 9.4.A.1, above, non-residential
uses allowed in residential areas including, but not limited to, churches and
synagogues- may also have one (1) wall mounted sign not to exceed fifteen (15)
square feet in sign area.
B. Signs are allowed as follows in the general business (B-2), neighborhood commercial (B-
3), and office (0-1) zones:
1. Freestanding Signs.
a. One (1) freestanding sign per zoning lot, not to exceed fifty (50) square
feet in sign area. Such signs may not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet.
All freestanding signs within a vehicular area must be protected by a
curbing, landscape area or other similar type permanent barrier.
b. Where a lot is on a comer or has more than one main street frontage,
one (1) additional freestanding sign will be allowed on the additional
frontage, not to exceed the size of the other allowed freestanding sign.
c. A freestanding sign shall have a minimum setback of five (5) feet from
any public right-of-way.
2. An establishment may have one (1) wall sign per street frontage. Each wall sign
may have a square footage of up to sixty (60) percent of the number of linear feet
of building frontage, provided that no sign may be greater than one hundred
square feet. The sign shall not exceed the height or the width of the building wall
on which it is attached. Wall signs shall conform to the North Carolina State
Building Code and all applicable City Codes.
3. One (1) under canopy sign per establishment, not to exceed six (6) square feet in
sign area and maintains a clear distance of at least eight (8) feet between the
sidewalks and the bottom of the sign.
4. Any zoning lot having more three (3) establishments may also have one (1)
additional freestanding, wall, or marquee style sign, the area of which shall not
exceed 300 square feet.
C. Signs are allowed as follows in the central business (B-1) zone:
9-5
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
1. One (1) permanent, freestanding-sign is permitted for each lot. The area of the
sign shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet. Any such freestanding sign shall not
exceed twenty (20) feet in height. The sign shall not be located in the public rightof-
way.
2. Wall signs mounted against the facade of a principal building may cover up to
twenty percent (20%) of the total area of each facade.
3. One (1) sign projecting from a building facade per street frontage shall be
allowed for each business establishment in the absence of flat-mounted wall
signs. Such sign shall not project more than five (5) feet from the building facade
and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area for each side. Projecting
signs, where permitted, shall not extend above the top of the building facade.
Such sign shall maintain a clear distance of at least eight (8) feet above the
sidewalk.
4. One sign per establishment may be suspended from or attached to the underside
of a canopy or marquee, provided such sign does not exceed six (6) square feet
in area and maintains a clear distance of at least eight (8) feet between the
sidewalk and the bottom of the sign.
D. The following signs are allowed in industrial zones (the 1-1, and 1-2 zones):
1. Freestanding Signs.
a. One (1) freestanding sign per zoning lot, not to exceed 200 square feet
in sign area. Such signs shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Where a zoning lot has in excess of 150 feet of street frontage, one
additional freestanding sign will be allowed for each additional 150 feet of
street frontage or portion thereof.
c. Such signs shall be subject to the size and height limitations of the first
allowed freestanding sign and may be placed no closer than 150 feet to
any freestanding sign on the same zoning lot.
d. Where a zoning lot has more than one (1) street frontage, one (1)
additional freestanding sign and additional wall signs are allowed on the
additional frontage, not to exceed the size limitations of other allowed
wall and freestanding signs. All freestanding signs located on the corner
lot shall be separated by 150 linear feet.
e. All freestanding signs must have a sixteen-foot clearance from the
ground which is utilized by vehicular traffic. This minimum clearance
shall be waived by the code enforcement officer if the freestanding sign
is protected by barriers, such as landscaping, curbing, or other such
permanent barriers.
f. A projecting sign may be used instead of any allowed wall or
freestanding sign, not to exceed a sign area of one (1) square foot for
each linear foot of any occupancy's building frontage up to a maximum of
thirty (30) square feet.
g. All allowed freestanding signs shall have a minimum setback of twenty
(20) feet from any street right-of-way.
9-6
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
2. An establishment may have one (1) wall sign per street frontage. Each wall sign
may have a square footage of up to sixty (60) percent of the number of linear feet
of building frontage, provided that no sign may be greater than one hundred
square feet. The sign shall not exceed the height or the width of the building wall
on which it is attached. All wall signs must comply with NC State Building Code
and all applicable city codes.
3. One (1) under canopy sign per establishment, not to exceed six (6) square feet in
sign area.
4. Any zoning lot having more than three (3) establishments may also have one (1)
additional freestanding, wall, or marquee style sign, the area of which shall not
exceed 300 square feet.
5. Outdoor Advertising Signs.
a. Signs in the 1-1 and 1-2 Districts. New and existing outdoor-advertising
signs shall be permitted in industrial zones (the 1-1 and l-2 zones). Such
signs shall meet all building setbacks and yard requirements of the
zoning district and in addition shall not be closer than one hundred (100)
feet to a residential zone and at least 200 feet from a residence. Three
hundred (300) feet shall separate one (1) outdoor advertising sign from
another on the same side of the street or around a corner. On an
unoccupied lot, one (1) outdoor advertising sign is permitted for each
three hundred (300) feet of street frontage or portion thereof. One (1)
Outdoor advertising sign shall not exceed three hundred square feet in
area and shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
b. Signs in the B-2 District. New outdoor advertising signs are prohibited in
the general commercial zone (the B-2 zone). Outdoor advertising signs
existing as of the effective date of this ordinance are permitted to remain,
but they are hereby declared to be lawful nonconformities, which must
comply with the requirements of section 9. 7, "Nonconforming Signs."
c. To the extent that the North Carolina Outdoor Advertising Control Act,
G.S. 136-126, et. seq., preempts the regulation of an outdoor advertising
sign by the City, then the requirements of the Outdoor Advertising
Control Act and applicable State regulations shall control.
E. Gas Price Signs. An establishment located in the general commercial, neighborhood
commercial, heavy industrial zones (the B-2, B-3, and 1-2 zones), may have one
additional sign with changeable copy. One (1) such sign is permitted for each frontage on
a public street, provided it does not exceed eight (8) square feet in area. Any such sign
shall be affixed to a permitted freestanding identification sign, to a canopy support, or ftatmounted
against the wall of a building. The primary purpose of this subsection is to allow
this display of information that changes regularly, such as gasoline prices, but the content
of this sign shall not be restricted and may include content other than gas prices.
F. Entertainment and Recreation Venues. Signs may be placed on fencing at entertainment
and recreation venues, provided that (i) the cumulative area of said signs does not
exceed 60% of the total area of the fencing and (ii) the signs are directed toward persons
inside the venue and are not primarily intended to be seen by persons outside of the
venue.
9-7
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
G. Special Regulations for Hospitals.
1. A hospital, regardless of the zoning district in which it is located, may utilize the
signage requirements for uses located within the B-2 zoning district, or it may use
the alternative signage requirements set forth in this subsection. A hospital may
not use both standards simultaneously. A hospital may have the following signs:
a. One (1) permanent, freestanding sign with a maximum height of twelve
(12) feet and a maximum width of twenty-four (24) feet, six (6) inches.
The sign may have two faces and shall not be located in a public right-ofmay;
b. One (1) permanent, freestanding sign with a maximum height of seven
(7) feet, six (6) inches and a maximum width of thirteen (13) feet. The
sign may have two faces and shall not be located in the public right-ofway;
c. One (1) permanent, freestanding sign with a maximum height of six (6)
feet and a maximum width of five (5) feet, five (5) inches. The sign may
have two faces and shall not be located in a public right-of-way;
d. Two (2) permanent, freestanding signs, each with a maximum height of
four (4) feet and a maximum width of three (3) feet, one (1) inch. The
signs may have two faces and shall not be located in a public right-ofway;
e. One (1) permanent, wall sign a maximum of eleven (11) feet, two (2)
inches in height and a maximum of twenty-six (26) feet, four (4) inches in
width. The wall sign may be located anywhere on the hospital building at
or below the highest point on the building; and
f. Such other incidental traffic and wayfinding signs as may be necessary
to direct traffic to and away from hospital building entrances and parking
areas.
2. Hospital signs may be internally lit, provided that such lighting is designed to
minimize glare that escapes the property.
3. All hospital signage, including internal wayfinding signage, shall have a
consistent, unified design and color scheme.
Section 9.5 Illumination
Unless otherwise specified by this ordinance, all signs may be illuminated. However, no sign regulated by
this Ordinance may utilize:
A. An exposed incandescent lamp with an external reflector and without a sunscreen or
comparable diffusion.
B. A revolving beacon light.
C. All signs illuminated under the provisions of this section shall be constructed to meet the
requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code.
9-8
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
D. A sign located in the B-2, B-3, 1-1, or 1-2 zoning district which maintains a clearance of
sixteen (16) feet above the adjacent ground level may utilize flashing, intermittent, or
moving lights. Otherwise, such lights are prohibited.
E. Self-illuminated signs shall be limited to those lights enclosed by glass or plastic faces
bearing the advertisement.
F. All illuminated signs shall be shielded so as to prevent direct rays from being cast into a
residential area or district and/or vehicles approaching on a public right-of-way from any
direction. Such lighting shall also be shielded as to prevent direct view of the light source
from a residence or residential district and/or vehicles approaching on a public right-ofway
from any direction.
Section 9.6 Prohibited Signs
The following types of signs are prohibited in all districts:
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Section 9.7
A.
Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals.
Signs which, because of their location, nature, color, shape, or message would tend to be
confused with, or obstruct the view of, traffic and emergency signals of signs.
Snipe signs or signs attached to trees, utility poles and/or their supporting guide wires,
public benches, and or light poles, even if these items are located on private property.
Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or located for the primary purpose
of displaying said sign (This does not apply to allowed temporary signs or to signs or
lettering on buses, taxis, or vehicles operating during the normal course of business).
Signs which rotate or otherwise move either by mechanical means or other means
including wind, water, or solar.
Roof signs, unless such a roof sign is specifically designed so that the sign is an integral
part of the roof structure or the applicant can provide the necessary information to
illustrate that the roof structure can and will support said sign. In no instance shall the top
of the sign extend higher than the highest point of the roof.
Signs located within a B-2, 1-1, or 1-2 zoning district or which do not maintain a sixteen
(16) foot clearance from ground level, which contain, include or are lighted by any
flashing, intermittent or moving lights are prohibited, except those portions of signs
providing a noncommercial message. such as, but not limited to, time, temperature, and
date.
Permanent off-premises signs.
Nonconforming Signs
Existing signs which were lawfully erected but do not conform to the current provisions of
this Article shall be deemed lawful nonconformities, provided that such signs shall lose
their lawful nonconforming status if:
1. The sign is relocated or replaced; or
2. The structure or size of the sign is altered in any way except towards compliance
with this Article. This does not refer to change of copy or normal maintenance.
9-9
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
B. A nonconforming sign is subject to all of the requirements of this Article regarding safety,
maintenance, and repair. However, if the sign suffers more than 50% percent appraised
damage or deterioration, it must be brought into conformance with this code or removed.
9-10
ARTICLE X. SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
Section 10.1 Screening Requirements for Non-Residential Zoning Districts
Any non-residential use located in either the B-1, B-2, B-3 Business Districts, the 0-1 Office and
Institutional District, or the 1-1 and 1-2 Industrial Districts and located on property abutting any RA-20, R-
20, R-10, R-8, R-6, or R-6M Residential Districts, unless separated by a public street or railroad right-ofway,
shall provide a screening device as described below. Such screening device shall be provided along
the full length of any common property line and shall be maintained as long as the conditions requiring
the original installation exists. The requirement for the installation of a screening device shall be initiated
by the occurrence of any one or more of the Following activities on the non-residential property:
A. The initial use, development or occupancy of the non- residential property;
B. Any change in use or occupancy of the non-residential property which results from
a change in the zoning classification of the non-residential property; and/or
C. Any building expansion that increases the floor area of the non-residential use or any
addition of parking that provides ten (10) or more spaces, whether required or not.
The screening device shall be provided by the non-residential use even if the abutting residentially zoned
property is vacant.
Screening Device - A screen that is at least ninety percent (90%) opaque from the ground to a height of
at least six (6) feet. The screen is intended to exclude completely all visual contact between uses and to
create a strong impression of spatial separation.
The screen may be composed of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, or existing
vegetation. compliance of planted vegetative screens or natural vegetation will be judged on the basis of
the average mature height and density of foliage of the subject species, or field observation of existing
vegetation.
In any case where vegetation, either existing or proposed, is to be used as the required screening device,
if the vegetation is to be less than ten (10) feet in width {thickness), a fence, wall or similar device at least
fifty (50) percent opaque and six (6) feet in height shall be used in combination with the vegetation. In all
cases, the screen must be at least ninety (90) percent opaque in all seasons of the year.
10-1
ARTICLE XI. ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Section 11.1 Zoning Enforcement Officer
This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer who shall be
appointed by the City Manager. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may appoint agents to act on their
behalf. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the following:
A. Inspections
The Zoning Enforcement Officer ·1s authorized to enter any premises within the jurisdiction
of the City of Hamlet at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action upon presentation of proper credentials, provided the appropriate
consent has been given for inspection of areas not open to the public or that an
appropriate inspection warrant has been secured.
B. Notice of Violation
When the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines work or activity has been undertaken
in violation of a development regulation, other local development regulation, or any State
law delegated to the City for enforcement purposes in lieu of the State, or in violation of
the terms of a development approval, a written notice of violation may be issued.
1. The notice of violation shall be delivered to the holder of the development approval
and to the landowner of the property involved, if the landowner is not the holder of
the development approval, by personal delivery, electronic delivery, or first-class mail
and may be provided by similar means to the occupant of the property or the person
undertaking the work or activity. The notice of violation may be posted on the
property.
2. The notice shall include a description of the violation and its location, the measures
necessary to correct the violation, the possibility of civil penalties and judicial
enforcement action if the violation is not corrected, and notice of right to appeal the
violation. The notice shall also state the time allowed, if any, to correct the violation,
which time may vary depending on the nature of the violation and knowledge of the
violator.
3. The person providing the notice of violation shall certify to the local government that
the notice was provided, and the certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the
absence of fraud. Except as provided by G.S. 160D-1123 or G.S. 160D-1206 or
otherwise provided by law, a notice of violation may be appealed to the Board of
Adjustment pursuant to G.S. 160D-405 and Article XII, Section 12.1.
C. Revocation of Development Approval
In addition to initiation of enforcement actions pursuant to G.S. 160D-404,_development
approvals may be revoked by the City by notifying the owner in writing stating the reason
for the revocation. The City shall follow the same development review and approval
process required for issuance of the development approval, including any required notice
or hearing, in the review and approval of any revocation of that approval. Development
approvals shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application,
plans, or specifications for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of any
applicable development regulation or any State law delegated to the City for enforcement
purposes in lieu of the State; or for false statements or misrepresentation's made in
11-1
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
securing the approval. Any development approval mistakenly issued in violation of an
applicable State or local law may also be revoked. The revocation of a development
approval by City staff may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to G.S.
160D-405 and Article XII, Section 12.1 If an appeal is filed, the provisions of G.S. 160D-
405(e) and Section 12.1.E regarding stays apply.
D. Determinations
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for making decisions and
determinations regarding the implementation of development regulations contained within
this Ordinance. Within 14 days after a decision on an administrative determination is
made, a copy of the decision shall be provided to the property owner or party seeking
determination, if different from the owner via written notice by personal delivery,
electronic mail, or first-class delivery. The notice shall be delivered to the last address
listed for the owner of the affected property on the county tax abstract and to the address
provided in the application or request for a determination if the party seeking the
determination is different from the owner. A copy of the decision shall also be filed with
the Zoning Enforcement Officer, where it shall be available for public inspection during
regular office hours.
E. Development Approvals
The Zoning Enforcement Officer must issue development approvals, including permits, in
print or electric form. Any development approval issued exclusively in electronic form
shall be protected from further editing once issued. Unless provided otherwise by law, all
rights, privileges, benefits, burdens, and obligations created by development approvals
made pursuant to this ordinance attach to and run with the land.
F. Conflict of Interest
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall not make a final decision on an administrative
decision if the outcome of that decision would have a direct, substantial, and readily
identifiable financial impact on the staff member or if the applicant or other person subject
to that decision is a person with whom the staff member has a close familial, business, or
other associational relationship.
G. Administrative Modifications
Occasionally, unanticipated circumstances require changes to approved development
plans and permits, including developer agreements and site-specific vesting plans. In
accordance with NCGS 160D-403.(d), the City of Hamlet allows for minor modifications to
be administratively approved, however, all major modifications require the same
procedures to be followed as were completed for the original approval. This
administrative flexibility reduces the need for a full approval process to accommodate a
limited change to the plans for a project.
1. Major Modifications
The following are considered major modifications and shall not be approved
administratively. These changes must follow the same process as the original
approval.
a. Any change in land use.
11-2
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
b. Any change in density.
c. When there is introduction of a new vehicular access point to an existing
street, road or thoroughfare not previously designated for access.
d. When the total floor area of a commercial or industrial classification is
increased more than ten percent (10%) beyond the total floor area last
approved by City Council.
e. A change in the type of proposed dwelling unit (eg. SF detached to
Townhouse)
f. When the number of existing trees to be preserved is decreased more
than ten percent (10%) beyond the number of trees shown on the
approved plans.
g. Any change that would increase traffic beyond the levels projected in the
approved Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)
h. Any increase the stormwater impact beyond what was identified in the
approved stormwater analysis for the project.
i. Any change which alters the basic development concept of the approval.
j. Any net reduction in the area of a buffer or a reduction in width of more
than ten (10%) percent of the approved width.
k. For developer agreements, any change in deadlines or completion dates
in excess of three (3) months.
I. Any minor modification beyond the permitted number of modifications for
a specific approval.
2. Minor Modifications
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to review and approve (or deny)
administratively a minor modification to an approved Special Use Permit, Major
Subdivision, Site Plan, or Vesting Plan, subject to the following limitations.
a. General Limitations
The minor modification shall meet the following:
(1 ). Does not involve a change in the uses permitted or the density of
overall development permitted.
(2) Does not increase the impacts generated by the development on
traffic, stormwater runoff, or similar impacts beyond what was
projected for the original development approval; and
(3) In compliance all other ordinance requirements.
(4) Limited to one (1) modification per development approval in a six
(6) month period, unless one (1) single site issue necessitates
11-3
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
more than one modification. In no instance, however, shall there
be more than four (4) modifications for the life of the project.
(5) Is necessitated due only to an unanticipated site condition
discovered during construction, a change in availability of a
construction-related product, extraordinarily weather or other
forces of nature, or a change on an off-site condition to which the
applicant had no prior knowledge.
b. Site Design
Site design minor modifications are limited adjustments to the terms or
design of an approved development plan or plat, including a site plan
attached as a condition to a special use permit. In addition to the general
limitations for minor modifications, a site design minor modification must:
(1) Comply with underlying zoning standards and other applicable
conditions of the approval;
(2) Be limited to a minor change such as, without limitation, a minor
adjustment to road configuration or internal circulation, a minor
adjustment to building or internal driveway location, or a minor
adjustment to right-of-way location.
c. Dimensional Standards
Section 11.2 Zoning Permit
Dimensional standard minor modifications are adjustments to the
dimensional standards of the zoning ordinance. In addition to the general
limitations for minor modifications, dimensional standard minor
modifications are limited to:
(1) An adjustment to parking requirements up to the greater offive
(5) spaces or ten (10) percent.
(2) An adjustment to setback requirements up to greater of five (5)
feet or ten ( 10%) percent of the standard setback.
(3) An adjustment to landscape standards up to ten (10%) percent
of required landscaping.
No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter structurally altered, erected, or moved, shall
be used, or its use changed until a Zoning Permit shall have been issued by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer stating that the building and/or the proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of this
Ordinance. No Building Permit shall be issued and no building shall be occupied until that Permit is
approved. A record of all Permits shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer and
copies shall be furnished, on request, to any persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building erected. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall collect such fees for the issuance of Zoning
Permits as are authorized by the fee schedule as adopted by the City Council. The issuance of a valid
Zoning Permit shall come with it the right to undertake and complete the development and/or use of
property under the terms and conditions of such Permit provided that such action as authorized by the
11-4
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance and provided that all other
permits are obtained. Otherwise the Permit shall be void.
A. Application Procedures
Applications shall be submitted by the landowner, a lessee or person holding an option or
contract to purchase or lease land, or a person acting on the behalf of the landowner with
their authorization and consent. Each application for a Zoning Permit shall be
accompanied by a plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, one (1) copy of which shall be
returned to the Owner upon approval. For Radio, Television or Communication Tower
permitting, see Article 7, Note 33.C.
The plan shall show the following:
1. The shape and dimensions of the lot on which the proposed building or use is to
be erected or conducted;
2. The location of the said lot with respect to adjacent rights-of-way;
3. The shape, dimensions, and location of all buildings, existing and proposed, on
the said lot;
4. The nature of the proposed use of the building or land, including the extent and
location of the use, on the said lot;
5. The location and dimensions of off-street parking and the means of ingress and
egress to such space: and
6. Any other information which the Zoning Enforcement Officer may deem
necessary for consideration in enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Right of Appeal
If the Zoning Permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the action of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to G.S. 1600-405 and Article
XII, Section 12.1.
Section 11.3 Duties of Zoning Enforcement Officer, Board of Adjustment, Courts and City
Council to Matters of Appeal
It is the intention of this Ordinance that all questions arising in connection with the enforcement of this
Ordinance shall be presented first to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and that such questions shall be
presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the Zoning Enforcement Officer's decision; and
from the decision of the Board of Adjustment recourse shall be to the courts as provided by law. It is
further the intention of this Ordinance that the duties of the City Council in connection with the Ordinance
shall not include the hearing and passing upon disputed questions that may arise in connection with the
enforcement thereof, but the procedure for determining such questions shall be as herein set out in the
Ordinance, and that the duties of the City Council in connection with this Ordinance shall be 'only the duty
of considering and passing upon any proposed amendment or repeal of the Ordinance as provided by
law.
Preliminary and final plat approvals are administrative in nature. Pursuant to NCGS 1600-1403, any party
aggrieved by the decision to approve or deny a preliminary or final play plat may seek to have the
11-5
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
decision reviewed by filing an action in the Richmond County Superior Court seeking appropriate
declaratory or equitable relief. Such an action must be filed within the time frame specified in NCGS
1600-406 for petitions in the nature of certiorari. Thirty (30) days from receipt of the written notice of the
decision, which notice shall be made as provided in G.S. 160D-403(b).
Section 11.4 Vested Rights
A. The zoning vested right is a right, established pursuant to N.C.G.S. 1600-108, which
precludes any action by a local government that would change, alter, impair, prevent,
diminish, or otherwise delay the development or use of the property allowed by the
applicable land development regulation or regulations. As such, amendments in land
development regulations are not applicable or enforceable without the written consent of
the owner with regard to any of the following:
1. Buildings or uses of buildings or land for which a development permit application
has been submitted and subsequently issued in accordance with G.S. 143-755.
2. Subdivisions of land for which a development permit application authorizing the
subdivision has been submitted and subsequently issued in accordance with
G.S. 143-755.
3. A site-specific vesting plan pursuant to G.S. 1600-108. 1 and Subsection H,
below.
4. A multi-phased development pursuant to Subsection 0.
5. A vested right established by the terms of a development agreement
B. Duration of Vested Rights
1. Upon issuance of a development permit, the vesting granted for a development
project is effective upon filing of the application in accordance with G.S. 143-755,
for so long as the permit remains valid. Unless otherwise specified, building permits
expire after six (6) months and development permits expire one (1) year after
issuance unless work authorized by the permit has substantially commenced.
2. Except where a longer vesting period is provided by statute or land
development regulation, the vesting granted expires for an uncompleted
development project if development work is intentionally and voluntarily
discontinued for a period of not less than 24 consecutive months. The
vesting period for a nonconforming use of property expires if the use is
intentionally and voluntarily discontinued for a period of not less than 24
consecutive months.
C. Multiple Permits.
Where multiple local development permits are required to complete a development
11-6
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
project, the applicant may choose the version of each of the local land development
regulations applicable to the project, upon submittal of the application for the initial
development permit. This provision is applicable only for those subsequent development
permit applications filed within 18 months of the date following the approval of an initial
permit.
D. Multi-Phased Developments.
A multi-phased development is a development containing at least twenty-five (25) acres
that is both submitted for a development approval to occur in more than one phase and
subject to a master development plan with committed elements showing the type and
intensity of each phase.
1. A multi-phased development is vested for the entire development with the land
development regulations then in place at the time a site plan approval is granted
for the initial phase of the multi-phased development.
2. A right whi.ch has been vested as provided for herein remains vested for a period
of seven (7) years from the time a site plan approval is granted for the initial
phase of the multi-phased development.
E. Continuing Review. Following issuance of a development permit, a local government
may make subsequent inspections and reviews to ensure compliance with the applicable
land development regulations in effect at the time of the original approval.
F. Process to Claim Vested Right.
A person claiming a vested right may submit information to the zoning administrator, who
shall make an initial determination as to the existence of the vested right. The decision of
the zoning administrator or officer may be appealed under G.S. 1600-405 and Article XII,
Section 12.1. On appeal, the existence of a vested right shall be reviewed de novo. In
lieu of seeking such a determination or pursuing an appeal under G.S. 1600-405 and
Article XII, Section 12.1, a person claiming a vested right may bring an original civil action
as provided by G.S. 1600-1403.1.
G. Runs with the Land.
Vested rights run with the land except for the use of land for outdoor advertising
governed by G.S. 136-136.1 and G.S. 136-131.2 in which case the rights granted by this
section run with the owner of the permit issued by the North Carolina Department of
Transportation.
H. Site Specific Vesting Plans
1. A site-specific vesting plan consists of a plan submitted to the City in which the
applicant requests vesting, describing with reasonable certainty on the plan the
type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels of property. For purposes
of this section the following plans or approvals qualify as site-specific vesting
plans:
a. Preliminary Plat
11-7
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
b. Minor Subdivision
c. Major Subdivision
d. Special Use Permit
2. Establishment of Vested Right.
A vested right is established with respect to any property upon the valid
approval, or conditional approval, of a site-specific vesting . Such a
vested right confers upon the landowner the right to undertake and
complete the development and use of the property under the terms and
conditions of the site- specific vesting plan, including any amendments
thereto.
3. Approval Process for a Site-Specific Vesting Plan
a. Each site-specific vesting plan shall include the information required by
the City Council for the underlying type of development application.
b. Each site-specific vesting plan shall provide the notice and hearing
required for the underlying type of development application. If the vesting
plan is not based on such an approval, a legislative hearing as required
by NCGS 1600-602 shall be held.
c. A local government may approve a site-specific vesting plan upon any
terms and conditions that may reasonably be necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare.
d. A site- specific vesting plan is deemed approved upon the effective date
of the City Council's decision approving the plan
e. An approved site-specific vesting plan and its conditions may be amended
with the approval of the owner and the local government in the same
manner as required for the underlying type of development plan. Minor
modifications may be approved administratively in accordance with
Section 11.1.G.
4. Duration and Termination of a Vested Right
a. A vested right for a site-specific vesting plan remains valid for two (2)
years. Upon following the same process as required for the original
approval, the City Council or the Administrator may extend the vesting of
a site-specific vesting plan up to three years (with total length of vesting
not to exceed five years) upon finding that:
(1) The permit has not yet expired;
(2) Conditions have not changed so substantially as to warrant a
new application; and,
11-8
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
(3) The extension is warranted in light of all other relevant
circumstances-including, but not limited to the size and phasing
of development, the level of investment, the need for the
development, economic cycles, and market conditions or other
considerations.
b. Upon issuance of a building permit, the provisions of G.S. 1600-1111
and G.S. 1600-1115 apply, except that a permit does not expire and
shall not be revoked because of the running of time while a vested
right under this section is outstanding.
c. A right vested as provided in this section terminates at the end of the
applicable vesting period with respect to buildings and uses for which no
valid building permit applications have been filed.
5. Changes and Exceptions.
a. A vested right precludes any zoning action by a local government which
would change, alter, impair, prevent, diminish, or otherwise delay the
development or use of the property as set forth in an approved sitespecific
vesting plan, except under the following conditions outlined in
NCGS Section 1600.108.1
b. The establishment of a vested right does not preclude the application of
overlay zoning or other development regulations which impose additional
requirements but do not affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or
ordinances or regulations which are general in nature and are applicable
to all property subject to development regulation by a local government,
including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and
mechanical codes. Otherwise applicable new regulations become
effective upon the expiration or termination of the vesting rights period of
the site-specific plan.
c. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the establishment of a
vested right does not preclude, change, or impair the authority of a local
government to adopt and enforce development regulations governing
nonconforming situations or uses.
I. Annexation Declaration
Whenever the city acquires jurisdiction over a territory that theretofore has been subject
to the jurisdiction of another local government, any person who has acquired vested
rights in the surrendering jurisdiction may exercise those rights as if no change of
jurisdiction had occurred. The city acquiring jurisdiction may take any action regarding
such a development approval, certificate, or other evidence of compliance that could
have been taken by the local government surrendering jurisdiction pursuant to its
development regulations. Except as provided in this subsection, any building, structure,
or other land use in a territory over which the city has acquired jurisdiction is subject to
the development regulations of the city.
Section 11.5 Permit Choice
If an applicant submits an application for any type of development and a rule or ordinance is amended,
11-9
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
including an amendment to any applicable land development regulation, between the time the
development application was submitted and a decision is made, or if a land development regulation is
amended after a development permit decision has been challenged and found to be wrongfully denied or
illegal, G.S. 143-755 applies. The applicant may choose which adopted version of the rule or ordinance
will apply to the development and use of the building, structure, or land indicated on the application. If the
applicant chooses the version of the rule or ordinance applicable at the time of the application, the
applicant shall not be required to await the outcome of the amendment to the rule, map, or ordinance
prior to acting on the development permit.
A. When a development required multiple permits under the development regulations of this
ordinance, the applicant may choose the regulations applicable to the project at the time
of their initial permit application. The applicant must submit the subsequent applications
within eighteen (18) months of approval of the initial permit in order to claim permit
choice.
B. If the development permit applicant chooses the version of the rule or ordinance
applicable at the time of the permit application, the development permit applicant shall
not be required to await the outcome of the amendment to the rule, map, or ordinance
prior to acting on the development permit. The provisions contained in G.S 143-755
apply.
C. If a permit application is placed on hold for six (6) or more consecutive months at the
request of the applicant, or the applicant fails to respond to comments or provide
additional information reasonably requested by City staff for a period of six (6)
consecutive months or more, then permit choice is waived and the rules in effect at the
time of resuming consideration of the application shall apply.
Section 11.6 Penalties for Violation
A. Violations of this Ordinance shall constitute either a misdemeanor as provided by G.S.
14-4, or, at the election of the City, shall subject the offender to a civil penalty upon the
issuance of a citation for said violation as hereinafter provided. The civil penalty, if not
paid to the City of Hamlet within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of a citation, may be
recovered by the City in a civil action in the nature of debt. Said civil penalties shall be in
the amount of $50.00 (fifty dollars) for each violation and each day any single violation
continues shall be a separate violation for purposes of the penalties and remedies
specified in this section.
B. In addition to the civil penalties set out above, any provision of this Ordinance may be
enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction. In such case, the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such
orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to the application of the City
for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law.
C. In addition to the civil penalties set out above, any provision of this Ordinance that makes
unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by
injunction and order of abatement by General Court of Justice. When a violation of such
a provision occurs, the City may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of
Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and/or order of abatement commanding
the violator to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the
property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing
civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in
particular.
11-10
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
D. In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as part of the
judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other
structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed; that fixtures, furniture or
other movable property be removed from buildings on the property; that abandoned or
junked vehicles be removed; that improvements or repairs be made; or that any other
action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this
Ordinance. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order
of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he or she may be cited for contempt,
and the City may execute the order of abatement. The City shall have a lien on the
property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's
and lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all
costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond
shall be given with sureties approved by the Clerk of Superior Court in an amount
approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the
defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed
by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an
injunction issued in conjunction therewith.
E. The provision of this Ordinance may be enforced by one, all or a combination of the
remedies authorized and prescribed by this section and G.S. 160A-175.
F. Upon determination of a violation of any section of this Ordinance, the penalty for which
is a civil penalty, the City of Hamlet shall cause a warning citation to be issued to the
violator. Such citation shall set out the nature of the violation, the section violated, the
date of the violation, and shall contain an order to immediately cease the violation. If the
violation is in the nature of an infraction for which an order of abatement would be
appropriate in a civil proceeding, a reasonable period of time must be stated in which the
violation must be abated.
G. An appeal from a warning citation shall be taken within ten (10) thirty (30) days from the
date of said warning citation to the Board of Adjustment. Notwithstanding other powers as
may be granted, the Board of Adjustment, in considering such an appeal, shall only have
the power only in the manner of administrative review and interpretation where it is
alleged that the Zoning Enforcement Officer has made an error in the application of the
Ordinance, in the factual situation as it relates to the application of the Ordinance, or
both.
H. Where the City determines that the period of time stated in the original warning citation is
not sufficient for abatement based upon the work required or Consent Agreement, the
City may amend the warning citation to provide for additional time. The warning citation
shall specify that a second citation shall incur a civil penalty, together with costs, and
attorney fees.
I. Upon failure of the violator to obey the warning citation, a civil citation shall be issued by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the City of Hamlet and either served directly on the
violator, his duly designated agent, or registered agent if a corporation, either in person or
posted in the United States mail service by first class mail addressed to the last known
address of the violator as contained in the records of the City or obtained from the
violation at the time or issuance of the warning citation, The violator shall be deemed to
have been served upon the mailing of said citation. The citation shall direct the violator to
appear before the City Manager of the City of Hamlet, or his designee, within fifteen (15)
days of the date of the citation, or alternatively to pay the citation by mail. The violation
for which the citation is issued must have been corrected by the time the citation is paid,
11·11
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
otherwise further citations shall be issued. Citations may be issued for each day the
offense continues until the prohibited activity is ceased or abated.
J. If the violator fails to respond to a citation within fifteen (15) days of its issuance, and pay
the penalty prescribed therein, the City of Hamlet may institute a civil action in the nature
of debt in the appropriate division of the North Carolina General Court of Justice for the
collection of the penalty, costs, attorney fees, and such other relief as permitted by law.
K. Whenever any work or activity subject to regulation pursuant to this Ordinance or any
State law delegated to the City for enforcement purposes in lieu of the State is
undertaken in substantial violation of any State or City ordinance, or in a manner that
endangers life or property, the City may order the specific part of the work or activity that
is in violation or presents such a hazard to be immediately stopped. The order shall be in
writing, directed to the person doing the work or activity, and shall state the specific work
or activity to be stopped, the reasons therefor, and the conditions under which the work
or activity may be resumed. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the holder of the
development approval and to the owner of the property involved (if that person is not the
holder of the development approval) in the same manner as NOVs in Section 11.1.B.
The person or persons delivering the stop work order shall certify to the City Council that
the order was delivered, and that certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of
fraud. The certification may be in the form of an affidavit per 160D-404(b).
SECTION 11.7. Establishment, Powers and Duties of Boards
A. Planning Board
The establishment and the duties of the Planning Board shall be as listed in Code of
Ordinances, Article 11, Section 2-127 and to:
1. Acquire and maintain in current form such basic information and materials as are
necessary to an understanding of past trends, present conditions, and forces at
work to cause changes in those conditions.
2. Establish principles and policies for guiding action in the development of the area
within the city;
3. Prepare and recommend to the City Council ordinances promoting the orderly
development of the City;
4. To advise the governing board concerning the implementation of plans, including,
but not limited to, review and comment on all zoning text and map amendments
as required by G.S.1600-604.
5. Determine whether specific proposed development conform to the principles and
requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and/or Zoning Ordinance for the growth
and improvement of the area;
6. To keep the City council and the general public informed and advised as to these
matters, and;
7. To perform any other duties which may lawfully be assigned to it such as Zoning
Ordinance review and/or Subdivision review.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment
11-12
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
1. Establishment of the Board of Adjustment
The Hamlet Planning Board shall serve as the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
terms of the members and officers of the Board of Adjustment shall be the same
as for the members and officers of the Planning Board, as outlined in Article 11,
Division 2 of the Code of Ordinances.
2. Meetings
The Planning Board shall sit as the Board of Adjustment and shall meet on an
as-needed basis. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
Evidentiary hearings and quasi-judicial proceedings shall be followed in
accordance with Section 12.4.
3. Duties. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to:
a. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator or
Building Inspector in accordance with Section 12.1,
b. Decide any matter on which the Board is required to consider under the
Zoning Ordinance, and,
c. Hear and decide variances in accordance with the requirements of
Section 12.2.
C. City Council
It shall be the duty of the City Council to hear and decide Special Use Permits in
accordance with the requirements in Section 12.3. The Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall have no role in considering or making recommendations about
Special Use Permits to ensure the integrity of the evidentiary hearing.
11-13
ARTICLE XII QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS
Section 12.1 Appeal of Administrative Decisions
A. Appeals. Appeals of administrative decisions are governed by G.S. 1600-405. Except as
provided in G.S. 1600-1403.1, appeals of administrative decisions made by the City staff
under this ordinance shall be made to the Board of Adjustment, unless a different board is
provided by statute.
B. Standing. Any person who has standing under G.S. 1600-1402(c) or the City of Hamlet
may appeal an administrative decision to the board. An appeal is taken by filing a notice of
appeal with the Zoning Administrator. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the
appeal.
C. Time to Appeal. The owner or other party has 30 days from receipt of the written notice of
the determination within which to file an appeal. Any other person with standing to appeal
has 30 days from receipt from any source of actual or constructive notice of the
determination within which to file an appeal. In the absence of evidence to the contrary,
notice given pursuant to G.S. 1600-403(b) by first-class mail is deemed received on the
third business day following deposit of the notice for mailing with the United States Postal
Service.
D. Record of Decision. The official who made the decision shall transmit to the board all
documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from is
taken. The official shall also provide a copy of the record to the appellant and to the owner
of the property that is the subject of the appeal if the appellant is not the owner.
E. Stays. An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order stays enforcement of
the action appealed from and accrual of any fines assessed during the pendency of the
appeal to the board of adjustment and any subsequent appeal in accordance with G.S.
1600-1402 or during the pendency of any civil proceeding authorized by law or appeals
therefrom, unless the official who made the decision certifies to the board after notice of
appeal has been filed that, because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property or, because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay
would seriously interfere with enforcement of the development regulation. In that case,
enforcement proceedings are not stayed except by a restraining order, which may be
granted by a court. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with
the official a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the board shall meet to
hear the appeal within 15 days after the request is filed.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, appeals of decisions granting a
development approval or otherwise affirming that a proposed use of property is consistent
with the development regulation does not stay the further review of an application for
development approvals to use the property; in these situations, the appellant or local
government may request and the board may grant a stay of a final decision of development
approval applications, including building permits affected by the issue being appealed.
F. Alternative Dispute Resolution. The parties to an appeal that has been made under this
section may agree to mediation or other forms of alternative dispute resolution.
G. No Estoppal. G.S. 1600-1403.2, limiting the City's use of the defense of estoppel, applies
to proceedings under this section.
Section 12.2 Variances
12-1
A. When unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of this
ordinance, the Board of Adjustment shall vary any of the provisions of the zoning regulation
upon a showing of all of the following:
1. Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the regulation. It
is not necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no
reasonable use can be made of the property;
2. The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as
location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as
well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood
or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance. A variance may
be granted when necessary and appropriate to make a reasonable
accommodation under the Federal Fair Housing Act for a person with a disability;
3. The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the property
owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that circumstances exist
that may justify the granting of a variance is not a self-created hardship; and
4. The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of the
regulation, such that public safety is secured and substantial justice is achieved.
B. No change in permitted uses may be authorized by variance. Appropriate conditions may
be imposed on any variance, provided that the conditions are reasonably related to the
variance.
Section 12.3 Special Use Permits
A. Special uses are land uses that are generally compatible with the land uses permitted by
right in a zoning district, but which require individual review of their location, design, and
configuration so as to evaluate the potential for adverse impacts on adjacent property and
uses. Special uses ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location within a
given zoning district.
B. Special Use Permits: The City Council shall hold an evidentiary hearing. The applicant
and other property owners likely to be materially affected by the application shall be given
an opportunity to be heard. Upon reviewing all of the pertinent information, the City
Council may approve, deny or approve with conditions the Special Use Permit by a
majority vote.
1. The City Council shall not grant a Special Use Permit unless the Council finds that,
in the particular case in question, the use for which the Special use permit is sought
will not adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood of the proposed use, will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or public improvements in the neighborhood, and meets the
following:
a. The proposed special use conforms to the character of the neighborhood,
considering the location, type and height of buildings or structures and the
type and extent of landscaping on the site.
b. The proposed use will not cause undue traffic congestion or create a traffic
hazard.
12-2
c. Adequate utilities (water, sewer, drainage, electric, etc.) are available for
the proposed use.
d. The proposed use shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of vibration,
noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas.
e. The establishment of the proposed use shall not impede the orderly
development and improvement of surrounding property.
f. The proposed use is consistent with the officially adopted plans and
policies of the City of Hamlet.
2. In granting such a permit, the City Council may designate such conditions in
connection therewith as will, in its opinion, assure that the proposed use will
conform to the requirements and spirit of the Zoning Ordinance if the applicant
and/or owner of the property concur with the conditions by written consent. City
Council must not impose conditions on Special Use Permits that the City does not
otherwise have statutory authority to impose.
Section 12.4 Quasi-Judicial Procedure
Boards shall follow quasi-judicial procedures in determining appeals of administrative decisions, special
use permits, variances, or any other quasi-judicial decision.
A. Notice of Hearing. Notice of an evidentiary hearing shall be mailed to the person or entity
whose appeal, application, or request is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of the
property that is the subject of the hearing if the owner is not the applicant; to the owners
of all parcels of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject of the hearing; and to
any other persons entitled to receive notice. In the absence of evidence to the contrary,
the City may rely on the county tax listing to determine owners of property entitled to
mailed notice. The notice must be deposited in the mail at least 1 O days, but not more
than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing. Within that same time period, the City shall
also prominently post a notice of the hearing on the site that is the subject of the hearing
or on an adjacent street or highway right-of-way.
The board may continue an evidentiary hearing that has been convened without further
advertisement. If an evidentiary hearing is set for a given date and a quorum of the board
is not then present, the hearing shall be continued until the next regular board meeting
without further advertisement.
B. Administrative Materials. The Administrator shall transmit to the board all applications,
reports, and written material relevant to the matter being considered. The administrative
materials may be distributed to the members of the board prior to the hearing if at the
same time they are also provided to the appellant or applicant and to the landowner if
that person is not the appellant or applicant. The administrative materials shall become a
part of the hearing record. The administrative materials may be provided in written or
electronic form. Objections to inclusion or exclusion of administrative materials may be
made before or during the hearing. Rulings on unresolved objections shall be made by
the board at the hearing.
C. Presentation of Evidence. The applicant, the City, and any person who would have
standing to appeal the decision under G.S. 160D-1402(c) shall have the right to
participate as a party at the evidentiary hearing. Other witnesses may present competent,
material, and substantial evidence that is not repetitive as allowed by the board.
12-3
Objections regarding jurisdictional and evidentiary issues, including but not limited to, the
timeliness of an appeal or the standing of a party, may be made to the board. The board
chair shall rule on any objections and the chair's rulings may be appealed to the full
board. These rulings are also subject to judicial review pursuant to G.S. 1600-1402.
Objections based on jurisdictional issues may be raised for the first time on judicial
review.
D. Appearance of Official New Issues. The official who made the decision or the person
currently occupying that position if the decision-maker is no longer employed by the local
government, shall be present at the evidentiary hearing as a witness. The appellant shall
not be limited at the hearing to matters stated in a notice of appeal. If any party or the
City would be unduly prejudiced by the presentation of matters not presented in the
notice of appeal, the board shall continue the hearing.
E. Oaths. The chair of the board or any member acting as chair and the clerk to the board
are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming before the board.
Any person who, while under oath during a proceeding before the board determining a
quasi-judicial matter, willfully swears falsely is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
F. Subpoenas. The board making a quasi-judicial decision through the chair, or in the
chair's absence anyone acting as chair, may subpoena witnesses and compel the
production of evidence. To request issuance of a subpoena, the applicant, the local
government, and any person persons with standing under G.S. 160D-1402(d) may make
a written request to the chair explaining why it is necessary for certain witnesses or
evidence to be compelled. The chair shall issue requested subpoenas he or she
determines to be relevant, reasonable in nature and scope, and not oppressive. The chair
shall rule on any motion to quash or modify a subpoena. Decisions regarding subpoenas
made by the chair may be immediately appealed to the full board. If a person fails or
refuses to obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this subsection, the board or the party
seeking the subpoena may apply to the General Court of Justice for an order requiring
that its subpoena be obeyed, and the court shall have jurisdiction to issue these orders
after notice to all proper parties.
G. Conflict of Interest. A member of any board exercising quasi-judicial functions pursuant to
this Article shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that
would violate affected persons' constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker.
Impermissible violations of due process include, but are not limited to, a member having
a fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed
ex parte communications, a close familial, business, or other associational relationship
with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter. If an
objection is raised to a member's participation and that member does not recuse himself
or herself, the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
H. Appeals in Nature of Certiorari. When hearing an appeal pursuant to G.S. 160D-947(e) or
any other appeal in the nature of certiorari, the hearing shall be based on the record
below and the scope of review shall be as provided in G.S. 160D-1402{k).
I. Voting. As required by G.S. 160D-406(i), the concurring vote of four-fifths of the board
shall be necessary to grant a variance. A majority of the members shall be required to
decide any other quasi-judicial matter. For the purposes of this subsection, vacant
positions on the board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial
matter under G.S. 160D-109{d) shall not be considered members of the board for
calculation of the requisite majority if there are no qualified alternates available to take
the place of such members.
12-4
J. Decisions. The board shall determine contested facts and make its decision within a
reasonable time. When hearing an appeal, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any order, requirement,
decision, or determination that ought to be made. The board shall have all the powers of
the official who made the decision. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon
competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision
shall be reduced to writing, reflect the board's determination of contested facts and their
application to the applicable standards and be approved by the board and signed by the
chair or other duly authorized member of the board. A quasi-judicial decision is effective
upon filing the written decision with the clerk to the board or such other office or official as
the development regulation specifies. The decision of the board shall be delivered within
a reasonable time by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the
applicant, landowner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy
prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person required to provide notice
shall certify to the local government that proper notice has been made and the certificate
shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
K. Judicial Review. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be subject to review by the superior
court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari pursuant to G.S. 1600-1402. Appeals
shall be filed within the times specified in G.S. 160D-1405(d).
12-5
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE XIII Amendment Procedure
The City Council may amend, supplement or change the Zoning Ordinance text and Zoning District
boundary lines and designations according to the following procedure.
Section 13.1 Amendment Initiation
Applications to change, supplement or amend this Ordinance, including map or text may be initiated by:
A. The City Council;
B. The Planning Board;
C. Anyone who owns property or resides in the area of jurisdiction of this Ordinance or the
agent of such person.
However, no amendment to the zoning regulations or the zoning map, that down-zones property, shall be
initiated written consent is obtained from all landowner(s) whose property is the subject of the downzoning
amendment, or the down-zoning amendment is-initiated by the City.
Section 13.2 Submittal
All applications for amendments to this Ordinance shall be in writing, signed and filed with the Secretary
to the Planning Board. Such fees as are established by the City Council shall be paid to the City of
Hamlet at the time any application for amendment is submitted.
The Secretary shall, before scheduling any amendment on the application for consideration by the
Planning Board, ensure that it contains all the required information as specified in this Ordinance and on
the application form. Applications which are not complete, or otherwise do not comply with the provisions
of this Ordinance shall not be scheduled by the Secretary, but shall be returned to the applicant with a
notation of the deficiencies in the application.
Completed applications shall be received a minimum of twenty-five (25) days prior to the Planning Board
meeting at which the proposed amendment is scheduled to be considered.
A. Applications for zoning map amendments shall contain all of the following:
1. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
2. A map drawn to a scale of not less than four hundred (400) feet to the inch and
not more than twenty (20) feet to the inch showing the land covered by the
proposed amendment.
3. A metes and bounds description of the area proposed to be changed.
4. The names and addresses of all the property owners included in the change as
shown on the latest tax list.
5. The names and addresses of all abutting property owners, including across any
street or other transportation corridor, as shown on the latest tax list.
B. Applications for zoning text amendments shall contain all of the following:
13-1
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
1. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
2. A summary of the specific objective of any proposed change in the text of this
chapter.
3. A concise statement of the reasons why the petitioner believes the proposed
amendment would be in the public interest
C. Applications for conditional zoning district amendments shall contain all of the following:
1. Subsection (1) through (5) as required for zoning map amendments under
Section 13.2.A above.
2. A written application for a conditional zoning district indicating the section
(district) of the Zoning Ordinance to which the Conditional Zoning District
rezoning is sought, the conditions to be applied and/or a site plan showing the
conditions. The application shall include written consent of the
applicant/landowner to the conditions provided.
Section 13.3 Planning Board Action
A. The Secretary shall present any properly completed application for amendment to the
Planning Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least twenty-five (25)
days after filing of such application with the Planning Department or according to a
schedule duly adopted by the Planning Board or the City Council, whichever is later. The
Planning Board may receive comments from any interested party.
B. The Planning Board shall either recommend in favor of an amendment or in opposition to
an amendment by simple majority vote of those present and voting. A tie vote on a
proposal shall be considered to be in opposition to such amendment. If the Planning
Board should fail to act on any proposed amendment within sixty (60) days after it is
presented to the Board such failure to act shall be considered to be a favorable
recommendation for the purposes of this procedure.
C. Any recommendation on a proposed amendment other than a favorable recommendation
shall be considered to be a recommendation for denial from the Planning Board ..
D. All recommendations from the Planning Board shall be accompanied by a written
statement on whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan, Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, or other applicable plans officially adopted by
the City Council. The Planning Board shall provide a written recommendation to the City
Council that addresses plan consistency and other matters as deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board. If no written report is received by the City Council from the Planning
Board within thirty (30) days after that Board makes its final decision on the proposed
amendment, the City Council may proceed in its consideration of the amendment without
the Planning Board report. The City Council is not bound by the recommendations, if
any, of the Planning Board.
E. Except for a City-initiated zoning map amendment, when an application is filed to request
a zoning map amendment and that application is not made by the owner of the parcel of
land to which the amendment would apply the applicant shall certify to the Planning
Board that the owner of the parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing has received
actual notice of the proposed amendment and a copy of the notice of public hearing.
13-2
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
Section 13.4 City Council Action
A. The Secretary shall present all proposed amendments to the City Council at its next
regular scheduled meeting at which it hears zoning amendment proposals. The Secretary
shall transmit to the City Council the Board's record on the proposed amendments.
B. The City Council shall take such lawful action on such proposals as it may deem
advisable provided that no zoning amendment shall be adopted until after a public
hearing shall have been held and public notice given as required by law. A member of
City Council shall not vote on any legislative decision regarding a development regulation
adopted pursuant to this Chapter where the outcome of the matter being considered is
reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on
the member. A member of City Council shall not vote on any zoning amendment if the
landowner of the property subject to a rezoning petition or the applicant for a text
amendment is a person with whom the member has a close familial, business, or other
associational relationship.
C. A notice of the public hearing on any ordinance that amends the provisions of this zoning
ordinance (including zoning map amendments) shall be published once a week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the Hamlet area. All
notifications and adoption shall be conducted per the requirements of G.S. 1600-601.
The notice shall be published for the first time not less than ten days nor more than
twenty-five days before the date fixed for the hearing. This period is to be computed in
accordance with G.S. 1600-601, which provides that the date of publication is not
counted but the date of the hearing is.
D. With respect to all map amendments, the Zoning Administrator or staff shall mail, by first
class mail, written notice of the public hearing to the record owners of all properties
whose zoning classification is changed by the proposed amendment as well as the
owners of all properties abutting any portion of the property rezoned by the amendment,
including any property abutting a right-of-way that abuts the property prosed for rezoning.
For purposes of this section the term "owners" shall mean the persons shown as
owners on Richmond County's computerized land records system. The notices required
by this subsection shall be deposited in the mail at least 1 O but not more than 25 days
prior to the date of the public hearing. The staff member mailing such notices shall certify
to the City Council that the notices have been mailed, and such certificate shall be
deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
E. The first class mail notice required under subsection (C) of this section shall not be
required if the zoning map amendment directly affects more than 50 properties, owned by
a total of at least 50 different property owners, and the City elects to use the expanded
published notice provided for in this subsection. In this instance, the City may elect to
either make the mailed notice provided for in subsection (C) of this section or may, as an
alternative, elect to publish notice of the hearing as required by G.S. 1600-602, but
provided that each advertisement shall not be less than one-half(1/2) of a newspaper
page in size. The advertisement shall only be effective for property owners who reside in
the area of general circulation of the newspaper which publishes the notice. Property
owners who reside outside of the newspaper circulation area, according to the address
listed on the most recent Richmond County property tax listing for the affected property,
shall be notified according to the provisions of subsection (C) of this section.
F. For proposed zoning map amendments, the Zoning Administrator shall prominently post
a notice of the public hearing on the site proposed for a rezoning or an adjacent public
13-3
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
street or highway right-of-way. When multiple parcels are included within a proposed
zoning map amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the
planning staff shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested
persons.
G. The notice required or authorized by this section (other than the posted notice required
by subsection (F)) shall:
1. State the date, time, and place of the public hearing.
2. Summarize the nature and character of the proposed change.
3. State that the full text of the amendment can be obtained from the town clerk.
4. State that substantial changes in the proposed amendment may be made
following the public hearing.
H. The Zoning Administrator shall make every reasonable effort to comply with the notice
provisions set forth in this section. However, it is the Board's intention that the notice
requirements set forth in this section that are not required by state law shall not be
regarded as mandatory, and therefore a failure to comply with such requirements shall
not render any amendment invalid.
I. Except for a City-initiated zoning map amendment, when an application is filed to request
a zoning map amendment and that application is not made by the owner of the parcel of
land to which the amendment would apply the applicant shall certify to the City Council
that the owner of the parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing has received actual
notice of the proposed amendment and a copy of the notice of public hearing.
J. For all other amendments the person or persons required to provide notice (typically the
Zoning Administrator) shall certify to the City Council that proper notice has been
provided in fact, and such certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
K. Actual notice of the proposed amendment and a copy of the notice of public hearing
required under this section shall be by any manner permitted under G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4(j).
If notice cannot with due diligence be achieved by personal delivery, registered or
certified mail, or by a designated delivery service authorized pursuant to 26 U.S.C. §
7502(f) (2), notice may be given by publication consistent with G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4(j)(1 ).
This subsection applies only to an application to request a zoning map amendment
where the application is not made by the owner of the parcel of land to which the
amendment would apply. This subsection does not apply to a city-initiated zoning map
amendment.
l. The Secretary shall present all proposed amendments to the City Council at its next
regular scheduled meeting at which it hears zoning amendment proposals. The Secretary
shall transmit to the City Council the Board's record on the proposed amendments.
M. Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, the City shall adopt a statement
describing whether its action is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, Land Use Plan,
Thoroughfare Plan, or other applicable plan officially adopted by the Council and
explaining why the Council considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public
interest. This statement is not subject to judicial review. If the amendment is adopted and
the action was deemed inconsistent with the adopted plan, the zoning amendment shall
13-4
City of Hamlet, Zoning Ordinance
have the effect of also amending any future land use map in the approved plan and no
additional request or application for a plan amendment shall be required.
Section 13.5 Maximum Number of Applications
No application for the same zoning district applicable to the same property or any part thereof shall be
filed until the expiration of one year from:
A. The date of final determination by the City Council; or
B. The date of denial if not appealed within ten (10) days of non- favorable action by the
Planning Board; or
C. The date of the public hearing or scheduled public hearing if such application is
withdrawn later than nineteen (19) days prior to such public hearing. Applications
withdrawn in writing prior to that time may be resubmitted without waiting one year. Fees
submitted for withdrawn cases are not refundable.
13-5
ARTICLE XIV GENERAL LEGAL PROVISIONS
Section 14.1 Interpretation, Purpose, Conflict
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, prosperity and general welfare.
It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or
other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a greater
restriction or imposes higher standards than those required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by
easements, covenants, or agreements the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern so that, in all cases,
the most restrictive limitation or requirement, or the requirement causing the highest standard of
improvements, shall govern.
Section 14.2 Repeal and Reenactment of Existing Zoning Ordinance
The rewriting of this Ordinance in part carries forth by reenactment some of the provisions of the existing
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hamlet and it is not intended to repeal but rather to reenact and continue
in force such existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have been accrued are preserved and
may be enforced. All provisions of the Zoning Ordinance which are not reenacted herein are hereby
repealed. All suits at law or in equity and/or all prosecutions resulting from the violation of the Zoning
Ordinance in effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of this State or of the United States, shall
not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of this Ordinance, but shall be prosecuted to their
finality the same as if this Ordinance had not been adopted; and any and all violations of the existing
Ordinance, prosecutions for which have not been instituted, may be filed and prosecuted; and nothing in
this Ordinance shall be so construed as to abandon, abate, or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now
pending and/or which may have been instituted or prosecuted.
Section 14.3 Effects Upon Outstanding Permits.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of
any building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit has been granted by the Building
Inspector prior to the time of passage of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto; provided, however,
that where construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of one hundred
eighty(180) days subsequent to the passage of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto, or where it
has not been prosecuted to completion within eighteen (18) months subsequent to passage of this
Ordinance or any amendment thereto, any further construction or use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance or any such amendment.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of
any Conditional Use Permit which has been previously granted by the Board of Adjustment prior to the
date of any amendment, deleting any such Conditional Uses from the Table of Permitted and Conditional
Uses or by any legislative update converting Conditional Use approvals to Special Use Permits, provided
that a Building Permit has been obtained and construction begun within one hundred eighty (180) days of
the date of the approval of such Permit by the City Council and provided that such Building Permit is
prosecuted to completion as provided for above. Such valid Conditional Uses, hereinafter referred to as
Special Use Permits, including those already existing may be constructed, continued and reconstructed
the same as any permitted use subject to such use limitations and other conditions as provided for in the
original issuance of the Conditional Use Permit. Any such previously Conditional Use that is changed to
any permitted use for any period of time shall resume as a permitted use.
Section 14.4 Validity
If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be
14-1
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance and each Section, Subsection, clause,
and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more Sections, subsections, sentences,
clauses or phrases be declared invalid.
Section 14.5 Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption by the City Council of the City of Hamlet, North
Carolina
14-2
APPENDICES
Town of Hamlet
Development Ordinance
2021
A-1
Tree List
· · · siria11trees
Chaste Tree
Common Smoketree
Crepe Myrtle
Flowering Crabapple
Flowering Peach
Fringe Trees
Hawthorne Species
Japanese Maple
Little Gem Magnolia
Loquat
Nellie Stevens Holly
Purpleleaf Plum
Virginia Pine
Appendix A:
Partial List of Trees That May Be Planted
American Hornbean
Bradford Pear
Chinese Elm
Flowering Cherry
Goldenraintree
Lusterleaf Holly
Osage-orange
Possum haw
Redbud
Saucer Magnolia
Savannah Holly
Silverbell
Trident Maple
A-2
Common Bald Cypress
Common China Fir
Cottonwood
Dawn Redwood
Ginko
Green Ash
Japanese Zelkova
Leyland Cypress
Loblolly Pine
Longleaf Pine
Oak Species
Peacan
Red Maple
River Birch
Southern Magnolia
Sugar Maple
Sycamore
Tuliptree
White Pine
Appendix B:
Mapping Standards
Section B.01: Plan Submission
The following are the standards for maps, plats, and plans, which are to be submitted as part of the
subdivision approval process. These standards are intended to be general and the subdivider may be
required to submit fewer or more maps, plats, or plans, or provide less or more information depending
upon the circumstances of the particular case.
(A) All maps, plats, and plans shall be drawn to scale. The scale shall be notless than 1" =
200'. Constructions plans shall be at a scale of not less than 1" = 50'. Prints may be blueline
or black-line, and map size shall be a minimum of 11" x 17" and a maximum of 24" x
36".
(B) The number and type of maps, plats, and plans submitted shall adhere to the requirements set
forth in the following table.
Preliminary Plat
Construction Plans
Final Plat
s-built drawings
Type and Number Submitted
2 prints
prints; and
1 reproducible (11" x 17")
2 prints
2 prints
2 prints; and
1 m lar
(C) Unless otherwise advised by the Administrator, preliminary plats and final plats shall contain all
information as requ'ired in the following table.
1:'
Information Required "c:'
-.§ - :!!~ c. c.
Title Block containing the name of the proposed development; name
of map, plat, or plan (preliminary or final); owner's name with address and
daytime phone#; date map was prepared or revised; scale in feet per inch; name ./
address, and telephone# of person preparing the map, plat or plan; developer's
name, address, and daytime phone number (if different from owner's)
Zoning districts within the property and adjacent properties ./
Deed book or plat book reference for subject property ./
Names of adjoining property owners or names of adjoining
subdivisions or develooments with deed book/oage and olat book references ./
Tax map numbers of subject property
./
-i"i:'
Oi
c:
ii:
./
./
,/
Vicinity map illustrating the location of the subject property relative to
surrounding area typically drawn in upper right corner at a scale of 1" ./ ./ = 2000'
Corporate limits or extraterritorial boundaries if on the subject ./ ./
property
North arrow and orientation (North arrow shall be oriented towards ./ ./
top of map where practical)
Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided distinctly and accurately ./ ./
represented with all distances, bearin!ls, and curve data shown
If existing property lines on subject property are to be changed, then label as "old ./ ./
property lines" and illustrate as dashed lines.
Location and description of all monuments, markers, and control ./ ./
corners
Location of intersecting boundary lines of adjoining properties ./ ./
Dimension, location and use of all existing buildings, distances
between buildings measured at the closest point; distance from buildings to ./ ./
closest propertv fines; buildinas to remain on final olat
Railroad lines and rights-of-way ./ ./
Water courses, ponds, lakes, or streams ./ ./
Marshes, swamps and other wetlands ./ ./
Areas to be dedicated or reserved for the public or a local jurisdiction ./ ./
Areas reserved for common area or open space ./ ./
Existing and proposed topography of subject property and 100 feet
beyond boundaries of subject property at intervals no greater than five feet (2 feet ./
where available)
Proposed lot lines and dimensions with bearings ./ ./
Setback lines for each proposed lot ./ ./
Square footage of all proposed lots under one acre in size ./ ./
Acreage of all lots over one acre in size ./ ./
Site calculations including but not limited to acreage in total tract;
acreage in public greenways and other open space; total number of ./
lots proposed; linear feet in streets; area in newly dedicated right-ofway_
Lots sequenced or numbered consecutively ./ ./
Street data illustrating existing and proposed rights-of-way within and
adjacent to property; total right-of-width dimension; cut-de-sac right- ./
of-way radius from center point; pavement or curb lines; pavement width
. dimensions; cut-de-sac pavement radius from center point
Existing and proposed street names ./ ./
Location, dimension, and type of all easements (existing and ./ ./
proposed)
Any other information deemed relevant by the Administrator ./
Section B.02: Certifications, Notes and Approval Blocks
The following certificates, notes and approval blocks shall appear on the appropriate plans and plats in
substantially the following formats:
(A) Certificate of Ownership (for minor subdivisions)
Certificate of Ownership
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described
hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of Hamlet;
and that I am hereby adopting this plan of subdivision.
Owner: Date:
Owner: -------------- Date: -------
(B) Certificate of Approval (for minor subdivisions)
Certificate of Approval
hereby certify that the minor subdivision shown on this plat does not
involve the creation of new public streets or any change in existing public
streets; that the subdivision shown complies in all respects with the Unified
Development Ordinance of Hamlet, North Carolina; and that therefore this
plat has been approved by the City of Hamlet Planning Director, subject to
its being recorded in the Richmond County Registry within 60 days of the
date below.
(C) Certificate of Ownership (for major subdivisions)
Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property described hereon, which
is located in the subdivision regulation jurisdiction of the City of Hamlet;
that I hereby freely adopt this plan of subdivision and dedicate to public
use all areas shown on this plat as streets, alleys, walks, parks, open
space, and easements, except those specifically indicated as private, and
that I will maintain all such areas until the offer of dedication is accepted
by the appropriate public authority. All property shown on this plat as
dedicated for a public use shall be deemed to be dedicated for any other
public use authorized by law when such other use is approved by the
Hamlet City Council in the public interest.
Owner: Date:
Owner: -------------- Date: -------
{D) Certificate of Approval (for major subdivisions)
Certificate of Approval
I hereby certify that all streets shown on this plat are within the City of
Hamlet's planning jurisdiction; that all streets and other improvements
shown on this plat have been installed or completed or that their installation
or completion (within 12 months after the date below) has been assured
by the posting of a performance bond or other sufficient surety, and that
the subdivision shown on this plat is in all respects in compliance with the
Unified Development Ordinance of Hamlet, North Carolina; and therefore
this plat has been approved by the Hamlet Planning Director, subject to its
being recorded in the Richmond County Registry within 60 days of the date
(E) Certificate of Survey and Accuracy {for major and minor subdivisions)
Certificate of Survey and Accuracy
I hereby certify that this map (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision)
from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my
supervision) (a deed description recorded in Book , Page of
the Richmond County Registry) (other); that the boundaries not surveyed
are clearly indicated as dashed lines plotted from information found in
Book , Page ; that the ration of precision as calculated is
___ ; and that this map was prepared in accordance with [statutory
citation]. Witness my original signature, registration number and seal this
__ day of , 20_
(F) Review Officer Certificate (for major, minor and exempt subdivisions)
Review Officer Certificate
State of North Carolina
County of Richmond
I, , Review Officer of Richmond County, certify
that the map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory
requirements for recording.
A-6
Appendix C:
Specifications for Street Construction
Section C.01: Radius at Street Intersections
The intersections of the paved surfaces of streets shall be rounded with a minimum radius as shown in the
table below. Where streets intersect at less than right angles, a greater radius may be required. The North
Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT) may vary the minimum radii set forth below at
intersections involving state maintained streets.
Type of Street Intersection Minimum Radius
Minor to Minor 15 feet
Minor to Local 15 feet
Minor to Subcollector 20 feet
Minor to Collector 20 feet
Local to Local 15 feet
Local to Subcollector 20 feet
Local to Collector 20 feet
Subcollector to 25 feet
Subcollector
Subcollector to Collector 30 feet
Section C.02: Cut and Fill Slopes
Cut and fill slopes on any street right-of-way may not exceed 2:1.
Section C.03: Clearing and Grubbing
Clearing and grubbing shall be performed within the limits shown on the plans. All timber, brush, roots,
stumps, trees, or other vegetation cut during the clearing operations shall become the contractor's
responsibility to dispose of, and shall be either removed from the project, or satisfactorily disposed of onsite.
Satisfactory on-site disposal shall not included burial.
Section C.04: Grading and Compaction
Streets shall be graded in accordance with the lines and grade set by the engineer. Before placing curb
and gutter or base on the graded sub-grade, the sub-grade shall be compacted to 100 percent AASHO T99
for a depth of six (6) inches and then shall be proof rolled in the presence of the engineer. Places that are
found to be loose, or soft, or composed of unsuitable materials, whether in the sub-grade or below it, must
be dug out and refilled with suitable material. All embankments or fills shall be made in one-foot horizontal
lifts of suitable material. The fill shall be rolled with a sheepsfoot roller after each lift, followed by a wheel
roller, each weighing not less than eight (8) tons.
Section C.05: Street Base
Base course for streets shall generally be eight (8) inches thick, unless otherwise directed by the City of
Hamlet Public Works Director, and shall be crushed stone conforming to NCDOT Type ABC stone. The
stone base course shall be placed in four-inch layers, watered as necessary, and compacted to 100 percent
AAS HO T99. The contractor shall be responsible for keeping the stone base free of contamination from
A-7
clay or other foreign materials. Handling and placement of stone base shall all be in accordance with
NCDOT specifications.
Section C.06: Street Surfaces
The asphalt surface course shall meet NCDOT specifications for Type 1-2 asphalt. The asphalt shall be
placed in one (1) two-inch layer, and shall be handled and placed in accordance with D.O.T. specifications.
Section C.07: Curb and Gutter
The concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed according to the lines and grades established by the
engineer. The concrete shall conform to NCDOT requirements. The forms shall be of metal, free of marks
or kinks, and shall be rigidly held in position. The engineer shall approve the positioning of the forms before
concrete is poured. The concrete shall be placed in the forms in a manner to prevent segregation, and
tamped or vibrated sufficiently to prevent honeycombs. The concrete shall be finished smooth and even by
means of rollers or floats. Expansion joints shall be provided every thirty (30) feet, and false joints every
ten (10)feet.
Section C.08: Sidewalks
Sidewalk construction shall be similar to street construction, with sub-grade compacted to 100 percent
AAASHO T99. Concrete sidewalks shall be four (4) inches thick (increasing to six (6) inches thick at
driveway entrances), and shall be at least four (4) feet wide. Expansion joints shall be provided every thirty
(30) feet, and false joints every ten (1 O) feet.
Section C.09: Wheelchair Ramps
Where required, wheelchair ramps shall be constructed in accordance with ADA and NCDOT requirements.
Section C.10: Storm Water Runoff Control
(A) The minimum design frequency for storm runoff shall be ten (10) years for storm sewer collection
and twenty-five (25) years for cross drainage (drainage facilities crossing a street).
(B) All storm drainage pipes shall be reinforced concrete and no pipe shall be smaller than 15 inches
in diameter.
(C) Culvert outlet protection and swale erosion protection shall be designed based on a 10-year storm.
(D) All storm drainage structures and pipes shall be designed and constructed in accordance with North
Carolina Department of Transportation specifications.
Section C.11: Sedimentation Control
Road shoulders, swales, back-of-curbs, and cut and fill banks shall be completely dressed up by the
contractor and seeded as soon as possible.
A-8
Appendix D:
Dumpster Screening Details
A. Location:
1. Enclosures shall be located to the rear or side of the primary building. For multi-family
residential uses, the locations shall be approved by the Administrator.
2. Enclosures shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any right-of-way.
3. Enclosures shall not be located within any tree preservation area, sight triangle, front
yard setback, or buffer yard.
4. Where no acceptable location can be found on an existing site, with approval from the
Administrator, an enclosure may be located in a parking space or within a side or rear
yard setback.
B. Construction Standards:
1. Enclosures shall be constructed of solid, sturdy materials, including wood or composite
fencing, masonry, stone, or brick.
2. All enclosures shall be constructed with an opaque gate with a metal frame. Chain link
gates with slats shall not be permitted, except for industrial uses. All gates shall be
provided with wheels and drop pins or rods for securing gates when open and closed.
3. The base of the enclosure shall consist of a 6" reinforced concrete pad, designed to
3,000 PSI. The pad shall extend a minimum of twelve (12) inches beyond the walls of
the enclosure and 4' from the gate to protect surrounding asphalt.
4. The minimum inside measurements of a dumpster enclosure shall be no less than
fourteen (14) feet in width and nine (9) feet in length. If two dumpsters are to be
enclosed, the minimum width shall be increased to twenty-three (23'). If container(s)
other than a dumpster is being utilized, enclosure size shall be approved by the
Administrator.
5. A drain may be installed to drain only the area of the base.
6. Concrete wheel stops, soldier posts, or similar feature shall be installed within 12" of the
side and rear of the enclosure to ensure the container does not make contact with the
walls.
7. Enclosures in multi-family residential areas shall provide a separate opening for
pedestrian access that shall be screened from view by either a fence, gate, wall, or
landscaping at least six feet in height and that does not obstruct the pedestrian
access. A paved or concrete walkway shall be provided for access.
8. Enclosure walls and gates shall be at least six (6) inches above the height of the
dumpster but in no case shall the enclosure be less than six (6) feet in height
A-9
C. Appearance and Maintenance
1. The exterior color of the enclosure shall compliment the materials and colors of the
principal building.
2. No commercial signs related to the principal use shall not be allowed on the walls or
gates of the dumpster enclosure. Only incidental signage, not exceeding six (6) square
feet, shall be permitted.
3. All enclosures shall be maintained and repaired as necessary
4. No trash, garbage, or recycling may be placed outside the dumpster
5. Gates to the enclosure shall be closed and secured except for times when materials are
being placed inside the dumpster or when it is being serviced.
6. All enclosures visible form a public roadway or adjacent property, shall include a
landscape component as the base of the enclosure. Landscaping shall include a
mulched plant bed with a minimum of one (1) evergreen tree and three (3) shrubs per
side of the enclosure that is facing a roadway or adjacent property without the benefit of
a buffer.
A-10
Appendix E:
Additional Information for Soil Conservation
1. North Carolina Division of Water Quality Best Management Practices (BMP) Design Manual
2. (http://portal.ncdenr.org/web/lr/bmpmanua1) details how to design various stormwater BMPs
effectively.
3. North Carolina Association of Soil & Water Conservation Districts (http:/ncaswed/org/)
4. A sample (soil) conservation plan: http:www.dec.ny.gov/docs/water_pdf/appendixfl.pdf
A-11

 




 


