
Lillington, NC Code of Ordinances


LILLINGTON, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2017 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2017-02, passed 10-17-2016; and
State legislation current through North Carolina Legislative Service, 2017
Pamphlet #1



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS



Section



   Town Charter



   Related Laws



 

Act
 


P.L. 1941, Chapter 292:
 
An Act to amend consolidated statutes 2688, volume one, 1919, relating to the
sale of municipal property


Sess. L. 1957, Chapter 612:
 
An Act to extend the authority of the police officers of the Town of
Lillington so as to include all territory within one mile of the corporate
limits of said town


Sess. L. 1959, Chapter 901:
 
An Act to provide for the election of the Mayor and Lillington Town Board of
the Town of Lillington


Sess. L. 1963, Chapter 798:
 
An Act authorizing the establishment of the town liquor control store in the
Town of Lillington, Harnett County, upon a vote of the people, and providing
for the allocation of the net proceeds from the operation of such store


Sess. L. 1967, Chapter 353:
 
An Act to fix the compensation of the Mayor and members of the governing body
of the Town of Lillington in Harnett County



 



TOWN CHARTER



1903 CHAPTER 252 Pr.L.



Editor’s note:



   Chapter 252, Private Laws 1903, as amended and herein set out, includes
section headings and bracketed words supplied by the editors.



     Sections have been edited as to capitalization and punctuation for
the sake of uniformity, and amendatory acts have been inserted in the
sections thereby amended, as indicated by historical citations following
amended sections.



The General Assembly of North Carolina does enact:



   Sec. 1. Prior charter acts repealed. That Chapter 111 of the Private
Laws of 1871-1872, and Chapter 58 of the Private Laws of 1899, and Chapter
279 of the Private Laws of 1899, be and the same are hereby repealed.



   Sec. 2. Town incorporated; name, laws gov- erning. That the Town of
Lillington, in the County Harnett, be and the same is hereby incorporated by
the name of the Town of Lillington, and shall be subject to all provisions of
the law now in force or hereafter enacted relating to incorporated towns and
cities, except as herein provided.  The town shall operate under the
Council-Manager form of government in accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of
G.S. Ch. 160A and any Charter provisions not in conflict therewith.



(Ord. passed 12-10-1985)



   Sec. 3. Boundaries. That the boundaries and corporate limits of said
Town of Lillington shall be as follows, to wit: Beginning at a point in the
center of the intersection of Main and Front Streets, in said town, a line to
be surveyed running north seventy-two degrees west forty chains, to the
beginning point in the western boundary; thence south eighteen degrees west
forty chains, thence south seventy-two degrees east eighty chains; thence
north eighteen degrees east to the Cape Fear River; thence up the Cape Fear
River to a point where the extension of the first boundary line would touch
the bank of said river; thence south eighteen degrees west to the beginning,
or western terminus of said town.



(Priv. Laws. 1937, Ch. 166, § 1)



Editor’s note:



   For current boundaries of the town, see official town map which is on
file in the office of the Town Clerk.



   Sec. 4. Officers. That the officers of said town shall consist of a
Mayor, five Commissioners, a Chief of Police, a Treasurer, and a Clerk to the
Lillington Town Board, and the following named persons shall fill said
offices until the first Monday of May, 1903, to wit: A.C. Holloway as Mayor:
A. P. McPherson, A. F. Johnson, J. A. Rogers, J. E. Caviness and U. H. Parker
as Commissioners; J. B. Lanier as Chief of Police and Allan M. Shaw as Clerk.



   Sec. 5. Election of Mayor and Commissioners. That on the first Monday
of May, 1903, and every two years thereafter, there shall be held at the
courthouse in Lillington an election, at which the successors to said Mayor
and Commissioners shall be chosen, which election shall be governed in all
respects by the rules, regulations and laws governing municipal elections
throughout the state, as provided by the general laws of the state.



Editor’s note:



   The term of office of Mayor and Commissioners is now four years, and
the Commissioners serve overlapping terms. See Sess. L. 1959, Ch. 901, which
is set out in the local laws which follow the Charter. Election date repealed
by Section 835 of the 1971 Session Laws.



   Sec. 6. Selection of Marshall, Treasurer and Clerk. That the Lillington
Town Board chosen at any election held as above provided for, shall at their
first meeting held after such election, choose by ballot or otherwise, as
they may determine, a Marshall, a Treasurer and a Clerk, who shall serve for
two years, or until their successors be elected.



Editor’s note:



   The Marshal is now the Chief of Police.



   Sec. 7. Bond of Treasurer and Marshall. That the Treasurer and the
Marshall shall each enter into a bond in such sum as the Lillington Town
Board may direct, with good and sufficient surety, to be approved by the said
Lillington Town Board, payable to the State of North Carolina, conditioned
for the faithful performance of their respective duties.



   Sec. 8. Powers of Lillington Town Board. That the said Commissioners
shall have power to pass all bylaws and regulations for the good government
of said town, as shall not be inconsistent with the laws of the state and of
the United States, and may levy a tax on all objects of state taxation, not
to exceed thirty-three and one-third cents on each one hundred dollars worth
of taxable property located within the boundary limits of said town, and
shall likewise have the right to levy a reasonable tax upon trades and
professions, where a levy of the same is not prohibited by the laws of the
state.



   Sec. 9. Oath of town officers. That it shall be the duty of the
officers appointed by this Act, within ten days after its ratification, to
appear before the Clerk of the Superior Court of Harnett County, or other
officer in said county authorized to administer oaths, and take the oath of
office prescribed by law for such officers.



Editor’s note:



   For oath of office as required by state constitution, see Const., Art.
VI, § 7. For statutory oath of mayor, see G.S. § 160A-61. As to
Commissioners, see G.S. § 160A.



   Sec. 10. Condemnation of land for streets, drainage or sewer
rights-of-way or easements. When any land or right-of-way shall be required
for the purpose of opening or laying out new streets or widening those
already opened, or for drainage or sewerage, and the land owner or owners and
said Commissioners cannot agree upon the price which the land owner or owners
will take and convey the right and easement to the said town, the same shall
be taken at the valuation of three freeholders, to be chosen as follows. The
Commissioners shall select one, [and] the owner or owners of the land one,
within three days after notice in writing to the land owner or owners from
the Commissioners of the selection, and the two freeholders thus selected
shall select a third man, also a freeholder, and these persons shall assess
the damages, if there be any, within five days after notice from the
Commissioners to the land owner or owners above mentioned; and if the owner
or owners of the land fail to select a man within three days as aforesaid,
then the Commissioners shall select two men, and the two thus selected shall
select a third man, and the three men thus selected shall assess the damage
within the time aforesaid. The said freeholders, when so chosen, shall be
first duly sworn by the Mayor or a justice of the peace to do impartial
justice, and shall view the premises and the land on which the right and
easement is demanded, and in making assessment of the damages shall take into
consideration any benefit or advantage such owner or owners may receive from
opening or widening of such street or making and maintaining of such drainage
or sewerage, and shall ascertain and report to the Commissioners, under their
hands and seals, what amount or sum shall be paid to the land owner or
owners, which report, on being confirmed by the Lillington Town Board and
spread upon the minutes of said town, shall have the force and effect of a
judgment in favor of said land owner or owners in said Town of Lillington for
the amount of damages assessed; provided, that either party may appeal to the
next term of the Superior Court of Harnett County upon the question of
damages, and notice of appeal must be served in writing within ten days from
the report of the freeholders and notice to the land owner that said report
has been filed; but no appeal shall delay the opening or widening of any
street or making any drainage or sewerage; provided further, that in case the
owner or owners of land on which right-of-way and easement is desired, as
herein stated, are infants, lunatics or nonresidents, it shall be the duty of
the Commissioners to file a petition before the Clerk of the Superior Court
of Harnett County on behalf of the said Town of Lillington, making defendants
the parties on whose land the right-of-way and easement is desired, and such
petition shall set forth in detail the lands on which said right-of-way and
easement will run, and the termini of said street or drainage or sewerage;
and such proceeding as to notice from time of hearing shall be governed by
the laws governing other special proceedings; and upon the hearing the Clerk
shall appoint three disinterested persons, citizens and freeholders of the
Town of Lillington, as Commissioners, who shall view the premises and shall
ascertain and report to the Clerk, under their hands and seals, what amount
or sums shall be paid to the land owner or owners by way of damages; and the
order of the Clerk of the Superior Court, if report is confirmed by him,
together with the report of the Commissioners, shall be spread upon the
minutes of the Town of Lillington, and shall pass the right-of-way or
easement in said land to the Town of Lillington, and shall have the force of
a judgment in favor of said land owner or owners in said Town of Lillington
for the damages assessed; provided, that no title shall vest and no street
shall be on lands condemned under this Act until all such damages as are
assessed shall be paid into the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of
Harnett County; and any person or persons attempting to open, or opening,
such street before such damages as are assessed shall have been paid into
said office shall be guilty of a trespass.



(Priv. Laws 1905, Ch. 180, § 1)



   For condemnation authority, see G.S. 40A, which repealed all charter
provisions.



   Sec. 11. Authority of Lillington Town Board to preserve the public
health. The Lillington Town Board may take such measures as they may deem
necessary and effectual to prevent the entrance into town, or the spreading
therein, of any contagious or infectious diseases; may stop, detain and
examine for that purpose all things and persons coming from places believed
to be infected with such diseases, may cause any person in the town believed
to be infected with such contagious diseases, and whose stay might endanger
the public health, to be removed to some designated place or places within or
without the town limits; may cause to be removed or destroyed such furniture
or other article or articles as shall be believed to be tainted or infected
with any contagious or infectious disease, or which there shall be reasonable
cause to apprehend will propagate disease; and may take all such reasonable
steps to preserve the public health as they may deem necessary.



   Sec. 12. Street labor for convicted offenders who fail to pay fine.
Whenever an offender has been convicted for a violation of a town ordinance
and a fine imposed, the Mayor of said town or other officer before whom he
shall have been convicted, at the time of entering judgment may order that on
failure to pay the fine to the Chief of Police of said town or the officer
having him in charge, such offender shall be by such officer put to work on
the streets of said town for a time to be fixed by the Mayor or other officer
rendering the judgment, not exceeding thirty days, when he shall be
discharged.



Editor’s note:



   Inasmuch as there is no longer a Mayor’s Court in the town, the
district court now exercises jurisdiction over cases involving the violation
of town ordinances. See Sess. L. 1967, Ch. 826, which repealed G.S. §§
160-13 to 160-16 relating to Mayors’ Courts, effective 12-2-1968 in Harnett
County.



   Sec. 13. Vagrants; generally. Any and all persons who may be able to
labor, who shall frequent said town and be found therein without any visible
means of support, sauntering about without employment, or who shall be found
sleeping at night or spending the night in or upon the piazzas of the stores
or the courthouse in said town, shall be deemed vagrants and guilty of a
misdemeanor, and punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars, or
imprisoned not exceeding thirty days, said offense being cognizable before
the Mayor, who may cause such person or persons to be farmed out to work on
the public streets or other public works of said town.



   Sec. 14. Same; tramps. That tramps, as defined and punished by sections
3828, 3829, 3830, 3831 and 3832 of chapter 63 of The Code, are subject to the
same penalties, punishments and cognizances as vagrants as set forth in the
preceding section.



Editor’s note:



   These sections were formerly G.S. §§ 14-338, 14-340 and 14-341, and
have been repealed with no replacement.



   Sec. 15. Authority to enclose town with fence. That the Commissioners
of said Town of Lillington may cause it to be enclosed, or any specified
portion of it to be enclosed, with a fence of wood or of metal, or part of
wood and part of metal, with gates in same at the crossings or terminals of
the several streets of the town reaching to said fence.



   Sec. 16. Authority to prevent animals from running at large. That the
said Commissioners may make an ordinance prohibiting the running at large
within the town limits or within the enclosure surrounded by the fence
provided for in the next preceding section, of any horse, mule, cow, hog,
sheep, goat or other four-footed animal, under such penalties as said
ordinance shall designate, which shall be, however, not inconsistent with the
laws of the state; and a violation of such ordinance, if wilfully permitted
by the owner of such animal, shall constitute a misdemeanor, cognizable by
the Mayor of said town and punishable by a fine not exceeding the sum of ten
dollars or imprisonment not exceeding ten days, in the discretion of the
Mayor.



   Sec. 17. Authority to penalize persons damaging town fence. That the
said Commissioners shall also have authority to provide by ordinance for the
punishment of any person or persons who shall wilfully remove rails from,
tear down or otherwise injure any portion of the fence erected by them (the
said Commissioners) or caused to be erected by them, under the authority of
Section 15 of this Act, or who shall wilfully remove, injure or leave open
any of the gates built in said fence, and a violation of any ordinance made
by them prohibiting such acts shall constitute a misdemeanor, cognizable by
the Mayor of said town, and shall be punished as said ordinance may specify;
provided, [that] such punishment be not inconsistent with the laws of the
state.



   Sec. 18. Effective date. That this Act shall be in force from and after
its ratification.



   In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 4th day
of March, 1903.



RELATED LAWS



H.B. 624 CHAPTER 292 P.L. 1941



   AN ACT TO AMEND CONSOLIDATED STATUTES TWO THOUSAND SIX HUNDRED AND
EIGHTY-EIGHT, VOLUME ONE, ONE THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED AND NINETEEN, RELATING TO
THE SALE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.



Editor’s note:



   These Acts of the General Assembly of North Carolina are not amendatory
of the Town Charter, but they constitute part of the fundamental law of the
town and are included for that reason. Sections have been edited as to
capitalization and punctuation for the sake of uniformity, and amendments
have been inserted as shown by the historical citation which follows any
section which has been amended. Bracketed words and section catchlines,
wherever appearing, have been supplied by the editors.



The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact:



   Sec. 1. Sale of property by municipalities. That Consolidated Statutes
two thousand six hundred and eighty-eight, volume one, one thousand nine
hundred and nineteen, be, and the same is hereby, amended to read as follows:



   “The Mayor and Commissioners of any city or town shall have power at
all times to sell either at public or private sale any property, real or
personal, belonging to any such city or town and apply the proceeds as they
may think best.”



   Sec. 2. Applicability of Act. That this Act shall apply only to
Alexander and Washington Counties and the Town of Lillington in Harnett
County. (Sess. L. 1943, Ch. 128, ratified Feb. 17, 1943 and effective from
date of ratification).



   Sec. 3. Repeal of conflicting laws. That all laws and clauses of laws
in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed.



   Sec. 4. Effective date. That this Act shall be in full force and effect
from and after its ratification.



   In the General Assembly read three times and ratified, this 15th day of
March, 1941.



H.B. 701 CHAPTER 612 Sess. L. 1957



   AN ACT TO EXTEND THE AUTHORITY OF THE POLICE OFFICERS OF THE TOWN OF
LILLINGTON SO AS TO INCLUDE ALL TERRITORY WITHIN ONE MILE OF THE CORPORATE
LIMITS OF SAID TOWN.



The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact:



   Sec. 1. Extraterritorial jurisdiction of police. The power and
authority of the Chief of Police and each and every police officer of the
Town of Lillington in Harnett County to make arrests, serve warrants and
enforce the motor vehicle laws is hereby extended to include any and all of
the territory within one mile of the corporate limits of the Town of
Lillington.



   Sec. 2. Repeal of conflicting laws. All laws and clauses of laws in
conflict with this Act are hereby repealed.



   Sec. 3. Effective date. This Act shall be in full force and effect from
and after its ratification.



   In the General Assembly read three times and ratified, this the 9th day
of May, 1957.



S.B. 420 CHAPTER 901 Sess. L. 1959



   AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE ELECTION OF THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWN OF LILLINGTON.



The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact:



   Sec. 1. Four year. overlapping terms of commissioners established. At
the next regular municipal election conducted in the Town of Lillington,
subsequent to the ratification of this Act, there shall be elected by the
qualified voters of said town a Mayor and five Commissioners. The two
candidates for the office of Commissioner receiving the highest number of
votes in said election shall serve for a term of four years each and until
their successors are elected and qualified. The three candidates for
Commissioner receiving the next highest number of votes shall serve for a
term of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified.
Thereafter all members of the Lillington Town Board of the Town of Lillington
shall be elected for the terms of four years each.



Editor’s note:



   The election referred to in this section was held on the first Monday
in May, 1961 (see Charter Section 5). Therefore, two Commissioners are to be
elected in 1969 and every four years thereafter, and three Commissioners are
to be elected in 1971 and every four years thereafter.



   Sec. 2. Four year term of mayor established; Mayor and Commissioners
constitute governing body. The candidate for the office of Mayor receiving
the highest number of votes shall be declared elected and shall serve for a
term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. The
Mayor and the Lillington Town Board shall constitute the governing body of
the Town of Lillington.



Editor’s note:



   The effect of this Section and Section 1 of this Act is to provide for
the election of a Mayor in 1969 and every four years thereafter.



   Sec. 3. Notice of candidacy; filing fee. All persons desiring to become
a candidate for the office of mayor or commissioner shall give notice to the
Town Clerk by filing with said Clerk a notice of candidacy at least fifteen
days prior to said election and shall pay a filing fee in an amount to be
determined by the Lillington Town Board but said fee shall in no instance
exceed two dollars. No person’s name shall be placed upon the general
election ballot unless he has complied with the conditions herein set out.



   Sec. 4. Laws applicable to elections. Except as otherwise provided in
the Charter of the Town of Lillington, all elections shall be conducted in
accordance with the general laws of North Carolina relating to municipal
elections.



   Sec. 5. Repeal of conflicting laws. All laws and clauses of laws in
conflict with this Act are hereby repealed.



   Sec. 6. Effective date. This Act shall be in full force and effect from
and after its ratification.



   In the General Assembly read three times and ratified, this the 11th
day of June, 1959.



S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963



   AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A TOWN LIQUOR CONTROL STORE IN
THE TOWN OF LILLINGTON, HARNETT COUNTY, UPON A VOTE OF THE PEOPLE AND
PROVIDING FOR THE ALLOCATION OF THE NET PROCEEDS FROM THE OPERATION OF SUCH
STORE.



Editor’s note:



   Pursuant to the provisions of this Act, an election was held within the
town on October 8, 1966 and a majority of the votes cast were in favor of
establishing an alcoholic beverage control store.



The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact:



   Sec. 1. Referendum to determine whether or not town liquor control
store may be established. The governing body of the Town of Lillington may on
its own motion, or shall if requested by a petition signed by at least
fifteen per cent of the registered voters of Lillington, order an election to
be held on the question of whether or not a town liquor control store may be
operated in the Town of Lillington; and if a majority of the votes cast in
such election shall be for the operation of such a store, it shall be legal
for a liquor control store to be set up and operated in said town; but if a
majority of the votes cast in said election shall be against the operation of
a town liquor control store, no such store shall be set up or operated in
said town under provisions of this Act. In the event the governing body of
the Town of Lillington on its own motion orders a special election herein
provided for, said election shall be held on such date as determined by said
governing body; provided, that the special election shall not be held on or
within sixty days of any biennial election for county officers.



   Sec. 2. Registration of voters; printing and marking of ballots;
election laws applicable. In calling for such special liquor election, the
said governing body shall give at least thirty days’ public notice of the
same prior to the opening of the registration books, and said registration
books shall remain open for eight days before such special liquor election. A
new registration of voters for such special liquor election shall not be
necessary and all qualified electors who are properly registered prior to
registration for the special election and those who register in said special
liquor election shall be entitled to vote in said election. ln said election
a ballot shall be used upon which shall be printed on separate lines for each
proposition, “For Town Liquor Control Store,” “Against Town Liquor
Control Store.” Those favoring setting up and operating a liquor store in
the Town of Lillington shall mark in the voting square to the left of the
words “For Town Liquor Control Store,” printed on the ballot; and those
opposed to a town liquor control store shall mark in the voting space to the
left of the words “Against Town Liquor Control Store.” Except as
otherwise herein provided, the special election authorized shall be conducted
under the same statutes, rules and regulations applicable to municipal
elections in the Town of Lillington.



   Sec. 3. How town liquor control store may be abolished; disposition of
store assets upon abolishment; limitation as to subsequent referenda. If,
after the first election, upon a petition signed by at least fifteen per cent
of the registered and qualified voters of the town, the governing body shall
call an election and at such election a majority of the votes shall be cast
“Against Town Liquor Control Store, “ the town liquor control board shall
within three months from the canvassing of such votes and the declaration of
the result thereof, close said store and shall thereafter cease to operate
the same, and within said three months the town control board shall dispose
of all alcoholic beverages on hand, all fixtures, and all other property in
the hands and under the control of said board and convert the same into cash
and turn the same over to the Town Treasurer. Thereafter, All Public,
Public-Local and Private Laws applicable to the sale of intoxicating
beverages within said Town of Lillington in force and effect prior to the
authorization to operate a town liquor store shall be in full force and
effect the same as if such election had not been held until and unless
another election is held under the provisions of this Act in which a majority
of the votes shall be cast “For Town Liquor Control Store.” No election
shall be called and held in the Town of Lillington under the provisions of
this Section within three years from the holding of the last election
thereunder. It shall be the duty of the governing body of the Town of
Lillington to order the special liquor election herein authorized in this
section within sixty days after a sufficient petition has been filed
requesting the same. But no election under this Act shall be held on the day
of any biennial county or Town of Lillington general election or primary
election, or within thirty days of any such election.



   Sec. 4. Town Board of Alcoholic Control: Composition and appointment of
members; Chairman; financial reports; inspection of records. If the operation
of a town liquor control store is authorized under the provisions of this
Act, the Mayor and governing body of the Town of Lillington shall immediately
create a Town Board of Alcoholic Control to be composed of a Chairman and two
other members who shall be well known for their character, ability and
business acumen. Said Board shall be known and designated as “The Town of
Lillington Board of Alcoholic Control.” The Chairman of said Board shall be
designated by the governing body of the town and shall serve for his first
term a period of three years, and one member shall serve for his first term a
period of two years, and the other member shall serve for a period of one
year; and all terms shall begin with the date of their appointment, and after
the same terms shall have expired, their successors in office shall serve for
a period of three years. Their successors, or any vacancy occurring in the
Board, shall be named or filled by the governing body of the town. Members of
the Town Board may serve as members of the Board of Alcoholic Control. The
Board of Alcoholic Control shall report monthly to the Town Board the status
and financial condition of the Alcoholic Control Board and the books of the
said Board of Alcoholic Control shall be available for inspection and
examination by the members of the Town Board at any time.



   Sec. 5. Same; Powers and duties. The said Town of Lillington Board of
Alcoholic Control shall have all of the powers and duties imposed by G.S. §
18-45 on County Boards of Alcoholic Control, except as otherwise provided
herein, and shall be subject to the powers and authority of the State Board
of Alcoholic Control the same as county boards of alcoholic control as
provided in G.S. § 18-49. The said Town of Lillington Board of Alcoholic
Control and the operation of any town liquor store authorized under the
provisions of this Act shall be subject to and in pursuance with the
provisions of G.S. Ch. 18, Art. 3, except to the extent which the same may be
in conflict with the provisions of this Act. Wherever the word “county”
board of alcoholic control appears in said Article, it shall include the Town
of Lillington Board of Alcoholic Control.



Editor’s note:



   The references in this section to G.S. Chapter 18 are now obsolete. For
current provisions concerning Alcoholic Beverages, see G.S. Chapter 18B.



   Sec. 6. Disposition of liquor control store profits. The net profits,
as determined by quarterly audit, shall be distributed and used as follows:



   1.   Twenty-five per cent of the net profits shall be paid to the
Harnett County Public Library.



   2.   Ten percent of the net profits, which shall be a part of the
profits referred to in the following subsection, shall be used by the Town
Alcoholic Control Board, in its discretion, for educational programs as to
the effect of the use of alcoholic beverages and for the rehabilitation of
alcoholics. Whenever a person becomes an inebriate from the use of alcoholic
beverages and has been committed by the clerk of court of Harnett County, as
provided in G. S. § 35-2,12 and such person is indigent so that the expenses
of his care and cure shall constitute a valid charge against the county, as
provided in G.S. § 35-2, the Town Alcoholic Control Board shall pay to the
county such charges; provided, that the Town Alcoholic Control Board shall
not be required to pay any such charges except where it has agreed with the
Clerk of Superior Court to pay such charges prior to the person’s
commitment. The Town Alcoholic Control Board is authorized to participate in
and to make contributions to public and private organizations which have
rehabilitation programs for alcoholics, when the organization and its
programs have been approved by the Board. Nothing herein shall be construed
as limiting the Alcoholic Control Board’s discretion in establishing its
educational and rehabilitation programs and expenditures therefor within the
ten percent of net profits herein allocated.



Editor’s note:



   As to current incompetency and guardianship provisions, see G.S.
Chapter 35A. Note that G.S. Chapter 35 has been repealed.



   3.   Seventy-five percent of the net profits shall be allocated to
the General Fund of the Town of Lillington. The governing body of the town is
hereby authorized to appropriate such funds for any proper governmental
purposes. Out of the funds allocated to it, the governing body of the town is
specifically authorized to expend up to twenty-five per cent of such funds
for recreational programs in the town. The governing body is further
authorized to expend up to five per cent of the funds allocated to it for law
enforcement to Harnett County for the use of the sheriff of Harnett County
for the employment of deputies.



   Sec. 7. G.S. § 18-45(15) not applicable. The provisions of G.S. §
18-45(15) shall not apply to the Town Board of Alcoholic Control.



Editor’s note:



   Please see editor’s note #5 above.



   Sec. 8. Repeal of conflicting laws. All laws and clauses of laws in
conflict with this Act are hereby repealed.



   Sec. 9. Effective date. This Act shall be in full force and effect from
and after its ratification.



   In the General Assembly read three times and ratified, this the 11th
day of June, 1963.



H.B. 569 CHAPTER 353 Sess. L. 1967



   AN ACT TO FIX THE COMPENSATION OF THE MAYOR AND MEMBERS OF THE
GOVERNING BODY OF THE TOWN OF LILLINGTON IN HARNETT COUNTY.



The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact:



   Sec. 1. Salary of Mayor and members of governing body. The governing
body of the Town of Lillington is hereby authorized, in its discretion, to
fix the salary of the Mayor at a sum not to exceed sixty dollars per month,
and to fix the salaries of the members of the governing body of the Town of
Lillington at a sum not to exceed forty dollars per month. The authority to
fix salaries as provided herein shall not be effective until after the 1967
regular municipal election in the Town of Lillington.



Editor’s note:



   Repealed by G.S. 160A-64.



   Sec. 2. Repeal of conflicting laws. All laws and clauses of laws in
conflict with this Act are hereby repealed.



   Sec. 3. Effective date. This Act shall be in full force and effect from
and after its ratification.



   In the General Assembly read three times and ratified, this the 9th day
of May, 1967.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Captions



   10.04   Definitions



   10.05   Rules of construction



   10.06   Conflicting provisions



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances



   10.09   Reference to other sections



   10.10   Reference to offices



   10.11   Errors and omissions



   10.12   Official time



   10.13   Reasonable time



   10.14   Ordinances repealed



   10.15   Ordinances unaffected



   10.16   Ordinances saved



   10.17   Amendments to code; amendatory language



   10.18   Extraterritorial jurisdiction for enforcement of certain
ordinances



   10.19   Form of ordinances general



   10.20   Resolutions



   10.21   Town seal



 



   10.99   Penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated the Code of the Town of Lillington, North
Carolina and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as Lillington Town
Code.



(1991 Code, § 10.01)



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of the General Statutes of North Carolina.



   (B)   Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the
General Statutes of North Carolina, the reference indicates that the section
is analogous or similar to the cited sections in the General Statutes of
North Carolina. Footnotes, cross-references and other comments are by way of
explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



   (C)   Nothing herein contained is intended to conflict with or
supercede applicable state or federal laws.



   (D)   Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute
any part of the law as contained in the code.



(1991 Code, § 10.02)



§ 10.03  CAPTIONS.



   The captions of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part thereof, nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the captions, are amended or reenacted.



(1991 Code, § 10.03)



§ 10.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COUNTY. Harnett County, North Carolina.



   LILLINGTON TOWN BOARD.  The governing body of the Town of Lillington,
North Carolina.



   MONTH. A calendar month.



   OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an OATH, and in such cases, the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



   OWNER. When applied to any property, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the
whole or part of such property.



   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and
any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property as
herein defined.



   PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.



   PROPERTY. Real and personal property.



   REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   SHALL and MAY.  The word SHALL is mandatory, and the word MAY is
permissive.



   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. A mark when a person cannot write.



   STATE. The State of North Carolina.



   STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the
town and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between abutting
property lines.



   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by an
italicized heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the
body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject
matter of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land shall include
any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.



   TOWN. The Town of Lillington in the County of Harnett and the State of
North Carolina.



   WRITING or WRITTEN. Shall include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters.



   YEAR. A calendar year.



(1991 Code, § 10.04)



Statutory reference:



   Similar statutory definitions, see G.S. § 12-3



§ 10.05  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   And or or. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.



   (B)    Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (C)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



   (D)   Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language.
However, technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to that meaning.



   (E)   Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be
done, as provided by law, shall be computed in the manner prescribed by Rule
6 of the State Rules of Civil Procedure as may be amended from time to time.



(G.S. § 1-593)



   (F)   Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three
or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers, unless otherwise expressly declared in
the law giving the authority.



(G.S. § 12-3(2))



(1991 Code, § 10.05)



Statutory reference:



   Similar statutory rules of construction, see G.S. § 12-3



§ 10.06  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of the
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the subject matter taken as a
whole.



(1991 Code, § 10.06)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Board that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid
judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since they
would have been enacted by the Town Board without the incorporation in this
code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.



(1991 Code, § 10.07)



§ 10.08  PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as
those of ordinances adopted prior to the adoption of this code and included
herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new
enactments.



(1991 Code, § 10.08)



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



(1991 Code, § 10.09)



§ 10.10  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



(1991 Code, § 10.10)



§ 10.11  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted that will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



(1991 Code, § 10.11)



§ 10.12  OFFICIAL TIME.



   Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard
time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in this town.



(1991 Code, § 10.12)



§ 10.13  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME
OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this
code, by order of any court, or by any applicable statute, such computation
shall be in the manner prescribed by Rule 6 of the State Rules of Civil
Procedure as may be amended from time to time.



(1991 Code, § 10.13)



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



(1991 Code, § 10.14)



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



(1991 Code, § 10.15)



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body or a certain town officer or employee to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving that
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto,
shall remain in effect and are saved.



(1991 Code, § 10.16)



§ 10.17  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.



   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code
by ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance
with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be
excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent
ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of the
subsequent ordinances until the legislative body of the town adopts a new
code of ordinances.



   (B)   Every ordinance introduced, if it proposes to amend or repeal
any existing portion of this code, shall show by proper reference the
chapter, and a section proposed to be amended or repealed; or if it proposes
to add to this code a new chapter, or section, it shall indicate, with
reference to this code, a proper number for such chapter.



(1991 Code, § 10.17)



§ 10.18  EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION FOR ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN
ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Boundaries for the extraterritorial enforcement of the
following ordinances are hereby established:



      (1)   Zoning ordinance;



      (2)   Subdivision regulations;



      (3)   State Building Code;



      (4)   Ordinances creating the Municipal Planning Board; and



      (5)   Mobile homes ordinance.



   (B)   Such boundaries are delineated on the face of a map, entitled
“Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of the Town of Lillington,” which is
hereby adopted by reference.



   (C)   The official copy of this section and the aforementioned map
shall be on record in the office of the Town Clerk for public inspection
during normal business hours. The Town Clerk shall cause a certified copy of
this section and the aforementioned map and any subsequent amendments to be
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county. The Town Clerk
shall cause signs, signposts or similar readily-identifiable markers to be
installed at all points of intersection of the above-described boundary with
all roads, streets, highways and railroads.



(1991 Code, § 10.18)  (Ord. passed 12-4-1973)



§ 10.19  FORM OF ORDINANCES GENERAL.



   Every ordinance shall be proposed in writing, signed by the
Commissioner presenting it, and approved as to form by the Town Attorney. All
ordinances of the town shall be consecutively numbered, and shall be entered
into a book for that purpose to be kept by the Clerk to the Town Board.



(1991 Code, § 10.19)



§ 10.20  RESOLUTIONS.



   Every resolution shall be proposed in writing and signed by the
Commissioner presenting it; and, upon request of any Commissioner, shall be
approved as to form by the Town Attorney. All resolutions shall be
consecutively numbered and shall be entered into a book for that purpose, to
be kept by the Clerk to the Town Board.



(1991 Code, § 10.20)



§ 10.21  TOWN SEAL.



   (A)   The seal of the town shall be a circle with the words “TOWN
OF LILLINGTON” within and following the arc forming the top of the circle,
and the words “North Carolina” within and following the arc at the bottom
of the circle, with an inner circle inside these words. Within the inner
circle, and following the arc forming the top thereof, shall be the word
“INCORPORATED,” under which shall be the figures, horizontally placed
“.*.,” and thereunder, also horizontal, the date “1903.”



   (B)   The Town Clerk shall be custodian of the town seal.



(1991 Code, § 10.21)



§ 10.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or division of this code of ordinances for which no other penalty is
provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this code of ordinances are violated shall constitute a
separate offense.



(G.S. § 14-4(a))  (1991 Code, § 10.99)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   TOWN BOARD



      31.   TOWN OFFICIALS



      32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      33.   ELECTIONS



      34.   TOWN POLICIES



      35.   FINANCES



      36.   TAXATION



CHAPTER 30:  TOWN BOARD



Section



   30.01   Presiding officer



   30.02   Duty to attend meetings; quorum



   30.03   Regular meetings



   30.04   Special meetings



   30.05   Compelling attendance of absent members; penalty; exceptions



   30.06   Rules of procedure



   30.07   Committees



   30.08   Duties of Clerk



   30.09   Sergeant-at-Arms



   30.10   Compelling attendance of town officers and employees at
meetings



 



   30.99   Penalty



§ 30.01  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Town Board; provided,
that in all matters coming up for consideration before the Town Board the
Mayor shall not be entitled to vote, except in the case of a tie.



(1991 Code, § 30.01)



§ 30.02  DUTY TO ATTEND MEETINGS; QUORUM.



   It shall be the duty of the Commissioners of the town to attend all
regular and special meetings of the Town Board, and any three Commissioners
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.



(1991 Code, § 30.02)



§ 30.03  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The Town Board shall meet in regular session on the second Tuesday in
each month at 7:00 p.m.; provided, that when any regular meeting day as above
specified shall fall upon a holiday the Town Board may, by resolution, set
another date for such meeting.



(1991 Code, § 30.03)  (Ord. passed 12-10-1924; Ord. passed 6-10-1970; Ord.
passed 8-6-1974; Ord. passed 2-3-1976)



§ 30.04  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Mayor or any two of the Commissioners of the town may call
a special meeting of the Town Board, by personal notice to those not joining
in the call, and if the Commissioners of the town should meet with a quorum
present, and evidence of notice is presented to the absent ones, shown and
spread upon the minutes, then such notice shall for all purposes be deemed to
have been given.



   (B)   At any special meeting of the Town Board only those subjects
which have been included in the call for such meeting shall be considered and
acted upon.



(1991 Code, § 30.04)



§ 30.05  COMPELLING ATTENDANCE OF ABSENT MEMBERS; PENALTY; EXCEPTIONS.



   When present at any meeting of the Town Board, whether with or without
quorum, any one of the Commissioners shall have authority to direct any
officer in attendance upon the Board to immediately bring before such Board
and any member thereof not absent by permission of the Board, nor unavoidably
otherwise prevented from voluntarily attending, in which latter event any
excuse to be made by such member shall be made upon his or her appearance
with the officer, and not otherwise, serious cases of illness or inability
excepted; provided, that if any member shall refuse and neglect to come with
any such officer so sent for him or her, then and in the event he or she
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 30.99; provided further, that
the Board as a whole may exercise a discretion and remit such fine if it
shall cause to be spread upon the minutes in full the proceedings had by
which such absent member was compelled to attend.



(1991 Code, § 30.05)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 30.06  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   Robert’s Rules of Order, current edition, shall govern all
proceedings of the Town Board; and the Board may, by resolution, provide for
the order of business and such other rules as may be desirable to facilitate
the performance of its duties.



(1991 Code, § 30.06)  (Ord. passed 7-2-1963)



§ 30.07  COMMITTEES.



   The Town Board may, by resolution or motion, provide for such standing
committees and special committees as may be considered desirable. Committees
shall be appointed and shall have jurisdiction, powers and duties as may be
provided by resolution or motion of the Town Board.



(1991 Code, § 30.07)



§ 30.08  DUTIES OF CLERK.



   The Clerk to the Town Board shall attend all meetings of the Board and
shall keep the journal or minutes of its proceedings. The Clerk shall act as
Secretary to the Board and be the custodian of its papers, and shall perform
such related duties as may be required of the Clerk by the Board or its
presiding officer.



(1991 Code, § 30.08)



§ 30.09  SERGEANT-AT-ARMS.



   The Chief of Police or some officer designated by the Town Manager
shall be Sergeant-at-Arms of the Town Board, and shall, unless excused by the
Board, attend all meetings thereof to preserve order, serve notices and
execute such orders as may be given to him or her by the Board or its
presiding officer.



(1991 Code, § 30.09)



§ 30.10  COMPELLING ATTENDANCE OF TOWN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES AT MEETINGS.



   The Town Board may require the attendance of the Town Attorney and
other town officers and employees at its meetings.



(1991 Code, § 30.10)



§ 30.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject
the violator to a civil penalty in the sum of $50 per day.



      (1)   A citation for said civil penalty shall be issued by the
Town Manager.



      (2)   Each citation for a civil penalty must be paid within 72
hours of issuance.



   (B)   Each and every day that the violator continues in violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense.



   (C)   This chapter may also be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



(1991 Code, § 30.11)



CHAPTER 31:  TOWN OFFICIALS



Section




General Provisions




   31.001   Official bonds



   31.002   Conflict of interest



   31.003   Fiscal and budgetary information to be provided



   31.004   Miscellaneous appointments




Mayor




   31.015   Powers and duties



   31.016   Mayor pro tempore




Town Manager




   31.030   Appointment; qualifications; term; compensation; absence or
disability



   31.031   Duties and powers




Finance Director




   31.040   Finance Director/Treasurer




Town Clerk




   31.045   Powers and duties



   31.046   Town Clerk to act as Town Accountant




Tax Collector




   31.060   Appointment; bond



   31.061   Powers and duties




Attorney




   31.075   Appointment; duties




Zoning Administrator




   31.090   Powers and duties



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.001  OFFICIAL BONDS.



   (A)   Every officer, employee or agent of the town who handles or
has custody of more than $100 of the town’s funds at any time shall, before
assuming his or her duties as such, be required to enter into bond with good
sureties, in an amount sufficient to protect the town, payable to the town,
and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties and a true
accounting for all funds of the town which may come into his or her hands,
custody or control, which bond shall be approved by the Mayor and Town Board
and deposited with the Town Clerk, except that such bond of any employee may,
in the discretion of the Mayor and Town Board, be conditioned only upon a
true accounting for funds of the town; provided, that the bond of the Town
Clerk, in whatever capacity he or she is bonded, shall be deposited in the
office of the Mayor.



   (B)   The town may adopt a system or blanket faithful performance or
honesty bonding as an alternative to individual bonds. When such a system is
adopted, statutory requirements of individual bonds, except as to the
Treasurer and Tax Collector, shall not apply to any officer or employee
covered by the blanket bond.



   (C)   All official bonds shall be approved as to form by the Town
Attorney.



(1991 Code, § 31.01)



§ 31.002  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   For provisions concerning conflict of interest standards, see G.S. §
14-234.



(1991 Code, § 31.02)



§ 31.003  FISCAL AND BUDGETARY INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of each town officer who is the head of
an office, department or agency of the town to file with the Town Manager on
or before May 1 each year:



      (1)   A complete statement of the amounts expended for each
item of expenditure in his or her office, department or agency, in the fiscal
year preceding the then current fiscal year;



      (2)   A complete statement of the amount expended and
estimated to be expended for each item in his or her office, department or
agency in the current fiscal year; and



      (3)   An estimate of the requirements of his or her office,
department or agency for each item in the budget year next ensuing.



   (B)   Such statements and estimates shall list each item of
expenditure in such form and in such detail as may be prescribed by the Town
Manager, and shall include such other supporting information as may be
prescribed by the Town Manager.



(1991 Code, § 31.03)



§ 31.004  MISCELLANEOUS APPOINTMENTS.



   Town officials whose appointment and term of office is not governed by
law or by this code shall be appointed in such manner as may from time to
time be provided by the Town Board, and shall hold office at the will of the
Mayor and the Town Board.



(1991 Code, § 31.04)



MAYOR



§ 31.015  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Mayor shall be the official head of the town for the
purpose of civil process and for all ceremonial purposes.



   (B)   The Mayor shall preside over, when present, all of the
meetings of the Town Board; and he or she shall do and perform such other and
further duties as may be imposed upon him or her by the Town Board.



(1991 Code, § 31.10)



§ 31.016  MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Town Board to the
office of Mayor pro tempore. The Mayor pro tempore shall have the powers and
perform the duties of the Mayor when the Mayor is temporarily absent, ill or
disabled.



   (B)   During the concurrent temporary absence, illness or disability
of both the Mayor and Mayor pro tempore, the oldest Commissioner in point of
age shall act as Mayor pro tempore until such absence, illness or other
disability of the Mayor or Mayor pro tempore shall cease.



(1991 Code, § 31.11)



TOWN MANAGER



§ 31.030  APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM; COMPENSATION; ABSENCE OR
DISABILITY.



   The Town Board shall appoint an officer whose title shall be Town
Manager and who shall be the head of the administration branch of the town
government. The Town Manager shall be chosen by the Town Board solely on the
basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with special
reference to his or her actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted
practice in respect to the duties of his or her office as hereinafter
prescribed. At the time of his or her appointment he or she need not be a
resident of the town, but shall reside within a ten-mile radius of the town
limits during his or her tenure of office. No person elected as Mayor or as a
member of the Town Board shall be eligible for appointment as Town Manager
until one year shall have elapsed following the expiration of the term for
which he or she was elected. The Town Manager shall serve at the pleasure of
the Town Board and shall receive such salary as the Town Board shall fix. In
case of absence or disability of the Town Manager, the Town Board may
designate a qualified administrative officer of the town to perform the
duties of the Manager during such absence or disability.



(1991 Code, § 31.20)  (Ord. passed 1-12-1982; Ord. passed 6-25-1985; Ord.
passed 5-13-1986; Ord. passed 9-19-1988; Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



§ 31.031  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   (A)   The Manager shall be the Chief Administrator of the town. At
the first meeting of the Town Board following each general election of
Commissioners, such Board shall appoint a Town Manager to serve at the will
and pleasure of the Board.



   (B)   He or she shall be responsible to the Town Board for
administering all municipal affairs placed in his or her charge by it and
shall have the following powers and duties:



      (1)   He or she shall appoint and suspend or remove all town
employees not elected by the people and whose appointment or removal is not
otherwise provided for by law except the Town Attorney, in accordance with
such general personnel rules, regulations, policies or ordinances as the Town
Board may adopt;



      (2)   He or she shall direct and supervise the administration
of all departments, offices and agencies of the town subject to the general
direction and control of the Town Board except as otherwise provided by law;



      (3)   He or she shall keep the Town Board currently informed
as to the condition of town affairs and may make such recommendations from
time to time as he or she considers desirable for the good of the town. At
the first meeting of the Board each month, he or she shall present to the
Board an account of the transactions of his or her office involving the
collection or expenditure of any money of the town;



      (4)   He or she shall attend all meetings of the Town Board
and recommend any measures that he or she deems expedient;



      (5)   He or she shall see that all laws of the state, the Town
Charter and the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the Town Board are
faithfully executed within the town;



      (6)   He or she shall prepare and submit the annual budget and
capital program to the Town Board;



      (7)   He or she shall annually submit to the Town Board and
make available to the public a complete report on the finances and
administrative activities of the town as of the end of the fiscal year;



      (8)   He or she shall make any other reports that the Town
Board may require concerning the operations of town departments, offices and
agencies subject to his or her direction and control;



      (9)   Recommend to the Board revisions to the personnel
ordinance, position classification and pay plan for its consideration;



      (10)   Determine administrative, professional and managerial
positions to be excluded for entitlement to overtime compensation, as
provided for;



      (11)   He or she shall serve as the Zoning Administrator;



      (12)   He or she shall serve as the Town Budget Officer; and



      (13)   He or she shall perform any other duties that may be
required or authorized by the Town Board.



(1991 Code, § 31.21)  (Ord. passed 1-12-1982; Ord. passed 6-25-1985; Ord.
passed 9-10-1985; Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



Cross-reference:



   Powers and duties of the Zoning Administrator, see § 31.090



FINANCE DIRECTOR



§ 31.040  FINANCE DIRECTOR/TREASURER.



   (A)   The Finance Director shall be the Town Treasurer/Accountant.



   (B)   The Finance Director shall be under the general direction and
supervision of the Town Manager.



   (C)   The Finance Director shall have the duties and powers as set
forth in the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, Article 3, Part
3.



(Ord. passed 10-12-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Appointment of Finance Officer, see G.S. § 159-25



   Powers and duties, see G.S. Ch. 159, Article 3, Part 3



TOWN CLERK



§ 31.045  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Clerk of the Town Board shall be ex officio Town Clerk, and as such
he or she shall have custody of the corporate seal and all town documents,
records and papers not appropriate to be in the custody of some other town
officer. Except as may be provided otherwise by law, this code or other
ordinance, the Town Clerk shall issue all licenses and permits, and receive
all petitions to the Town Board and claims against the town; and he or she
shall perform all duties imposed upon him or her by law or by the Town Board.



(1991 Code, § 31.30)  (Ord. passed 8-12-2008)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of City Clerk, see G.S. § 160A-171



§ 31.046  TOWN CLERK TO ACT AS TOWN ACCOUNTANT.



   (A)   At the first meeting of the Town Board following each general
election of Commissioners such Board shall designate the Town Clerk to be the
Town Accountant. Because the person upon whom the powers and duties of the
Town Accountant are imposed and conferred is also a tax collecting officer of
the town, it shall be the duty of the Town Board to require all his or her
books and accounts to be audited at least annually by a certified public
accountant or by a public accountant registered under G.S. Ch. 93.



   (B)   The Town Accountant shall have the following duties and powers:



      (1)   He or she shall advise with the heads of offices,
departments and agencies of the town and with state officers as to the best
and most convenient method of keeping accounts, and shall inform himself or
herself as to the best and simplest methods of keeping accounts, so as to
bring about as far as possible a simple, accurate and uniform system of
keeping accounts of the town;



      (2)   He or she shall keep the accounts of the town in
accordance with generally accepted principles of governmental accounting and
the rules and regulations of the State Local Government Commission; and



      (3)   He or she shall perform such other duties having
relation to the purposes of this section as may be imposed upon him or her by
the Town Board.



(1991 Code, § 31.31)



TAX COLLECTOR



§ 31.060  APPOINTMENT; BOND.



   The Town Board shall appoint a Tax Collector to collect all taxes owed
to the town per G.S. § 105-349.



(1991 Code, § 31.60)  (Ord. passed 7-5-1960; Ord. 2013-04, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 31.061  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Tax Collector shall perform those duties specified in G.S.
§ 105-350, and such other duties as required by law or as the Town Manager
or Town Board may prescribe.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the Town Board from
entering into the Interlocal Agreement with county or state agencies for the
collection of taxes and other duties of the Tax Collector.



(1991 Code, § 31.61) (Ord. 2013-04, passed 1-8-2013)



ATTORNEY



§ 31.075  APPOINTMENT; DUTIES.



   At the first meeting of the Town Board following each general election
of Commissioners, such Board shall appoint a Town Attorney to serve at the
will of the Board. The Town Attorney shall attend each meeting of the Town
Board; he or she shall prosecute and defend suits for and against the town
and for and against town officers acting in their official capacity; he or
she shall approve all official bonds as to form; he or she shall approve all
draft ordinances as to form, and, at the request of any Commissioner, he or
she shall approve any draft resolution as to form; he or she shall draft or
approve all deeds, contracts and other instruments relating to the business
of the town; he or she shall advise the Mayor and Town Board and other town
officers as to the legality and legal consequences of proposed courses of
action; and, in general, the Town Attorney shall be the legal counselor of
the town.



(1991 Code, § 31.70)



ZONING ADMINISTRATOR



§ 31.090  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator is appointed to maintain for public
inspection and to furnish upon request a record of elevations, in relation to
mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or
substantially improved structures located in the special flood hazard areas.
If the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides, the elevation of the
floor immediately above must also be recorded.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall review all building permit
applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed
new construction or substantial improvement, including prefabricated and
mobile homes, must be designed or modified and anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure; use construction materials and
utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and use construction
materials and practices that will minimize flood damage.



   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall review subdivision proposals
and other proposed new developments to assure that all such proposals are
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; all public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located,
elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and adequate
drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall require new or replacement
water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into flood waters, and require on-site waste disposal
systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from
them during flooding.



(1991 Code, § 31.80)  (Ord. passed 1-7-1975)



Cross-reference:



   Town Manager to be Zoning Administrator, see § 31.031(B)(12)



CHAPTER 32:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section




Police Department




   32.001   Chief of Police



   32.002   Organization and duties of Department



   32.003   Rules and regulations



   32.004   Uniforms, insignia and equipment



   32.005   Organization of auxiliary police




Fire Department




   32.020   Organization; Chief; chain of command



   32.021   Duties of Chief



   32.022   Rules and regulations



   32.023   Uniforms, insignia and equipment



   32.024   Authority of members; interference with firefighter
prohibited



   32.025   Constitution and by-laws for volunteer members



   32.026   Mutual aid agreement



   32.027   Exemption from state OSHA regulations



   32.028   Interference with firefighters prohibited; obstructing fire
station



   32.029   Unauthorized riding on firefighting apparatus




Senior Citizens Advisory Board




   32.040   Creation



   32.041   Terms of members



   32.042   Annual meeting and election of officers



   32.043   Rules and regulations



   32.044   Powers and duties




Planning Board




   32.055   Creation



   32.056   Composition; terms of members; vacancies



   32.057   Organization; rules and records



   32.058   Appropriations and expenditures



   32.059   Powers and duties




Recreation Board




   32.070   Creation; members; vacancies; compensation



   32.071   Terms of members



   32.072   Annual meeting and election of officers



   32.073   Rules and regulations



   32.074   Powers and duties



   32.075   Authority to accept gifts; contractual authority;
expenditures




Tree and Appearance Advisory Commission




   32.090   Creation



   32.091   Members



   32.092   Meetings



   32.093   Powers and duties




Beautification Board




   32.100   Creation



   32.101   Terms of members



   32.102   Organizational meeting



   32.103   Regular meetings



   32.104   Purpose of Board




Flatwoods Rural Fire District Advisory Board




   32.120   Creation



   32.121   Terms of members



   32.122   Annual meeting and election of officers



   32.123   Rules and regulations



   32.124   Powers and duties




Alcoholic Beverage Control Board




   32.140   Composition and terms



   32.141   Powers




Botanical Trail Advisory Board




   32.150   Creation



   32.151   Terms of members



   32.152   Annual meeting and election of officers



   32.153   Rules and regulations



   32.154   Powers and duties



 



   32.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Town Board, see Ch. 30



   Town officials, see Ch. 31



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.001  CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief of Police, under the general direction and supervision of the
Town Manager shall have immediate control and management of the Police
Department and shall exercise command over the personnel of the Department.



(1991 Code, § 32.01)



§ 32.002  ORGANIZATION AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Police Department, headed by the Chief of Police, shall have such
personnel, such ranks, as shall from time to time be authorized by the Town
Board. It shall be the duty of the Police Department to be diligent in the
enforcement of the laws of the state and the provisions of this code and
other ordinances within the town and the police jurisdiction thereof.



(1991 Code, § 32.02)



§ 32.003  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Town Manager in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall
prepare rules and regulations for the government of the Police Department and
the personnel thereof. Such rules and regulations, which may be amended from
time to time, shall be submitted to the Town Board for approval. It shall be
unlawful for any member of the Police Department to violate any such rule or
regulation which has been approved by resolution of the Town Board and placed
on file in the office of the Town Clerk; and a copy of all such approved
rules and regulations shall also be placed on file at police headquarters.



(1991 Code, § 32.03)  Penalty, see 32.999



§ 32.004  UNIFORMS, INSIGNIA AND EQUIPMENT.



   Uniforms, insignia and items of equipment for members of the Police
Department shall be as prescribed in the departmental rules and regulations
as approved by the Town Board; and the Town Board may, in the annual budget
ordinances or by ordinance or resolution at other times, provide that the
town shall furnish certain items of uniform, insignia and equipment of
members of the Police Department free of charge, or on memorandum receipt.



(1991 Code, § 32.04)



§ 32.005  ORGANIZATION OF AUXILIARY POLICE.



   There is established within the Town Police Department, as a division
thereof, an auxiliary police force. The auxiliary police division shall be a
volunteer force, whose members shall serve without compensation or fringe
benefits, but shall be eligible for workers’ compensation coverage and
shall be composed of as many members as may from time to time be determined
by the Chief of Police and approved by the Town Manager.



(Ord. passed 5-11-2004)



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.020  ORGANIZATION; CHIEF; CHAIN OF COMMAND.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of such full-time and
volunteer members, and such quarters, vehicles, apparatus, equipment and
other personal property as may from time to time be authorized by the Town
Board.



   (B)   The organization of the Fire Department shall be as provided
by regulations promulgated pursuant to § 32.022.



   (C)   The Chief of the Fire Department, under general supervision of
the Town Manager, shall have direct control of the members and property of
the Fire Department and shall be in command of the members. Members of the
Fire Department shall assume command in order of rank, as prescribed in
departmental rules and regulations.



(1991 Code, § 32.10)



§ 32.021  DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   In addition to his or her duties as commanding officer of the Fire
Department, the Fire Chief shall perform all duties prescribed for him or her
by this code and other ordinances and by the General Statutes of North
Carolina.



(1991 Code, § 32.11)



§ 32.022  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Town Manager, in consultation with the Chief of the Fire
Department, shall prepare rules and regulations for the government of the
Fire Department and the personnel thereof. Such rules and regulations, which
may be amended from time to time, shall be submitted to the Town Board for
approval. It shall be unlawful for any member of the Fire Department to
violate any such rule or regulation which has been approved by resolution of
the Town Board and placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk; and a copy
of all such approved rules and regulations shall also be placed on file at
Fire Department headquarters.



(1991 Code, § 32.12)  Penalty, see § 32.999



§ 32.023  UNIFORMS, INSIGNIA AND EQUIPMENT.



   Uniforms, insignia and items of equipment for members of the Fire
Department shall be as prescribed in the departmental rules and regulations
as approved by the Town Board, and the Town Board may, in the annual budget
ordinances or by ordinance or resolution at other times, provide that the
town shall furnish certain items of uniform, insignia and equipment to
members of the Fire Department free of charge, or on memorandum receipt.



(1991 Code, § 32.13)



§ 32.024  AUTHORITY OF MEMBERS; INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTER PROHIBITED.



   Members of the Fire Department shall have authority to do all acts
reasonably necessary to extinguish fires and protect life and property from
fire; and it shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner of
property which is burning, forcibly to interfere in any manner with any
firefighter in order to hinder him or her in the performance of his or her
duty.



(1991 Code, § 32.14)  Penalty, see § 32.999



§ 32.025  CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR VOLUNTEER MEMBERS.



   The constitution and by-laws applicable to volunteer members of the
Fire Department shall be consistent with state law, this code and other
ordinances and the rules and regulations of the Fire Department, and
provision shall be made for election of officers during the month of July in
each odd number year and for the holding of at least one practice drill per
month, with the names of those participating to be reported monthly to Chief
of the Fire Department. Such constitution and by-laws and all amendments
thereto shall be approved by the Town Board, by resolution of motion, and
filed in the office of the Town Clerk, before taking effect. A copy of such
approved constitution and by-laws shall also be on file in the office of the
Chief of the Fire Department.



(1991 Code, § 32.15)  (Ord. passed 5-19-1961)



§ 32.026  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.



   The Fire Department shall be permitted to go out of town and assist
other fire departments as provided in the mutual aid contract now in
existence and as may be amended from time to time, upon request of such fire
departments when needed in such fire districts; provided, that the town is
not left without adequate firefighters and equipment for fire protection in
the town.



(1991 Code, § 32.16)  (Ord. passed 1-4-1972)



§ 32.027  EXEMPTION FROM STATE OSHA REGULATIONS.



   The Fire Department shall be exempt from the regulations of the
Occupational Safety and Health Act of the state as set forth in G.S. §
95-148.



(1991 Code, § 32.17)  (Res., passed 9-13-1983)



§ 32.028  INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS PROHIBITED; OBSTRUCTING FIRE
STATION.



   No person shall forcibly interfere with a firefighter in order to
hinder him or her in the discharge of his or her duty; nor shall any person
engage in any activity which would obstruct ingress or egress to the fire
station.



(1991 Code, § 32.18)  Penalty, see § 32.999



§ 32.029  UNAUTHORIZED RIDING ON FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Chief of the
Fire Department to ride upon any town firefighting apparatus when responding
to a fire alarm.



(1991 Code, § 32.19)  Penalty, see § 32.999



SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD



§ 32.040  CREATION.



   A Senior Citizens Advisory Board, hereby referred to as the
“Board”, for the town is hereby created and shall consist of five
members, appointed by the Town Board. The Board, serving in an advisory
capacity to the Town Board, will be composed of at least three members which
are town residents. Each member shall serve for a term of three years.
Vacancies in the membership of the Senior Citizens Advisory Board shall be
filled for the unexpired term by appointment of the Town Board. The members
of the Board shall serve without compensation. The Town Manager and Parks and
Recreation Director shall serve as ex-officio members of the Board.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 4-9-2013)



§ 32.041  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   The initial appointment of the members shall be as follows: two members
for a term of three years and two members for a term of two years and one
member for a term of one year. Thereafter, as the expiration of the
appointment of each member, the new member shall be appointed for a full
three-year term, to take office on the first day of July, so that the terms
of office shall be staggered. The seat of any member who shall be absent from
three consecutive regular monthly meetings shall be deemed vacant.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 4-9-2013)



§ 32.042  ANNUAL MEETING AND ELECTION OF OFFICERS.



   The Board shall, annually and as soon as practical after the
appointment of the new members thereof, meet for the purpose of organizing
and shall elect from its membership, a chairman and secretary and such
officers as shall be deemed proper for the conduct of its business. All
members shall be entitled to vote.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 4-9-2013)



§ 32.043  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Board shall adopt rules and regulations for its governance
and for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of
attendance at its meetings and minutes of recommendations, findings, and
determinations showing the vote of each member of each item requiring a vote.
The records of the Board shall be a public record.



   (B)   The quorum for a meeting of the Board shall be at least 50% of
the non-vacant seats on the Board. The Board shall meet on a bi-monthly
calendar.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 4-9-2013)



§ 32.044  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board shall make recommendations to the Town Board on programs and
events for Senior Citizens to include plans, budgets, rules and regulations
involving senior citizens programs.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 4-9-2013)



PLANNING BOARD



§ 32.055  CREATION.



   A Planning Board, hereinafter referred to as the “Board,” for the
town and its environs is hereby created under the authority of the G.S. Ch.
160A, Art. 19.



(1991 Code, § 32.45)  (Ord. passed 8-7-1973)



§ 32.056  COMPOSITION; TERMS OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES.



   The Planning Board shall consist of six members, three from the
corporate limits of the town and three from the one-mile territorial
jurisdiction, who shall be appointed by the Town Commissioners. Three members
shall be appointed for a term of two years and three members shall be
appointed for a term of one year. As the terms of these six members expire,
new appointments for terms of two years shall be made. The appointment of
members shall be made as vacancies occur by expiration of the term of office
or at such other time as vacancies occur.



(1991 Code, § 32.46)  (Ord. passed 8-7-1973)



§ 32.057  ORGANIZATION; RULES AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The Planning Board shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson
and Secretary from among the appointed members, and may create such other
offices as it may determine. All members shall be entitled to vote. Terms of
all elected officers shall be for one year, with eligibility for re-election.



   (B)   The Board shall adopt rules for its governance and for the
transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of attendance at its
meetings and of resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations
showing the vote of each member on each question requiring a vote, or if
absent or abstaining from voting, indicating such fact. The records of the
Board shall be a public record.



(1991 Code, § 32.47)  (Ord. passed 8-7-1973)



§ 32.058  APPROPRIATIONS AND EXPENDITURES.



   The Town Board shall make available to the Planning Board such
appropriations as it may see fit for salaries, fees and expenses necessary in
the conduct of its work. The Board shall have authority to expend all sums so
appropriated and other sums made available for its use from grants, gifts and
other sources for the purposes and activities authorized by this subchapter.



(1991 Code, § 32.48)  (Ord. passed 8-7-1973)



§ 32.059  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Planning Board shall perform those powers and duties as expressed
in the G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, §§ 160A-361 and 160A-363.



(1991 Code, § 32.49)  (Ord. passed 8-7-1973)



RECREATION BOARD



§ 32.070  CREATION; MEMBERS; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION.



   There is hereby created a Recreation Board which shall consist of five
members, appointed by the Town Board. One member from in or out of the town;
three members shall be residents of the town and two members from out of
town. Each member shall serve for a term of three years and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualifies. Vacancies in the membership of the
Recreation Board shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment of the
Town Board. The members of the Recreation Board shall serve without
compensation.



(1991 Code, § 32.55)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987; Ord. passed 5-9-1989; Ord.
passed 3-9-1993; Ord. passed 11-17-1993)



§ 32.071  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   Initial appointment of the members shall be as follows: one member for
a term of three years from in town; two members for a term of two years, one
from town and one from out of town; and two members for a term of one year,
one from in town and one from out of town. Thereafter at the expiration of
the appointment of each member, the new member shall be appointed for a full
three-year term, to take office on the first day of March, so that the terms
of office shall be staggered. The seat of any member who shall be absent from
three consecutive regular monthly meetings shall be deemed to be vacant.



(1991 Code, § 32.56)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987; Ord. passed 5-9-1989; Ord.
passed 3-9-1993; Ord. passed 11-17-1993)



§ 32.072  ANNUAL MEETING AND ELECTION OF OFFICERS.



   The Recreation Board shall, annually and as soon as practical after the
appointment of the new members thereof, meet for the purpose of organizing
and shall elect from its membership a Chairperson and such other officers as
shall be deemed proper for the conduct of its business.



(1991 Code, § 32.57)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)



§ 32.073  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Recreation Board shall adopt rules and regulations governing its
procedure, not inconsistent with the provisions of state law. The Recreation
Board shall hold regular meetings on the first Tuesday of each month at 7:00
p.m.



(1991 Code, § 32.58)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987; Ord. passed 5-9-1989)



§ 32.074  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Recreation Board shall plan and develop recreation programs
associated with the town park and playground areas and other recreation
facilities owned or controlled by the town or leased for recreational
purposes. The Board may recommend to the Town Manager plans, budgets, rules
and regulations involving recreation programs. The Board may conduct
recreational and cultural activities.



(1991 Code, § 32.59)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987; Ord. passed 3-9-1993)



§ 32.075  AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT GIFTS; CONTRACTUAL AUTHORITY; EXPENDITURES.



   The Recreation Board shall present to the Town Board for its
acceptance, any grant, gift, bequest or donation of any personal property
offered or made for recreational purposes. Any gift, bequest of money or
other personal property, grant or devise of real estate shall be held, used
and finally disposed of in accordance with the terms or to enter into any
contract or incur any obligation binding the town.



(1991 Code, § 32.60)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987; Ord. passed 3-9-1993)



TREE AND APPEARANCE ADVISORY COMMISSION



§ 32.090  CREATION.



   The Town Tree and Appearance Advisory Commission is hereby created
under the authority of G.S. §§ 160A-451 through 160A-454.



(Ord. passed 5-9-1995)



§ 32.091  MEMBERS.



   (A)   Seven members shall be appointed by the Town Board of
Commissioners.



   (B)   Each member shall serve for a term of three years and until
his or her successor is appointed and qualifies, provided that the initial
Commission members shall be appointed as follows:



      (1)   Two members for two years;



      (2)   Two members for three years; and



      (3)   Three members for four years.



   (C)   Vacancies in the membership of the Commission shall be filled
for the unexpired term by appointment of the Town Board of Commissioners.



   (D)   The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. passed 5-9-1995)



§ 32.092  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Commission shall, as soon as practical after the
appointment of the new members thereof, meet for the purpose of organizing
and shall elect from its membership a Chairperson and such other officers as
shall be deemed proper for the conduct of its business.



   (B)   The Commission shall hold regular meetings on the first Monday
of each month at 7:00 p.m.



(Ord. passed 5-9-1995)



§ 32.093  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Commission shall provide recommendations to the Town Board
of Commissioners as to the enhancement and improvement of the visual quality
of trees or other plantings within the street rights-of-way or on other
public property and as to other projects for the aesthetic enhancement of the
town, and other recommendations as may be requested by the Town Board of
Commissioners.



   (B)   The Commission shall present to the Town Board of
Commissioners for its acceptance, any grant, gift, bequest or donation of any
personal property offered or made. Any gift, bequest of money or other
personal property, grant or devise of real estate shall be held, used and
finally disposed of in accordance with the terms or conditions under which
such grant, gift or devise is made and accepted. The Commission shall have no
authority to enter into any contract or incur any obligation binding the town.



(Ord. passed 5-9-1995)



BEAUTIFICATION BOARD



§ 32.100  CREATION.



   The Town of Lillington Beautification Board is hereby created as an
advisory board.



(Ord. passed 6-13-1995; Ord. passed 10-10-2005)



§ 32.101  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   Seven members shall be appointed by the Town Board of
Commissioners. Each member shall serve for a term of three years and until
his or her successor is appointed and qualifies, provided that the initial
Board members shall be appointed as follows:



      (1)   Two members for two years;



      (2)   Two members for three years; and



      (3)   Three members for four years



   (B)   No more than three members of the Board may be non-residents
of the town. Vacancies in the membership of the Board shall be filled for the
unexpired term by appointment of the Town Board of Commissioners. The members
of the Board shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. passed 6-13-1995)



§ 32.102  ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.



   The Board shall, as soon as practical after the appointment of the new
members thereof, meet for the purpose of organizing and shall elect from its
membership a chairman and such other officers as shall be deemed proper for
the conduct of its business.



(Ord. passed 6-13-1995)



§ 32.103  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The Board shall hold regular meetings on the first Monday of each month
at 7:00 p.m.



(Ord. passed 6-13-1995)



§ 32.104  PURPOSE OF BOARD.



   The Board shall advise and provide recommendations to the Town Board of
Commissioners as to the enhancement and improvement of the visual quality of
trees or other plantings on public property and as to other projects for the
aesthetic enhancement of the town, and other recommendations as may be
requested by the Town Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. passed 6-13-1995)



FLATWOODS RURAL FIRE DISTRICT ADVISORY BOARD



§ 32.120  CREATION.



   A Flatwoods Rural Fire District Advisory Board, hereafter referred to
as the “Board”, for the town is hereby created and shall consist of five
members, appointed by the Town Board. The Board, serving in an advisory
capacity to the Town Board, will be composed of members which are residents
of the Flatwoods Rural Fire District. Each member shall serve for a term of
three years. Vacancies in the membership of the Board shall be filled for the
unexpired term by appointment of the Town Board. The members of the Board
shall serve without compensation. The Fire Chief shall serve as staff liaison
to the Board.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 8-13-2013)



§ 32.121  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   The initial appointment of the members shall be as follows: two members
for a term of three years, two members for a term of two years and one member
for a term of one year. Thereafter, as the expiration of the appointment of
each member, the new member shall be appointed for a full three-year term, to
take office on the first day of July, so that the terms of office shall be
staggered. The seat of any member who shall be absent from three consecutive
regular monthly meetings shall be deemed to be vacant.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 8-13-2013)



§ 32.122  ANNUAL MEETING AND ELECTION OF OFFICERS.



   The Board shall, annually and as soon as practical after the
appointment of the new members thereof, meet for the purpose of organizing
and shall elect from its membership a chairman and secretary and such
officers as shall be deemed proper for the conduct of its business. All
members shall be entitled to vote.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 8-13-2013)



§ 32.123  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Board shall adopt rules and regulations for its governance
and for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of
attendance at its meetings and minutes of discussions, recommendations,
findings, and determinations showing the vote of each member on each item
requiring a vote. The records of the Board shall be a public record.



   (B)   The quorum for a meeting of the Board shall be at least 50% of
the non-vacant seats on the Board. The Board shall meet on a bi-monthly
calendar.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 8-13-2013)



§ 32.124  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board shall make recommendations to the Town Board on service
provisions, equipment and facility recommendations and programs to increase
the effectiveness of fire protection services to the Flatwoods Rural Fire
District.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 8-13-2013)



ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL BOARD



§ 32.140  COMPOSITION AND TERMS OF BOARD.



   The Mayor and governing body of the town shall immediately appoint a
town Alcoholic Beverage Control Board to be composed of a chairman and two
other members who shall be well known for their character, ability and
business acumen. Said Board shall be known and designated as “The Town of
Lillington Board of Alcoholic Control.” The chairman of said Board shall be
designated by the Board of Commissioners of the town and shall serve for his
or her first term a period of three years, and one member shall serve shall
serve his or her first term for a period of two years, and the other member
shall serve for a period of one year; and all terms shall begin with the date
of their appointment, and after the first terms shall have expired, their
successors in office shall serve for a period of three years. All initial
appointments, successors, or any vacancy occurring in the Board, shall be
named or filled by the Board of Commissioners. The Board of Alcoholic Control
shall report monthly to the Town Board the status and financial condition of
the Alcoholic Control Board and the books of the said Board of Alcoholic
Control shall be available for inspection and examination by the members of
the Town Board at any time.



(Ord. 2014-09, passed 10-8-2013)



§ 32.141  POWERS OF BOARD.



   The Board of Alcoholic Control shall have all of the powers and duties
imposed by G.S. § 18B-701, except as otherwise provided herein, and shall be
subject to the powers and authority of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission. The Board of Alcoholic Control and the operation of any town
liquor store authorized under the provisions of this Act shall be subject to
and in pursuance with the provisions of state statutes, except to the extent
which the same may be in conflict with the provisions of the session laws
from which this section is derived.



(Ord. 2014-09, passed 10-8-2013)



BOTANICAL TRAIL ADVISORY BOARD



§ 32.150  CREATION.



   A Botanical Trail Advisory Board, hereafter referred to as the "Board",
for the town is hereby created and shall consist of three members, appointed
by the Lillington Town Board.  The Board serves in an advisory capacity to
the Town Board. Each member shall serve for a term of three years. Vacancies
in membership for an unexpired term shall be filled by appointment of the
Lillington Town Board. The members of the Board shall serve without
compensation. The Public Works Director and Town Planner shall serve as
ex-officio members of the Board.



(Ord. 2017-01, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 32.151  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   Initial appointment of the members shall be as follows: One member for
a term of three years and one member for a term of two years and one member
for a term of one year. Thereafter as the expiration of the appointment of
each member, the new member shall be appointed for a full three-year term, to
take office on the first day of October, so that the terms of office shall be
staggered. The seat of any member who shall be absent from three consecutive
regular monthly meetings shall be deemed to be vacant.



(Ord. 2017-01, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 32.152  ANNUAL MEETING AND ELECTION OF OFFICERS.



   The Board shall, annually and as soon as practical after the
appointment of the new members thereof, meet for the purpose of organizing
and shall elect from its membership a chairman and secretary and such
officers as shall be deemed proper for the conduct of its business. All
members shall be entitled to vote.



(Ord. 2017-01, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 32.153  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Board shall adopt rules and regulations for its governance
and for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of
attendance at its meetings and minutes of recommendations, findings, and
determinations showing the vote of each member on each item requiring a vote.
The records of the Board shall be a public record.



   (B)   The quorum for a meeting of the Board shall be at least 50% of
the non-vacant seats on the Board. The Board shall meet on a bi-monthly
calendar.



(Ord. 2017-01, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 32.154  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board shall make recommendations to the Town Board on programs and
improvements for the botanical trail to include plans, budgets, rules and
regulations involving use of the trail.



(Ord. 2017-01, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 32.999  PENALTY.



   If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



(1991 Code, § 32.99)



CHAPTER 33:  ELECTIONS



Section



   33.01   Nonpartisan policy



   33.02   Registration of eligible voters



§ 33.01  NONPARTISAN POLICY.



   (A)   All elections for members of the Town Board shall be on a
nonpartisan basis as described in G.S. Ch. 163, Art. 23.



   (B)   The result of all municipal elections shall be determined on
the nonpartisan plurality method as set out in G.S. §§ 163-290 and 163-292.



(1991 Code, § 33.01)  (Ord. passed 12-20-1972)



§ 33.02  REGISTRATION OF ELIGIBLE VOTERS.



   The registration of eligible voters shall be conducted pursuant to G.S.
§ 163-288(a) and as further prescribed by applicable state law. Further,
absentee voting shall also be permissible as set forth in G.S. § 163-302
(Absentee Voting in Municipal Elections).



(1991 Code, § 33.02)  (Ord. passed 12-20-1972; Res., passed 12-12-1989)



CHAPTER 34:  TOWN POLICIES



Section



   34.01   Policy to favor resident businesses



   34.02   Insurance



   34.03   Bills and claims against town; warrants for payment



   34.04   Disposal of personal property valued at less than $500



   34.05   Claims or civil judgments against town officers and employees



§ 34.01  POLICY TO FAVOR RESIDENT BUSINESSES.



   In the purchase or rental of supplies, equipment or services, the town
shall, give preference as far as may be practicable to those furnished by or
through citizens of the town; provided, however, that in giving such
preference no sacrifice or loss in price or quality shall be permitted.



(1991 Code, § 34.01)  (Ord. passed 3-3-1964)



§ 34.02  INSURANCE.



   The Town Board may authorize the Town Manager, on behalf of the town,
to contract with one or more insurance companies authorized to do business in
this state to protect the town, and town officers and employees while acting
in line of duty, against losses arising from public liability, fire, theft,
hail, windstorm and other causes, the amount and terms of policies to be as
prescribed by the Town Board and agreed upon by the insurers.



(1991 Code, § 34.02)



§ 34.03  BILLS AND CLAIMS AGAINST TOWN; WARRANTS FOR PAYMENT.



   (A)   No bill or claim against the town shall be paid unless it
shall have been approved by the head of the office, department or agency for
which the expense was incurred nor unless it shall have been presented to and
approved by the Town Manager, or in the case of his or her disapproval of
such bill or claim, by the Town Board. The Town Board shall not approve any
bill or claim which has been disallowed by the Town Manager without entering
upon the minutes its reason for approving the bill or claim in such detail as
may show the reason for reversing the Town Manager’s disallowance.



   (B)   No bill or claim against the town shall be paid except by
means of a warrant or order on the Treasurer or depository, and no warrant or
order, except a warrant or order for the payment of maturing bonds, notes or
interest coupons thereto appertaining, and except a warrant or order for the
payment of any bill or claim approved by the Town Board over the disallowance
of the Town Manager as above provided, shall be valid unless it shall bear
the signature of the Town Clerk and the Town Manager or a member of the Town
Board below a statement which he or she shall cause to be written, printed,
stamped or typewritten thereon containing the words:



      “Provision for the payment of this warrant (or order) has been
made by an appropriation duly made or a bond or note duly authorized, as
required by the Municipal Fiscal Control Act.”



   (C)   Before any warrant for the payment of a bill or claim against
the town is paid, all back taxes and other debts due the town by the claimant
shall be deducted.



(1991 Code, § 34.03)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1952)



§ 34.04  DISPOSAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY VALUED AT LESS THAN $500.



   (A)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized, pursuant to G.S. §
160A-266(c), to dispose of any surplus personal property owned by the town
whenever he or she determines, in his or her discretion that:



      (1)   The item or group of items has a fair market value of
less than $500;



      (2)   The property is no longer necessary for the conduct of
public business; and



      (3)   Sound property management principles and financial
considerations indicate that the interests of the town would best be served
by disposing of the property.



   (B)   The Town Manager may dispose of any such surplus personal
property by any means which he or she judges reasonably calculated to yield
the highest attainable sale price in money or other consideration, including,
but not limited to, the methods of sale provided in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 12.
Such sale may be public or private, and with or without notice and minimum
waiting period.



   (C)   The surplus property shall be sold to the party who tenders
the highest offer, or exchanged for any property or services useful to the
town if greater value may be obtained in that manner, and the Town Manager is
hereby authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title documents. If
no offers are received within a reasonable time, the Town Manager may retain
the property, obtain any reasonable available salvage value, or cause it to
be disposed of as waste material. No surplus property may be donated to any
individual or organization except by resolution of the Town Board.



   (D)   The Town Manager shall, on or before February 1, report in
writing to the Town Board on any property disposed of under these provisions
from July 1 through December 31 of the previous year, and shall, on or before
August 1, report in writing to the Town Board on any property disposed of
under these provisions from January 1 through June 30 of that year. The
written report shall generally describe the property sold or exchanged, to
whom it was sold, or with whom exchanged, and the amount of money or other
consideration received for each sale or exchange since the last such report
was submitted.



(1991 Code, § 34.04)  (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)



§ 34.05  CLAIMS OR CIVIL JUDGMENTS AGAINST TOWN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   It shall be the policy of the town to pay defense costs,
expenses, judgments, interest on judgments, deductibles on insurance policies
and other related costs on behalf of its officers and employees against civil
claims and judgments; and to satisfy the same either through the purchase of
insurance or otherwise, provided adoption of this section shall not deemed an
assumption of liability for payment of claims or judgments in excess of any
fund established by the Board for payment of claims or judgments in addition
to any insurance coverage or any combination of such a fund and insurance
coverage. Further, the town will not defend a claim or lawsuit or pay a claim
or judgement when the officer or employee willfully:



      (1)   Acts or fails to act because of actual fraud, corruption
or actual malice;



      (2)   Acts or fails to act as a result of or at a time when
this self-indulgence substantially impaired his or her judgement (as, for
example, an officer or employee who causes damage or injury while intoxicated
or under the influence of drugs while on the job);



      (3)   Acts or fails to act, except in emergencies or the
existence of extenuating circumstances, directly contrary to instructions
from his or her superior, or directly contrary to advice of the Town
Attorney; or



      (4)   Acts or fails to act in such manner as to constitute a
criminal act (as, for example, misappropriation of property or funds).



   (B)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall determine
whether or not a claim or suit filed against an officer or employee meets the
requirements specified herein for providing a defense for such officer or
employee. If the Town Manager or his or her designee determines that a claim
or suit does not meet the requirements specified herein, the affected officer
or employee may appeal said determination to the Town Board. The Town Board
shall afford the officer or employee a hearing on the matter and shall decide
whether or not the claim or suit meets the requirements of this section.



   (C)   The terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE as used herein shall mean
present or past Mayors and members of the Board, officers, employees or
volunteers and present or past appointed members of town boards, agencies,
committees and commissioners who might hereafter have claims or judgments
entered against them.



   (D)   The policies specified herein shall not be applicable unless
notice of the claim or suit is given to the Town Board through the Town
Manager or Town Attorney prior to the time the claim is settled or civil suit
is litigated and judgement is entered.



   (E)   This section shall not be interpreted in any way to relieve
any insurance company of its obligation under any insurance policy to protect
the interest of any insured under said policy, or to reduce or eliminate the
rights of any officer or employee of the town against any other party.
Further, except as expressly stated herein, this section is not to be
interpreted as a waiver of any rights the town has against any party. Nor
shall the adoption of this section be construed to waive the defense of
governmental immunity.



   (F)   This section is effective December 13, 1988 and shall
constitute uniform standards under which claims made or civil judgments
entered against officers or employees of the town shall be paid. A copy of
this section shall be maintained in the office of the Town Clerk for public
inspection during all normal business hours.



(1991 Code, § 34.05)  (Res., passed 12-13-1988)



CHAPTER 35:  FINANCES



Section




General Provisions




   35.01   Revenue-Sharing Trust Fund



   35.02   Designation of central depository




Budget




   35.15   Budget Officer



   35.16   Transfers of money



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  REVENUE-SHARING TRUST FUND.



   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established on the books of the town,
a trust fund to be known as the Revenue-Sharing Trust Fund.



      (2)   The Trust Fund shall remain available without fiscal
year limitation, and shall consist of such amounts as may be appropriated to
it and deposited in it from funds made available to the town by the United
States Treasury pursuant to the Local Government Fiscal Assistance Fund, 31
U.S.C. §§ 6701 through 6720.



   (B)   All money disbursed from the Trust Fund shall be disbursed
through a special checking account established for the Trust Fund in an
official depository of the town.



   (C)   The Town Clerk is authorized to invest and reinvest all or any
portion of the money in the Trust Fund in deposits and securities eligible
for investment of local funds under state law until such time as the money is
actually needed.



(1991 Code, § 35.01)  (Ord. passed 12-20-1972)



Editor’s note:



   The Federal Revenue Sharing Program upon which this Trust Fund is
based, is currently not in operation.



§ 35.02  DESIGNATION OF CENTRAL DEPOSITORY.



   The town shall implement a central depository as shall be designated by
the Town Board.



(1991 Code, § 35.02)  (Res. passed 6-6-1989)



BUDGET



§ 35.15  BUDGET OFFICER.



   The Town Manager shall serve as Budget Officer.



(Ord. 98-, passed 6-27-1998; Ord. 2002, passed 6-11-2002; Ord. 2003, passed
6-10-2003; Ord. 2004, passed 6-8-2004; Ord. 2005, passed 6-14-2005; Ord.
2006-2007, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 2007-2008, passed 6-12-2007; Ord.
2008-2009, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 2009-2010, passed 6- -2009; Ord. 2010,
passed 6-22-2010)



§ 35.16  TRANSFERS OF MONEY.



   The Budget Officer is authorized to effect interdepartmental and
intradepartmental transfers of $1,500 or less. Notification of all transfers
shall be made to the Board of Commissioners at the next regular meeting,
following the transfer.



(Ord. 98-, passed 6-27-1998; Ord. 2002, passed 6-11-2002; Ord. 2003, passed
6-10-2003; Ord. 2004, passed 6-8-2004; Ord. 2005, passed 6-14-2005; Ord.
2006-2007, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 2007-2008, passed 6-12-2007; Ord.
2008-2009, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 2009-2010, passed 6- -2009; Ord. 2010,
passed 6-22-2010)



CHAPTER 36:  TAXATION



Section



   36.01   Duty to list property



   36.02   Information to be filed



   36.03   Penalty for failure to list



   36.04   Levy of ad valorem taxes



   36.05   Authority to collect personal property tax by levy and sale



§ 36.01  DUTY TO LIST PROPERTY.



   Pursuant to authority contained in G.S. §§ 160A-206, 160A-209 and
105-301 et seq., all persons owning any property, whether real, personal or
mixed, subject to ad valorem taxation by the town, shall list such property
with the County Tax Office between the first business day of the month of
January and, unless extended by the county as set forth in G.S. § 105-307,
the last business day of the month of January.



(1991 Code, § 37.01)  (Ord. passed 10-2-1956)



§ 36.02  INFORMATION TO BE FILED.



   Each person who, under § 36.01, is required to list property for
taxation, shall file with the County Tax Office a tax list setting forth all
of the information required under the provisions of G.S. § 105-309, and such
listing shall be performed in the manner prescribed by G.S. §§ 105-301
through 105-312.



(1991 Code, § 37.02)  (Ord. passed 10-2-1956)



§ 36.03  PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO LIST.



   A penalty for failure to list property before the close of any regular
listing period shall be assessed and collected, as set forth in G.S. §§
105-308, 105-310 and 105-312.



(1991 Code, § 37.03)  (Ord. passed 10-2-1956)



§ 36.04  LEVY OF AD VALOREM TAXES.



   The Town Board shall annually levy and cause to be collected, for the
purpose of raising revenue for defraying the expenses incident to the proper
government of the town and for other purposes authorized by law, an ad
valorem tax on all taxable property in the town at a rate not exceeding that
which is specified in G.S. § 160A-209.



(1991 Code, § 37.04)



§ 36.05  AUTHORITY TO COLLECT PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX BY LEVY AND SALE.



   The Tax Collector, on and after September 1 in each year, shall have
power and authority to levy upon and sell the property of any person liable
for taxation as set forth in G.S. § 105-321.



(1991 Code, § 37.05)  (Ord. passed - -1930)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE



      51.   WATER AND SEWERS



      52.   SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Disposal of offensive wastes



   50.03   Deposit or burning of waste on streets



   50.04   Storage in proper receptacles



   50.05   Restricting the deposit of materials in residential and
commercial dumpsters




Town Collection Service




   50.15   Collection vehicles to remain on public streets and alleys;
collectors to take garbage cans from residents’ yards



   50.16   Collection of building, demolition or land clearing debris



   50.17   Tire collection



   50.18   Debris other than garbage



   50.19   Removal of animal carcasses



   50.20   Additional rules and regulations



   50.21   Scheduled collection times




Residential and Commercial Dumpsters




   50.35   Definitions



   50.36   Prohibited deposits



   50.37   Effective date




Fees




   50.50   Fees



 



   50.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Wastewater pretreatment, see Ch. 52



   Water and sewer, see Ch. 51



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of §§ 50.01 through 50.04 and 50.15 through 50.20,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   APPROPRIATE GARBAGE RECEPTACLES. For residential owners, shall be
32-gallon or smaller garbage cans which are water-tight and equipped with a
fly-proof cover.



   GARBAGE and REFUSE. Includes all residential waste, including animal
and vegetable matter, and all recognizable commercial waste. The terms shall
not include any sewage or human waste and shall not include pruned shrubbery,
wood, products, discarded furniture, trees or tires.



(1991 Code, § 50.01)



§ 50.02  DISPOSAL OF OFFENSIVE WASTES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any house offal, dead
animal or garbage of any kind to be thrown or placed on any street, sidewalk,
lot or other place within the town, or any decayed flesh or vegetables or
offensive matter which will annoy the citizens of the neighborhood or
endanger their health.



(1991 Code, § 50.02)  (Ord. passed 10-5-1954)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.03  DEPOSIT OR BURNING OF WASTE ON STREETS.



   No garbage shall be placed, thrown or swept upon any street or
sidewalks of the town, nor shall any garbage or trash be piled or burned
thereon.



(1991 Code, § 50.03)  (Ord. 2, passed - - )  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  STORAGE IN PROPER RECEPTACLES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person owning or occupying
premises to place all garbage in proper receptacles as provided in § 50.01
for removal by the town’s collection agent.



   (B)   All garbage which shall collect upon any premises shall be
placed in such cans and the tops thereon shall be kept in place in such
manner as to prevent access thereto by dogs, files or other insects.



(1991 Code, § 50.04)  (Ord. 2, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  RESTRICTING THE DEPOSIT OF MATERIALS IN RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL
DUMPSTERS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as follows:



      (1)   LIMITED USE DUMPSTER or TRASH RECEPTACLE. Any dumpster
or other trash receptacle placed or intended for deposit of garbage, trash
and other materials only by residents of immediately surrounding apartment or
residential units, or by employees of immediately surrounding business
establishments, and which is emptied on a regular basis by arrangement with
the sanitation force of the town, or by a commercial sanitation service under
contract with the town.



      (2)   UNAUTHORIZED PERSON. Any person who is neither a
resident or guest of a resident of any apartment or residential unit in
immediate proximity to a limited use dumpster or trash receptacle, as defined
above, nor an employee of a business establishment in immediate proximity to
such a dumpster or receptacle.



   (B)   Prohibited deposits. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized
person to deposit garbage, trash or any other materials in any limited use
dumpster or trash receptacle located within the corporate limits of the town.



(Ord. passed 2-12-91)  Penalty, see § 50.99



TOWN COLLECTION SERVICE



§ 50.15  COLLECTION VEHICLES TO REMAIN ON PUBLIC STREETS AND ALLEYS;
COLLECTORS TO TAKE GARBAGE CANS FROM RESIDENTS’ YARDS.



   (A)   Town garbage truck drivers will at all times keep their trucks
on the pubic streets and alleys and will not drive into yards or public
driveways



   (B)   Town garbage truck drivers will pick up garbage from garbage
cans in the yards of residents and the cans need not be placed adjacent to
the public street.



(1991 Code, § 50.10)  (Ord. passed 1-5-1965)



§ 50.16  COLLECTION OF BUILDING, DEMOLITION OR LAND CLEARING DEBRIS.



   Building materials or land clearing debris originating prior to, during
or subsequent to the construction of new buildings, alterations or additions
to existing buildings of whatsoever type or from demolition of existing
structures will not be collected. Removal of these building materials or land
clearing debris is the responsibility of the contractor or installer or owner.



(1991 Code, § 50.11)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.17  TIRE COLLECTION.



   There shall be no collection or disposal of tires by the town or its
contractor.



(1991 Code, § 50.12)



§ 50.18  DEBRIS OTHER THAN GARBAGE.



   (A)   No waste matter not classed as garbage shall be thrown upon
the streets at random, but shall be neatly piled adjacent to the street in
such a place and manner as not to obstruct the street or sidewalk and so that
it shall be easily accessible to town collection agents; provided, that the
size and weight of containers for all types of debris and trimmings such as
leaves, limbs and other debris shall be restricted to 50 pounds in weight.



   (B)   This type of debris shall be placed adjacent to the public
streets or alleys on the regular pickup dates by property owners, and limbs
and other items shall not exceed four feet in length and leaves shall be
placed in disposable containers.



   (C)   A fee shall be paid by the property owner in accordance with
the town’s fee schedule.



(1991 Code, § 50.13)  (Ord. passed 10-5-1954; Ord. passed 1-5-1965) 
Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.19  REMOVAL OF ANIMAL CARCASSES.



   The carcasses of animals and fowl shall be removed by the town without
delay, upon notice given to the Town Clerk.



(1991 Code, § 50.14)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.20  ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Town Board may, by resolution from time to time, promulgate
additional rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, for the
collection of refuse and garbage within the town. Such rules and regulations,
when spread upon the minutes and filed in the office of the Town Clerk, shall
be binding upon all persons affected thereby; and a copy thereof shall be
posted upon the bulletin board at the Town Hall and shall be given publicity
in the press.



(1991 Code, § 50.15)



§ 50.21  SCHEDULED COLLECTION TIMES.



   (A)   Town employees or contractors acting on behalf of the town
shall provide garbage collection services once a week, except for holidays or
in inclement weather conditions. Garbage receptacles must be placed curbside
prior to 7:00 a.m. (no earlier than 3:00 p.m. the day before collection is
schedule) and must be removed by 9:00 a.m. on the day after collection.



   (B)   At all times other than schedule collection times as mention
in division (A), garbage receptacles must be stored on the premises at a
location 30 feet from the public right-of-way or behind the front or side
wall of the principal structure, or within a completely enclosed substantial
structure such as a house, garage or shed.



(Ord. passed 2-10-2009)



RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL DUMPSTERS



§ 50.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LIMITED USE DUMPSTER OR TRASH RECEPTACLE. Any dumpster or other trash
receptacle placed or intended for deposit of garbage, trash and other
materials only by residents of immediately surrounding apartment or
residential units, or by employees of immediately surrounding business
establishments, and which is emptied on a regular basis by arrangement with
the sanitation force of the town, or by a commercial sanitation service under
contract with the town.



   UNAUTHORIZED PERSON. Any person who is neither a resident or guest of a
resident of an apartment or residential unit in immediate proximity to a
limited use dumpster or trash receptacle, as defined in this section, nor an
employee of a business establishment in immediate proximity to such a
dumpster or receptacle.



(Ord. passed 2-12-1991)



§ 50.36  PROHIBITED DEPOSITS.



   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deposit garbage,
trash or any other materials in any limited use dumpster or trash receptacle
located within the corporate limits of the town.



(Ord. passed 2-12-1991)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.37  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter is effective on February 12, 1991.



(Ord. passed 2-12-1991)



FEES



§ 50.50  FEES.



   (A)   Commercial - miscellaneous is computed by using the number and
size of containers times the number of pickups a month times $25 a ton.



   (B)   Special is computed at $25 a ton for truck loads of yard
debris or other trash items such as old furniture.



   (C)   COST means any advertising, professional services, materials,
supplies, postage or labor utilized.



   (D)   Labor is figured at $20 per hour per person.



   (E)   This fee schedule supersedes any fees, penalties or costs that
may be contained in the town code book.



(Ord. passed 6-27-1995)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Failure to remove garbage receptacles from the street before
9:00 a.m. on the day after collection shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty in the amount of $25. All other violations of §§ 50.01 through
50.04 and 50.15 through 50.20 shall subject the offender to a civil penalty
in the amount of $50. Each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate
and distinct offense. The Town Manager or his/her designee shall notify
either by telephone or letter the person, firm, or corporation in violation,
describing the offense, the section violated, the corrective action
necessary, and a reasonable time period for compliance. If the violation is
not corrected within the required time, the Town Manager or his/her designee
shall have the authority to issue a civil citation, on forms developed for
that purpose, imposing the civil penalty of $50 for each separate offense. If
corrective action is not taken or the penalty paid, the Town Manager or
his/her designee shall forward the matter to the Town Attorney for further
legal action. Such action could include, but not be limited to civil action,
criminal prosecution, and injunction as allowed by this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 50.99)



   (C)   Violation of §§ 50.35 through 50.37 shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $50, or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



   (D)   In addition to or in lieu of any remedies authorized above,
violations of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or infraction
in accordance with G.S. § 160A-175.



(Ord. passed 2-12-1991; Ord. passed 2-10-2009)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER AND SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   51.01   Water-carried sewerage facilities required



   51.02   Tampering with water and sewer pipes



   51.03   Discharge of stormwater and unpolluted drainage



   51.04   Disposal of effluent from carwash




Sewer and Water Connections




   51.15   Access to water and sewer lines in town



   51.16   Connection of property to sewer and water lines required;
tapping fee



   51.17   Permit required to connect property to sewer or water line
and to install certain fixtures



   51.18   Type of sewerage pipe required



   51.19   Water tap for trailer parks



   51.20   Unauthorized connections



   51.21   Water/sewer extension policy



   51.22   Access to water and sewer lines in the extraterritorial
zoning area




Water Use




   51.35   Special meters for water used to irrigate lawn or shrubbery




Rates and Charges




   51.50   Connection or tapping charges



   51.51   Deposit required prior to turning on water supply; purpose
and refund of deposit



   51.52   Schedule of charges for water and sewer service



   51.53   No exceptions to charges permitted



   51.54   Delinquent bills



   51.55   No charge for services furnished to retired town employees




Water Shortages




   51.70   Water shortage response plan



 



   51.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  WATER-CARRIED SEWERAGE FACILITIES REQUIRED.



   No person shall build, install or remodel any house, trailer or other
structure used or intended for human habitation or occupancy in the town
which is not provided with water-carried sewerage facilities.



(1991 Code, § 51.01)  (Ord. passed 2-4-1941; Ord. passed 1-7-1964) 
Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.02  TAMPERING WITH WATER AND SEWER PIPES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, not having proper authority from
the town to interfere or tamper with, open or change in any manner whatsoever
any part of the water or sewer system of the town including pipes.



(1991 Code, § 51.02)  (Ord. 3, passed - -; Ord. passed 6-21-1988) 
Penalty, see § 51.99



Cross-reference:



   Injuring private or public property, see § 130.02



§ 51.03  DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER AND UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process wastes to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to the storm drainage system or to a natural outlet approved by
the Town Manager. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may
be discharged upon approval of the Town Manager to the storm drainage system
or natural outlet.



(1991 Code, § 51.03)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.04  DISPOSAL OF EFFLUENT FROM CARWASH.



   If the owner of any carwash within the town limits desires to dispose
of the effluent from the carwash he or she shall comply with the following
requirements.



   (A)   The owner shall install a sedimentation pit with a turn-down
drain system, approved by the town, through which all wastewater must pass
before entering the town’s system. The owner shall cover all pits with a
roof to keep out stormwater.



   (B)   The owner shall cover all turn down pipes with screen mesh,
said mesh shall be no greater than one-tenth inch.



   (C)   The owner shall clean out all sedimentation pits with such
frequency as will not allow the sediment to reach closer than six inches from
the turn down pipe.



   (D)   The owner shall prevent any oil drainage, from crankcase,
transmission or other mechanical devices, from entering the town’s
wastewater system.



   (E)   The owner shall prevent any stormwater from roofs, parking
lots or other areas from draining onto the pits or the town’s wastewater
system.



   (F)   The owner shall allow the town’s personnel to inspect the
premises of the carwash for compliance with this chapter.



   (G)   In addition to other penalties provided for in the town’s
ordinances, violation of this section shall result in interruption of the
water supply to the carwash until compliance with all of the hereinabove
requirements.



(1991 Code, § 51.04)  Penalty, see § 51.99



SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS



§ 51.15  ACCESS TO WATER AND SEWER LINES IN TOWN.



   Owners of improved property abutting town- owned water and sewer lines
shall either connect to said lines within six months of the time the line is
completed and accepted for use by the town or pay a monthly improvement or
dry-tap charge as set forth in the town’s fee schedule, as may be amended
from time to time. IMPROVED PROPERTY shall be defined as a lot or tract upon
which is located a building or structure used for residential, business,
industrial, governmental or other similar urban purposes. ABUTTING shall be
defined as lying adjacent to the property or separated from the property by a
portion of street right-of-way.



   (A)   The town recognizes the responsibility to provide all existing
water and sewer users within the town corporate boundary with an adequate
supply of water and sewer treatment within the constraints of money and
budgets.



   (B)   The town will attempt to provide water and sewer service to
all existing homes and new homes not currently served on existing open and
dedicated streets within the constraints of money and budgets.  The priority
for new services will be less than for existing customers.



   (C)   Extensions of water and sewer service in and to subdivisions
and new streets or unopened streets will be at the developer's expense.



   (D)   The town will also make water and sewer extensions under
authority of G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10. The extensions may be made following
receipt of a petition from abutting property owners, or by action of the Town
Council.  Assessments levied under this authority may be payable over a
period of up to ten years.



   (E)   The Town Council is authorized, but not required, to offer
discounts off the one-time tap fee as set forth in the town’s fee schedule,
as may be amended from time to time, for the purpose of encouraging initial
connections and tap-ons during or immediately after construction of a sewer
project.



   (F)   The town may, but is not required, to participate in the
extension of any main sewer line if the Town Council determines from time to
time that the overall interests of the town or the area shall benefit.



   (G)   The Enterprise Fund may be reimbursed for the costs of the
extension of sewer lines for economic development, annexation or any other
purposes when the Enterprise Fund cannot reasonably expect reimbursement
within five years through income generated by sewer rates. Reimbursement
shall be from the General Fund or Capital Projects Fund, so long as such
reimbursement is consistent with the Local Government Budget and Fiscal
Control Act.



   (H)   It is the town’s responsibility to maintain all sewer lines
in the rights-of-way owned by the town or the state. It is each property
owner’s responsibility to maintain sewer lines and connections on his
private property.



   (I)   The policy set forth herein shall be effective upon passage of
this section. Any policy or practice inconsistent with this section is hereby
repealed.



(Ord. passed 6-24-1997; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 10-17-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 51.99



§ 51.16  CONNECTION OF PROPERTY TO SEWER AND WATER LINES REQUIRED; TAPPING
FEE.



   (A)   Every person who owns within the town, a house, mobile home or
other structure used or intended for human habitation or occupancy shall be
required to pay the proper tapping fee as contained in the current town
schedule of fees and connect his or her property to the town’s sewer line;
provided that the town may make exceptions to this section in appropriate
cases. In the event that an exception is made, at such time as the town
determines that the property owner should pay the above mentioned tap fee and
connect to the town’s wastewater system, connection to the town’s system
shall be made within 30 days of notice to the property owner, and the tap fee
paid within 90 days of notice to the property owner. This section shall apply
to persons annexed as of the effective date of annexation. This section shall
not apply to persons whose property is connected to the county wastewater
system.



   (B)   Every person who owns within the town, a house, mobile home or
other structure used or intended for human habitation or occupancy shall be
required to pay the proper tapping fee as contained in the current town
schedule of fees and connect his or her property to the town’s water line;
provided that the town may make exceptions to this section in appropriate
cases. In the event that an exception is made, at such time as the town
determines that the property owner should pay the above mentioned tap fee and
connect to the town’s water system, connection to the town system shall be
made within 30 days of notice to the property owner, and the tap fee paid
within 90 days of notice to the property owner. This section shall apply to
persons annexed as of the effective date of annexation. This section shall
not apply to persons whose property is connected to any county public
utilities water system.



   (C)   In the event the owner of any property with tapping fees due
sells the property, the new owner of such property shall be required to
either pay the unpaid portion of the water and sewer tapping fee or shall
sign a written assumption of the payment of the balance of such water and
sewer tapping fee in the same manner as hereinabove outlined in divisions (A)
and (B) above. This section shall be recorded in the Office of the Register
of Deeds of the county to provide notice to any purchaser that such water and
sewer tapping fees are a charge against the real estate.



   (D)   Sewer and water service requirements for residential property.



      (1)   Single-family home. One water meter with tap and
capacity fee. One sewer tap and capacity fee. One base rate charged monthly.



      (2)   Duplexes. Two water meters with one tap and two capacity
fees. One sewer tap and two capacity fees. One base rate charged monthly for
each unit.



      (3)   Apartments and condominiums (three or more residential
units in one building). Each residential unit within the building will
require its own water meter with tap and capacity fee. The number and size of
sewer taps will be determined by the number of residential units that can be
served according to the National Standard Plumbing Code. All residential
units will require a sewer capacity fee. One base rate charged monthly to
each unit.



      (4)   Separate apartment units existing as of January 1, 2003
for which water and sewer are serviced dependently through the residential
home will not be charged a monthly base rate for that apartment.



   (E)   Sewer and water service requirements for commercial property.



      (1)   Single use office building (one building, one business).
One water meter with tap and capacity fee. One sewer tap and capacity fee.
One base rate charged monthly.



      (2)   Multiple use office building (one building, more than
one business renting office space). One water meter with tap and capacity
fee. One sewer tap and capacity fee. One base rate charged monthly.



      (3)   Shopping center (two or more business units planned and
constructed to occupy distinctly different space within one building). Each
individual business unit within the building will require its own water meter
with tap and capacity fee. The number and size of sewer taps will be
determined by the number of business units that can be served according to
the National Standard Plumbing Code. All individual business units will
require a sewer capacity fee. One base rate charged monthly for each unit.



   (F)   Sewer and water service requirements for industrial property.



      (1)   Single use industrial building(s) (one or more
buildings, one industry). One or more water meters or compound meters with
taps and capacity fees. One or more sewer taps and capacity fees. One or more
base rates charged monthly.



      (2)   Multiple use industrial building (one building, more
than one industry renting space). One water meter or compound meter with tap
and capacity fee. The number and size of sewer taps will be determined by the
number of units that can be served according to the National Standard
Plumbing Code. All individual industrial units will require a sewer capacity
fee. One base rate charged monthly.



(1991 Code, § 51.20)  (Ord. passed 3-11-1980; Ord. passed 2-13-1990; Ord.
passed 4-8-2003)



§ 51.17  PERMIT REQUIRED TO CONNECT PROPERTY TO SEWER OR WATER LINE AND TO
INSTALL CERTAIN FIXTURES.



   No water or plumbing fixtures shall be installed and no building or
toilet fixtures shall be connected with a public or private water or sewer
line, or private septic tank, without first obtaining a building permit in
the manner provided in §§ 150.030 through 150.034.



(1991 Code, § 51.21)  (Ord. passed 2-4-1941) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.18  TYPE OF SEWERAGE PIPE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect private property to the
town sewerage system by means of Orangeburg pipe. All connections to the town
sewerage system shall be of cast iron pipe, PVC pipe or other pipe authorized
for this geographical area by the State Building Code; and there shall be a
cleanout plug at every 80 lineal feet of pipe.



(1991 Code, § 51.22)  (Ord. passed 5-7-1963; Ord. passed 6-21-1988) 
Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.19  WATER TAP FOR TRAILER PARKS.



   (A)   A water tap for trailer parks may be one tap for all trailers
located in the park or one tap per trailer located in the park. In either
case, a water tap will be made in the town’s right-of-way area with meter
and meter box placed at the edge of the property line.



   (B)   The only meter the town will read for billing purposes will be
the meters installed by the town as a water tap.



(1991 Code, § 51.23)  (Ord. passed 11-8-1983)



§ 51.20  UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS.



   Only authorized town employees may connect or reconnect water service.
If water is found to be in use without being turned on by an authorized town
employee, or if water is used for any other purpose than that paid for, the
consumer of the water shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 51.24)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.21  WATER/SEWER EXTENSION POLICY.



   Any request for connection to the town water and/or sewer system shall
be accompanied by a valid annexation petition. The Town Board shall make a
decision as to annexation of the property, annexation agreement on the
property, or decision not to annex the property before any connections are
made. No annexation agreement shall postpone the date of annexation for more
than five years from the date of the petition.



(Ord. passed 6-11-1996)



§ 51.22  ACCESS TO WATER AND SEWER LINES IN THE EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING
AREA.



   The Town Board is authorized to approve extensions to the town water
and sewer system in the town's extraterritorial zoning jurisdictional area. 
All costs will be borne by the applicant.  Any line extension or subdivision
will meet all applicable provisions of this chapter and the Town Subdivision
Ordinance.  All the systems will be dedicated to the town and the town will
maintain the systems.  The town personnel will be given unrestricted access
whether the roads are public or private.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 10-17-2016)



WATER USE



§ 51.35  SPECIAL METERS FOR WATER USED TO IRRIGATE LAWN OR SHRUBBERY.



   If any citizen shall desire to install a special meter in order to
meter water used exclusively for irrigation of a lawn or shrubbery, the town
will install such special meter if the citizen desiring such meter shall pay
the charges set forth in the town’s fee schedule, as may be amended from
time to time.



(1991 Code, § 51.35)  (Ord. passed 2-8-1972; Ord. passed 5-26-1981; Ord.
passed 6-8-1982; Ord. passed 6-14-1983)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.50  CONNECTION OR TAPPING CHARGES.



   Charges shall be established by the town for water and sewer taps in
the amounts as set forth in the fee schedules, as may be amended from time to
time.



(1991 Code, § 51.50)



§ 51.51  DEPOSIT REQUIRED PRIOR TO TURNING ON WATER SUPPLY; PURPOSE AND
REFUND OF DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Prior to turning on the supply of water from a town water main
to any property which is connected thereto, the tenant of such property shall
deposit with the officer who collects the town water and sewer service
charges a water service deposit in the amount as established by the town from
time to time.



   (B)   The deposit as required by this section shall be chargeable
for water and sewer service charge bills that become delinquent; and no
deposit shall be refunded until the service is discontinued, and then only to
the extent of any surplus over any unpaid service charge bill due or to
become due.



(1991 Code, § 51.51)  (Ord. passed 9-8-1931; Ord. passed 10-2-1962; Ord.
passed 2-3-1970; Ord. passed 5-26-1981)



§ 51.52  SCHEDULE OF CHARGES FOR WATER AND SEWER SERVICE.



   Water and sewer service supplied by the town to its customers shall be
charged in the amounts as set forth in the town’s fee schedule, as may be
amended from time to time.



(1991 Code, § 51.52)



§ 51.53  NO EXCEPTIONS TO CHARGES PERMITTED.



   No exception shall be made, in water or sewer charges established in
this subchapter, for churches, libraries, lodges, veterans organizations,
community associations, philanthropic and fraternal organizations or similar
associations, whether public or private.



(1991 Code, § 51.53)  (Ord. passed 7-3-1962)



§ 51.54  DELINQUENT BILLS.



   (A)   All water and/or sewer bills will be due and payable on or
before the fifteenth day of each month and payable by the twentieth of the
month.  Payments made by mail must be postmarked before the twentieth of the
month.



   (B)   If any bill is not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the twentieth day of
the month, or in the event that the twentieth day should fall on a weekend or
town holiday by 5:00 p.m. on the next working day, the town shall declare the
bill delinquent and shall:



      (1)   Charge a delinquent service fee as established by the
town’s fee schedule, as may be amended from time to time.  The delinquent
service fee will be added to unpaid accounts.



      (2)   Five days from the late fee date, all accounts still
unpaid will be disconnected and a disconnect penalty will be applied to the
delinquent bill. The disconnect fee is established by the town’s fee
schedule and may be amended from time to time. When water service is
discontinued for delinquency, it shall be unlawful for any person other than
a duly authorized agent or employee of the town to do any act that results in
the resumption of service.



      (3)   A reconnect fee will be added to unpaid accounts to
restore service. The reconnect fee is established by the town’s fee
schedule and may be amended from time to time. All charges must be paid in
full in order to have service restored.



(1991 Code, § 51.54)  (Ord. passed 10-2-1951; Ord. passed 2-3-1970; Ord.
passed 4-13-1982; Ord. passed 7-8-1986; Ord. passed 7-11-2006)



§ 51.55  NO CHARGE FOR SERVICES FURNISHED TO RETIRED TOWN EMPLOYEES.



   For each town retired employee with at least 15 years of service to the
town, and who retired prior to January 1, 1993, water and sewer services
shall be furnished, without cost, to the residence of the employee for the
remainder of his or her life; upon the death of the employee, such free
services shall continue to be provided to the residence of the employee’s
spouse for his or her lifetime; provided that such fee services shall
terminate at such time as neither the employee nor the spouse remains in the
residence.



(1991 Code, § 51.55)  (Ord. passed 7-10-1990; Ord. passed 1-10-1995)



WATER SHORTAGES



§ 51.70  WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PLAN.



   The procedures in this section are written to reduce potable water
demand and supplement existing drinking water supplies whenever existing
water supply sources are inadequate to meet current demands for potable water.



   (A)   Authorization.  The Town Manager shall enact the following
water shortage response provisions whenever the trigger conditions outlined
in division (D) are met. In his or her absence, the Utility Director will
assume this role.



   (B)   Notification.  The following notification methods will be
used to inform water system employees and customers of a water shortage
declaration: employee e-mail announcements, notices at municipal buildings,
notices in water bills and on the town website homepage. Required water
shortage response measures will be communicated through Dunn Daily Record,
other means of public service announcement and on the town website.
Declaration of emergency water restrictions or water rationing will be
communicated to all customers by telephone through use of reverse 911.
Contact Harnett County Fire Marshal between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. at (910)
893-7580. After 5:00 p.m. and weekends, call 911 and ask for the On-Call Fire
Marshal.



   (C)   Levels of response.



      (1)   Five levels of water shortage response are outlined in
the table below. The five levels of water shortage response are: voluntary
reductions, mandatory reductions I and II, emergency reductions and water
rationing. A detailed description of each response level and corresponding
water reduction measures follow below.



 


Stage

 

Response

 

Description



1
 
Voluntary reductions
 
Water users are encouraged to reduce their water use and improve water use
efficiency; however, no penalties apply for noncompliance. Water supply
conditions indicate a potential for shortage (see below).


2
 
Mandatory reductions I
 
Water users must abide required water use reduction and efficiency measures;
penalties apply for noncompliance. Water supply conditions are significantly
lower than the seasonal norm and water shortage conditions are expected to
persist (see below).


3
 
Mandatory reductions II
 
Same as in Stage 2 description plus (see below).


4
 
Emergency reductions
 
Water supply conditions are substantially diminished and pose an imminent
threat to human health or environmental integrity (see below).


5
 
Water rationing
 
Water supply conditions are substantially diminished and remaining supplies
must be allocated to preserve human health and environmental integrity (see
below).



 



      (2)   In stage 1, voluntary reductions, all water users will
be asked to reduce their normal water use by 5%. Customer education and
outreach programs will encourage water conservation and efficiency measures
including: irrigating landscapes a maximum of one inch per week; preventing
water waste, runoff and watering impervious surfaces; watering plants deeply
to encourage root growth; washing only full loads in clothes and dishwashers;
using spring-loaded nozzles on garden hoses; and identifying and repairing
all water leaks.



      (3)   In stage 2, mandatory reductions I, all customers are
expected to reduce their water use by 10% in comparison to their previous
month’s water bill. In addition to continuing to encourage all voluntary
reduction actions, the following restrictions apply: irrigation is limited to
a half inch per week between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; outdoor use drinking
water for washing impervious surfaces is prohibited; and all testing and
training purposes requiring drinking water (such as, fire protection) will be
limited.



      (4)   In stage 3, mandatory reductions II, customers must
continue actions from all previous stages and further reduce water use by 20%
compared to their previous month’s water bill. All nonessential uses of
drinking water are banned and garden and landscape irrigation must be reduced
to the minimum amount necessary for survival. Additionally, in stage 3, a
drought surcharge of 1.5 times the normal water rate applies.



      (5)   In stage 4, emergency reductions, customers must
continue all actions from previous stages and further reduce their water use
by 25% compared to their previous month’s water bill. A ban on all use of
drinking water except to protect public health and safety is implemented and
drought surcharges increase to two times the normal water rate.



      (6)   The goal of stage 5, water rationing, is to provide
drinking water to protect public health (such as, residences, residential
health care facilities and correctional facilities). In stage 5, all
customers are only permitted to use water at the minimum required for public
health protection. Firefighting is the only allowable outdoor water use and
pickup locations for distributing potable water will be announced according
to Town Emergency Response Plan. Drought surcharges increase to five times
the normal water rate.



   (D)   Triggers.  The town purchases the water from the County
Public Utilities. The town will follow the counties’ protocols for their
water shortage and water rationing responses, the town will also stay in
close contact with all county agencies. This plan will enact the town to
mandate their own water restrictions due to nature and man-made disasters.
Examples include: main water line breaks, loss of system pressure,
hurricanes, tornadoes and the like.



   (E)   Return to normal.  When water shortage conditions have abated
and the situation is returning to normal, water conservation measures
employed during each phase should be decreased in reverse order of
implementation. Permanent measures directed toward long-term monitoring and
conservations should be implemented or continued so that the community will
be in a better position to prevent shortages and respond to recurring water
shortage conditions.



   (F)   Enforcement.  The provisions of the water shortage response
plan will be enforced by town utility department and police personnel.
Violators will be reported to the town for record keeping and enforcement
actions. Citations are assessed according to the following schedule depending
on the number of prior violations and current level of water shortage.



 


Water Shortage Level

 

First Violation

 

Second Violation

 

Third Violation



Voluntary Reductions
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



Mandatory reductions (stages 2 and 3)   
 
Warning
 

$250

 
Discontinuation of service


Emergency Reductions
 

$250

 
Discontinuation of service
 
Discontinuation of service


Water rationing
 

$500

 
Discontinuation of service
 
Discontinuation of service


Drought surcharge rates are effective in Stages 3, 4 and 5



 



   (G)   Public comment.  Customers will have multiple opportunities
to comment on the provisions of the water shortage response plan. First, a
notice will be published in The Daily Record informing citizens of the draft
plan, a draft plan will be available at the Town Hall Administration Building
and on the town website allowing citizens to comment on the draft. Second, a
public hearing will be scheduled with notice printed in The Daily Record. All
subsequent revisions to the draft plan will be published at least 30 days
prior to an adoption vote by Town Council.



   (H)   Variance protocols.  Applications for water use variance
requests are available from the town website and town hall. All applications
must be submitted to the town hall for review. A decision to approve or deny
individual variance requests will be determined within two weeks of submittal
after careful consideration of the following criteria: impact on water
demand, expected duration, alternative source options, social and economic
importance, purpose (such as, necessary use of drinking water) and the
prevention of structural damage.



   (I)   Effectiveness.  The effectiveness of the water shortage
response plan will be determined by comparing the stated water conservation
goals with observed water use reduction data. Other factors to be considered
include frequency of plan activation, any problem periods without activation,
total number of violation citations, desired reductions attained and
evaluation of demand reductions compared to the previous year’s seasonal
data.



   (J)   Revision.  The water shortage response plan will be reviewed
and revised as needed to adapt to new circumstances affecting water supply
and demand, following implementation of emergency restrictions, and at a
minimum of every five years in conjunction with the updating of our Local
Water Supply Plan. Further, a water shortage response planning work group
will review procedures following each emergency or rationing stage to
recommend any necessary improvements to the plan to Town Council. The Utility
Director is responsible for initiating all subsequent revisions.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 2-12-2013)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject
the violator to a civil penalty in the sum of $50 per day.



      (1)   A citation for said civil penalty shall be issued by the
Town Manager.



      (2)   Each citation for a civil penalty must be paid within 72
hours of issuance.



   (B)   Each and every day that the violator continue in violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense.



   (C)   This chapter may also be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



(1991 Code, § 51.99)



CHAPTER 52: SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT



Section




General Provisions




   52.001   Purpose and policy



   52.002   Definitions and abbreviations




Regulations




   52.015   Prohibited discharge standards



   52.016   National categorical pretreatment standards



   52.017   Local limits



   52.018   State requirements



   52.019   Right of revision



   52.020   Dilution



   52.021   Pretreatment of wastewater



   52.022   Accidental discharge/slug control plans



   52.023   Hauled wastewater




Fees




   52.035   Purpose



   52.036   User charges



   52.037   Surcharges



   52.038   Pretreatment program administration charges




Wastewater Discharge Permit Application and Issuance




   52.050   Wastewater dischargers



   52.051   Wastewater permits




Reporting Requirements




   52.070   Baseline monitoring reports



   52.071   Compliance schedule progress reports



   52.072   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline



   52.073   Periodic compliance reports



   52.074   Reports of changed conditions



   52.075   Reports of potential problems



   52.076   Reports from unpermitted users



   52.077   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting



   52.078   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste



   52.079   Analytical requirements



   52.080   Grab and composite sample collection



   52.081   Timing



   52.082   Record keeping



   52.083   Electronic reporting



   52.084   Special reporting requirements for IUs in satellite POTWs




Compliance Monitoring




   52.100   Monitoring facilities



   52.101   Inspection and sampling



   52.102   Search warrants




Administration and Enforcement




   52.120   Confidential information



   52.121   Administrative remedies



   52.122   Civil penalties



   52.123   Other available remedies



   52.124   Remedies nonexclusive



   52.125   Annual publication of significant noncompliance



   52.126   Adjudicatory hearings



   52.127   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the Town of Lillington, hereafter referred to as the town, and enables the
town to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 403).



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater
discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the
operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater
discharge into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the
system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the state or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;



      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludge’s from the municipal system;



      (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected
by sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as
protecting the general public;



      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES
or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and
any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is
subject.



   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the
issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, require user reporting and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.



   (D)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the municipal
wastewater system, as authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-312 and/or 153A-275. The
town shall designate an administrator of the town sanitary sewer collection
system and pretreatment program hereafter referred to as the Public Works
Director. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Public Works Director
shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any
powers granted to or imposed upon the Public Works Director may be delegated
by the Public Works Director to other town personnel.



   (E)   By discharging wastewater into the town wastewater system,
industrial users located within or outside the town limits agree to comply
with the terms and conditions established in this chapter, as well as any
permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. Users subject to
this chapter are also subject to the receiving POTW ordinance of the county.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.002  DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director of the Division of Water Quality
of the State Department of Environmental and Natural Resources or his or her
deisgnee.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.



         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation,
authorized representative shall mean:



            1.   The president, secretary or a vice-president
of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the
corporation;



            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to
make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated
facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major
capital investment duty of making major capital investment recommendations,
and initiate and direct comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and
where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively.



         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or
local government facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.



         (d)   The individuals described in (a) through (c) may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible
for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates
or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company
and the written authorization is submitted to the town.



         (e)   If the designation of an authorized representative
is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to Public Works
Director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20° C., usually expressed as a concentration
(such as, mg/l).



      BUILDING SEWER. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of
a user to the town sanitary sewer collection system.



      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a user’s treatment facility.



      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. National categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment standard.



      CONTROL AUTHORITY. Refers to the town public works organization
if the public works organization’s pretreatment program approval has not
been withdrawn.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.



      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a
period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.



      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks, including but
not limited to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE. The discharge or the
introduction from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c),
or (d) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the sanitary sewer collection
system including holding tank waste discharged into the system.



      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any person which is a source of indirect
discharge.



      INTERFERENCE. The inhibition, or disruption of the town sanitary
collection system, treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process,
use, or disposal, which causes or contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the control authority’s (and/or county wastewater treatment
facility, if different from the control authority) NPDES, collection system,
or non-discharge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations,
or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by
the county utilities POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act, (33
U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et
seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine
Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) or more stringent state
criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal
or use employed by the POTW.



      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and
dialysis wastes.



      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears
in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances;
these prohibitions appear in § 52.015 and are developed under the authority
of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation
from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307(c) of the Act, provided that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source
is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of subsections 2. or 3. above but otherwise
alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.



         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a
new source has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a
continuous on-site construction program:



               A.   Any placement, assem- bly, or
installation of facilities or equipment; or



               B.   Significant site prep- aration work
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this definition.



      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.



      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES PERMIT.
A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342), or
pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.



      NON-DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the state pursuant to
G.S. § 143-215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged directly to surface
waters of the state or for a wastewater treatment works which does not
discharge directly to surface waters of the state.



      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from
other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation, of the control authority’s (and/or POTW’s, if
different from the control authority) NPDES, collection system, or
non-discharge permit (or a downstream water quality standard even if not
included in the permit).



      pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the
reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter
of solution.



      POLLUTANT. Any waste as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18) and
dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste and certain
characteristics of wastewater (such as, pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity,
color, metals, BOD, COD, toxicity and odor).



      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.



      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into town sanitary sewer collection system and/or
county utilities treatment plant. The reduction or alteration may be obtained
by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or process changes or other
means, except as prohibited by 40 C.F.R. Part 403.6(d).



      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM. The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the sanitary sewer collection system and POTW from
non-domestic sources which was developed by the town in compliance with 40
C.F.R. § 403.8 and approved by the approval authority as authorized by G.S.
§ 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.11.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any prohibited discharge standard,
categorical standard or local limit which applies to an industrial user.



      PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Town Manager designated with the
responsibility for the pretreatment program and enforcement of this chapter.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
SYSTEM. A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. §
1292) which is owned in this instance by the town. This definition includes
any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling,
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.
It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this chapter,
POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the town who are, by contract or agreement with the town, or
in any other way, users of the POTW of the town.



      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the user’s treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY
DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU. An industrial user that
discharges wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters);



         (b)   Contributes process wastewater which makes up 5%
or more of the NPDES non-discharge permitted flow limit or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant. In this context, organic capacity refers to BOD,
TSS, ammonia, total phosphorus and total nitrogen;



         (c)   Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 C.F.R. Part 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471; or



         (d)   Is found by the town, the Division of Water
Quality or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have the
potential for impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industrial users, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge,
the system’s effluent quality, or compliance with any pretreatment
standards or requirements.



      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or SNC.  The status of noncompliance
of a significant industrial user when one or more of the following criteria
are met. Additionally, any industrial user which meets the criteria in
subsections (b), (c), (d) or (h) of this definition shall also be SNC.



         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six- month period
exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. Part 403.3(1);



         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations,
defined here as those in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. Part 403.3(1) multiplied by the
applicable TRC; (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, 1.2 for all
other pollutants (except flow and pH);



         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 C.F.R. Part 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the town and/or
county POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of
POTW personnel or the general public);



         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that
has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the
environment or has resulted in either the control authority’s or the POTWs,
if different from the control authority, exercise of its emergency authority
under 40 C.F.R. Part 403.8(f)(l)(vi)(B) and § 52.121(E) of this chapter to
halt or prevent such a discharge;



         (e)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones,
contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting
construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by 90
days or more after the schedule date;



         (f)   Failure to provide reports for compliance
schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day
compliance reports, and periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the
due date.



         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and



         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations that
the town and/or county utilities POTW determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.



      SLUG LOAD or DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or
pass-through, or in any other way violates the POTW’s regulations, local
limits, or industrial user permit conditions. This can include but is not
limited to spills and other accidental discharges; discharges of a
non-routine, episodic nature; a non-customary batch discharge; or any other
discharges that can cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards
in § 52.015.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASS- IFICATION (SIC). A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.



      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting there from.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



      WASTEWATER. The liquid and water- carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile
sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the
POTW.



      WASTEWATER PERMIT. As set forth in § 52.051.



      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds,
tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all other
bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the state or any portion thereof.



   (B)   Abbreviations.  The following abbreviations when used in this
chapter shall have the designated meanings:



 



BOD
 
Biochemical oxygen demand


C.F.R.
 
Code of Federal Regulations


COD
 
Chemical oxygen demand


EPA
 
Environmental Protection Agency


gpd
 
Gallons per day


l
 
Liter


mg
 
Milligrams


mg/l
 
Milligrams per liter


G.S.
 
North Carolina General Statutes


NPDES
 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System


O & M
 
Operation and Maintenance


POTW
 
Publicly-Owned Treatment Works


RCRA
 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act


SIC
 
Standard Industrial Classification


SWDA
 
Solid Waste Disposal Act


TSS
 
Total suspended solids


TKN
 
Total kjeldahl nitrogen


U.S.C
 
United States Code




 



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



REGULATIONS



§ 52.015  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the town sanitary sewer collection system and/or county
utilities POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which
causes interference or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to all
users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or
subject to any national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods specified
in 40 C.F.R. 261.21;



      (2)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case
solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension;



      (3)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through;



      (4)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than
10.0 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage to the collection system, POTW or equipment;



      (5)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including
oxygen-demanding pollutants, (BOD and the like) in sufficient quantity, (flow
or concentration) either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to
cause interference with the POTW;



      (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°
F. (66° C.), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment
plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F.
(40° C.);



      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes within the collection system or POTW in a quantity
that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;



      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the Public Works Director and/or POTW Director in
accordance with § 52.023;



      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or
other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair;



      (10)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or
any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits
issued under Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean
Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used;



      (11)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be
removed by the treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color
to the treatment plant’s effluent to render the waters injurious to public
health or secondary recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to
adversely affect the palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the
receiving waters for any designated uses;



      (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except as specifically approved by the Public Works Director and/or
POTW Director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (13)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Public Works Director
and/or POTW Director;



      (14)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 200 mg/l;



      (15)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (16)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the Public Works Director and/or POTW Director in a wastewater discharge
permit;



      (17)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or
other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere
with the municipal wastewater system;



      (18)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous
waste according to 40 C.F.R. Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as
may be specifically authorized by the Public Works Director and/or POTW
Director;



      (19)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to
violate State Water Quality Standards for toxic substances as described in
15A NCAC 2B.0200;



      (20)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (21)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy;



      (22)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active
agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
municipal wastewater system;



      (23)   At no time, shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any
point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the
lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter; and



      (24)   No material larger than 14" in diameter which may cause
obstructions in the collections system other items prohibited from being
discharged into the collection system are ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime,
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent
grains, spent hops, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residuals or residues
from the refining process, or processing fuel or lubricating oil, mud glass
grindings, or polishing wastes.



   (C)   Processed and stored. Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or
other wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that they could be discharged to the municipal wastewater
system. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must
discharge to the industrial user’s pretreatment facility before connecting
with the system.



   (D)   Determinations. When the Public Works Director and/or POTW
Director determines that a user(s) is contributing to the POTW, any of the
above enumerated substances in such amounts which may cause or contribute to
interference of POTW operation or pass through, the POTW Director, through
the Public Works shall:



      (1)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the
contribution on the POTW in accordance with § 52.121; and



      (2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §§ 52.050
and 52.051 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass
through.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.016  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to
comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and incorporated herein.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the County Utilities POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or
mass limits in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.6(c). The POTW Director shall
notify the Town Public Works Director.



   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW
Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream
formula in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e). The POTW Director shall notify the Town Public
Works Director of said alternate limits.



   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 C.F.R. 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.



   (E)   A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.7.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.017  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user
discharging wastewater containing in excess of the following average
discharge limits:



 



BOD
 
250 mg/l


TSS
 
250 mg/l


NH3
 
25 mg/l


Arsenic
 
0.003 mg/l


Cadmium
 
0.003 mg/l


Chromium
 
0.05 mg/l (total chromium)


Copper
 
0.061 mg/l


Cyanide
 
0.015 mg/l


Lead
 
0.049 mg/l


Mercury
 
0.0003 mg/l


Nickel
 
0.021 mg/l


Silver
 
0.005 mg/l


Zinc
 
0.175 mg/l




 



   (B)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop
user-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW’s maximum
allowable head works loading are not exceeded for particular pollutants of
concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern
shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may impose mass
based limits in addition to, or in place of concentration based limits. The
POTW Director shall notify the Town Public Works Director of said
concentration limits.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.018  STATE REQUIREMENTS.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations
or those in this chapter.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.019  RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The town reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements
which are more stringent than those required by either state or federal
regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
52.001 or the general and specific prohibitions in § 52.015, as is allowed
by 40 C.F.R. § 403.4.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.020  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the national categorical pretreatment standards, unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific
limitation developed by the town, POTW or state.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.021  PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Pretreatment facilities.  Users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits
issued under § 52.051 and shall achieve compliance with all national
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set
out in § 52.015 within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the state,
or the Public Works Director and/or POTW Director, whichever is more
stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
town for review, and shall be approved by the Public Works Director and POTW
Director before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to
the town or POTW under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes
in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to
and be approved by the Public Works Director and/or POTW Director prior to
the user’s initiation of the changes.



   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.



      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Public Works Director
and/or POTW Director may require users to restrict their discharge during
peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into
specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate
sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions
as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user’s compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   The Public Works Director and/or POTW Director may
require any person discharging into the collection system and POTW to install
and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and
flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge
permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.



      (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the Public Works Director and/or POTW Director, they
are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive
amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not
be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type
and capacity approved by the Public Works Director and/or POTW Director and
shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed,
by the user at their expense.



      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.022  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   At least once every two years, the POTW Director in
coordination with the Public Works Director shall evaluate whether each
significant industrial user needs a plan to control and prevent slug
discharges and accidental discharges as defined in § 52.002. All SIUs must
be evaluated within one year of being designated an SIU. The Public Works
Director and/or POTW Director may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Public Works Director
and/or POTW Director may develop such a plan for any user.



   (B)   All SIUs are required to notify the Public Works Director and
POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for
spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic
nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load.



   (C)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Public Works
Director and POTW Director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required
by § 52.075; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.023  HAULED WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the Public Works Director with consultation of the
POTW Director, and at such times as are established by the POTW Director.
Such waste shall not violate this subchapter or any other requirements
established by the town. The Public Works Director and/or POTW Director may
require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.



   (B)   The Public Works Director and/or POTW Director shall require
haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The
Public Works Director and/or POTW Director may require generators of hauled
industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Public Works
Director and POTW Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled
industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all
other requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Public Works Director and/or POTW Director. No load may be
discharged without prior consent of the Public Works Director and POTW
Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure
compliance with applicable standards. The Public Works Director and POTW
Director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis
of any load prior to discharge.



   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form
for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address
of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



FEES



§ 52.035  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the wastewater disposal system of the town for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or
fees shall be set forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and fees by the
Town Manager and/or Public Works Director and approved by the Town Board. A
copy of these charges and fees will be made available from the Public Works
Director.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.036  USER CHARGES.



   A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited
to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge,
cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.



   (A)   The user charge shall reflect, at least, the cost of debt
service, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.



   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of
flow.



   (C)   The Manager of the County Utilities shall review annually the
sewage contributions of users, the total costs of debt service, operation and
maintenance of the POTW and will make recommendations to the Council or Board
serving their customers for adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees
as necessary. Said adjustments will be passed on to the users of the town’s
collection system unless otherwise mandated by the town governing body.



   (D)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the
users shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume
of flow of the users.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.037  SURCHARGES.



   The amount of the surcharges will be based upon the volume of flow and
the character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater:



   (A)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the
following:



      (1)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of
meter readings maintained by the town;



      (2)   If required by the town or at the individual
discharger’s option, other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual
volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be
accessible and safely located, and the measuring system shall be installed in
accordance with plans approved by the town. The metering system shall be
installed and maintained at the user’s expense according to arrangements
that may be made with the town; or



      (3)   Where any user procures all or part of his or her water
supply from sources other than the town, the user shall install and maintain
at his or her own expense a flow measuring device of a type approved by the
town.



   (B)   The character and concentration of the constituents of the
wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples
collected and analyzed by the town. Samples shall be collected in such a
manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed
using procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136.



   (C)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his/her duly
appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.038  PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION CHARGES.



   The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the town may include
charges and fees for:



   (A)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
pretreatment program;



   (B)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;



   (C)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug
load discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications;



   (D)   Permitting;



   (E)   Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the pretreatment program; and



   (F)   Other fees as charged by County Utilities.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)




WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE




§ 52.050  WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the town
collection system and/or POTW without first obtaining the permission of the
town and POTW Director. When requested by the POTW Director and/or Public
Works Director, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The POTW
Director in coordination with the Public Works Director is authorized to
prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update
this information.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.051  WASTEWATER PERMITS.



   All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial
user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW. Existing
industrial users who are determined by the Public Works Director and/or POTW
Director to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant
industrial user permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the
Public Works Director and/or POTW Director’s determination. Industrial
users who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may at the
discretion of the Public Works Director and/or POTW Director be required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit for non-significant industrial users.



   (A)   Significant industrial user determination.  All persons
proposing to discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the
volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of non- domestic
wastewater shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user
determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed
discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he or she will
require through the Public Works Director, that a significant industrial user
permit application be filed.



   (B)   Significant industrial user permit application.  Users
required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and
file with the town, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW
Director, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in
the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply
for a significant industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of
the POTW Director’s determination in division (A) of this section. The
application shall include at a minimum:



      (1)   Name of industrial user;



      (2)   Address of industrial user;



      (3)   Standard  industrial  classification  (SIC) code(s) 
or expected classification and industrial user category;



      (4)   Wastewater flow;



      (5)   Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants
contained in the discharge;



      (6)   Major products manufactured or services supplied;



      (7)   Description of existing on-site pretreatment facilities
and practices;



      (8)   Locations of discharge points;



      (9)   Raw materials used or stored at the site;



      (10)   Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user;



      (11)   Number of employees;



      (12)   Operation and production schedules; and



      (13)   Description of current and projected waste reduction
activities in accordance with G.S. § 143-215.1(g).



   (C)   Application signatories and certification.  All wastewater
discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current
authorized representative of the user on file with the control authority
and/or municipality as defined in § 52.002 and contain the following
certification statement:



      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete.  I am aware that there
are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



   (D)   Application review and evaluation.  The POTW Director will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information.



      (1)   The Public Works Director is authorized to accept
applications for the town and shall refer all applications to the POTW
Director and/or staff for review and evaluation.



      (2)   Within 30 days of receipt, the POTW Director shall
acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall
return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional
information is required. The POTW Director shall inform the Public Works
Director of said return.



   (E)   Tentative determination and draft permit.



      (1)   The POTW staff and public works staff shall conduct a
review of the application and an on-site inspection of the significant
industrial user, including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a
written evaluation and tentative determination to issue or deny the
significant industrial user permit.



      (2)   If the staffs tentative determination in subsection (1)
above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall
be made in writing:



         (a)   Proposed discharge limitations for those
pollutants proposed to be limited;



         (b)   A proposed schedule of compliance, including
interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and



         (c)   A brief description of any other proposed special
conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in
the application.



      (3)   The staff shall organize the determinations made
pursuant to subsections (1) and (2) above and the general permit conditions
of the town into a significant industrial user permit.



   (F)   Permit supporting documentation. The control authority staff
shall prepare the following documents for all significant industrial user
permits.



      (1)   An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for
all significant industrial users, including but not limited to permit limits,
permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of total permitted
flows and loads with Division approved maximum allowable loadings of the
POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the Division. The
AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as permits are
modified where the permitted limits or other AT information is revised.



      (2)   The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment
limitations, including the following:



         (a)   Documentation of categorical determination,
including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical
pretreatment standards; and



         (b)   Documentation of the rationale of any parameters
for which monitoring has been waived under 40 C.F.R. Part 403.12(e)(2).



   (G)   Final action on significant industrial user permit
applications.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all
applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete
application.



      (2)   The POTW Director is authorized to:



         (a)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1;



         (b)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements;



         (c)   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days
notice and pursuant to § 52.051(I);



         (d)   Revoke any permit pursuant to § 52.121;



         (e)   Suspend a permit pursuant to § 52.121;



         (f)   Deny a permit application, when in the opinion of
the POTW Director, such discharge may cause or contribute to pass-through or
interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to
effectuate the purposes of G. S. § 143-215.1.



   (H)   Permit modification.



      (1)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same
procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed below.
Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.



         (a)   Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no
other change in the permit is indicated;



         (b)   A single modification of any compliance schedule
not in excess of four months; or



         (c)   Modification of compliance schedules (construction
schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to
discharge until control facilities are operational.



      (2)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national
categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such
standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user,
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by §
52.051(B), the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180
days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard.



      (3)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall
constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. § 143-215.1(b) for
modifications.



      (4)   The Director of the County POTW shall provide the town a
copy of the aforementioned information.



   (I)   Permit conditions.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a
permit with such conditions attached as he or she believes necessary to
achieve the purpose of this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater permits
shall contain, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five
years);



         (b)   A statement of non-transferability;



         (c)   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical
standards or local limits or both;



         (d)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law;



         (e)   Requirements for notifying the POTW in the event
of an accidental discharge or slug load as defined in § 52.002;



         (f)   Requirements to implement a plan or other controls
for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in §
52.002, if determined by the POTW Director to be necessary for the user;



         (g)   Requirements for immediately notifying the Public
Works Director and the POTW of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for spills and other accidental discharges, or slug load as defined
in § 52.002; and



         (h)   A statement of applicable civil and/or criminal
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any
applicable compliance schedule.



      (2)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited
to, the following:



         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or monthly
average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified
wastewater pollutants or properties;



         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, and the like,
designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the treatment works;



         (d)   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the
municipal wastewater system;



         (e)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system;



         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



         (g)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and
standards for tests, and reporting schedules;



         (h)   Requirements for immediate reporting of any
instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within
30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s);



         (i)   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment
standards and requirements;



         (j)   Requirements for submission of periodic
self-monitoring or special notification reports;



         (k)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans
and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in § 52.082 and
affording the POTW Director and Public Works Director, or his or her
representatives, access thereto;



         (l)   Requirements for prior notification and approval
by the POTW Director and Public Works Director of any new introduction of
wastewater pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character
of the wastewater prior to introduction in the system;



         (m)   Requirements for the prior notification and
approval by the POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or
pretreatment process used by the permittee. A copy of said notification and
approval shall be furnished to the Public Works Director;



         (n)   A statement that compliance with the permit does
not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the terms of the permit; and



         (o)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW
Director and/or Public Works Director to ensure compliance with this
ordinance, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.



   (J)   Permit duration.  Permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period
less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.



   (K)   Permit transfer.  Wastewater permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation.



   (L)   Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply
for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in
accordance with § 52.051 in a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the existing permit.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



§ 52.070  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the POTW Director and copied to the Public Works
Director a report which contains the information listed in division (B). At
least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and
sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the POTW Director a report
which contains the information listed in division (B). A new source shall
report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.



      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include
a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes.



      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the POTW Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall
be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance
with procedures set out in § 52.079.



         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 52.080 and 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b) and (g), including
40 C.F.R. § 403.12(g)(4).



      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s
current authorized representative as defined in § 52.002 and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.



      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in § 52.070.



      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 52.051(C).



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.071  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 52.070(B)(7):



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director
and Public Works Director no later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay,
and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule; and



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the POTW Director and Public Works Director.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.072  REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
POTW Director a report containing the information described in §
52.070(B)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge
per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall
include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 52.051(C).



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.073  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   Municipalities may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of
requiring the users to conduct sampling and analysis.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the POTW Director but in no case less than once every six
months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
applicable flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be
performed in accordance with procedures set out in §§ 52.079 and 52.080.
All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 52.051(C). A copy of said reports shall be sent to the Public Works
Director.



   (B)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director,
using the procedures prescribed in §§ 52.079 and 52.080, the results of
this monitoring shall be included in the report.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.074  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   Each user must notify the POTW Director and Public Works Director of
any planned significant changes to the user’s operations or system which
might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days
before the change. The permittee shall not begin the changes until receiving
written approval from the control authority and/or municipality. See §
52.075(D) for other reporting requirements.



   (A)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 52.051.



   (B)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 52.051 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
52.051 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include,
but are not limited to, flow or pollutant increases of 20% or greater, and
the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, increases or decreases
to production; increases in discharge of previously reported pollutants;
discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the control authority
and/or municipality; new or changed product lines; new or changed
manufacturing processes and/or chemicals; or new or changed customers.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.075  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in § 52.002, that
may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately
telephone and notify the POTW Director of the incident. This notification
shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. A copy of this written report
shall be furnished to the Public Works Director by the significant
industrial. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense,
loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage
to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property;
nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of
a discharge described in division (A). Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



   (D)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in § 52.002.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.076  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may
require. Copies of said reports shall be furnished to the Public Works
Department by the significant industrial user.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.077  NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   (A)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the
user must notify the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW Director, the user is
not required to resample:



      (1)   If the POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility
at least once a month; or



      (2)   If the POTW Director samples between the user’s
initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.



   (B)   If the POTW Director has performed the sampling and analysis
in lieu of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a
violation, the POTW Director shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results
of the repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violations,
unless one of the following occurs:



      (1)   The POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility at
least once a month;



      (2)   The POTW Director samples the user between their initial
sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling;



      (3)   The POTW Director requires the user to perform sampling
and submit the results to the POTW Director within the 30 day deadline of the
POTW becoming aware of the violation; or



      (4)   Copies of the aforementioned notice of violations and
sampling reports shall be furnished to the Public Works Department.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.078  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   The town prohibits the discharge of any hazardous wastes without
notification to and approval by the POTW Director.



   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW Public Works, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge
into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. Part 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261, the EPA
hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or
other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the waste stream discharge during the calendar month, and an estimation of
the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream expected
to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take
place no later than 180 days before the discharge commences. The user shall
not begin the discharge until receiving written approval from the town. Any
notification under this division need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed conditions must
be submitted under § 52.074. The notification requirement in this section
does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§ 52.070,
52.072 and 52.073.



   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A)
of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than
15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specific in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or
of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months
during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous
waste do not require additional notification.



   (C)   In the case of any new regulation under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within
90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued hereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.079  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed by a laboratory certified by the state to perform the wastewater
analyses in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard
or unless otherwise performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA
town or county utilities. If 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses
must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA and town.
Analyses must be performed by a state-certified lab for each parameter
analyzed, if such certification exists for that parameter.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.080  GRAB AND COMPOSITE SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (B)   Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil
and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other pollutants as
required by 40 C.F.R. § 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs
necessary to be representative of the user’s discharge. See 40 C.F.R. §
403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and
90-day compliance reports. Additionally, the POTW Director may allow
collection of multiple grabs during a 24-hour period which are composited
prior to analysis as allowed under 40 C.F.R. § 136.



   (C)   Composite samples. All wastewater composite samples shall be
collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there
is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using
flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW Director. When
authorizing time- proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be
representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be
documented.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.081  TIMING.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.082  RECORD KEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time
of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the POTW Director.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.083  ELECTRONIC REPORTING.



   The POTW Director and Public Works Director may develop procedures for
receipt of electronic reports for any reporting requirements of this chapter.
Such procedures shall comply with 40 C.F.R. Part 3. These procedures shall be
enforceable under §§ 52.121 through 52.124.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.084  SPECIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR IUS IN SATELLITE POTWS.



   In the case of industrial user located in a satellite POTW
organization’s jurisdiction, all information required to be reported to the
industrial user’s Pretreatment Program Control Authority by the section
shall also be reported to the POTW treatment plant organization.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 52.100  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   The town and/or POTW requires the user to provide and operate
at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage
systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s
premises, but the town and/POTW may, when such a location would be
impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will
not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.



   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.



   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the town and/or POTW and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days
following written notification by the town .



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.101  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   The town and/or county utilities will inspect the facilities of any
user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all
requirements are being complied with.  Persons or occupants of premises
where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the town and/or county
utilities, approval authority and EPA or their representative ready access at
all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or in the performance
of any of their duties. The town and/or county utilities, approval authority
and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices
as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring
and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security
guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from
the town and/or county utilities, approval authority and EPA will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities. Denial of the town or county utilities, approval
authorities or EPA’s access to the user’s premises shall be a violation
of this chapter. Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.102  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the town, approval authority, or EPA has been refused access to a
building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the town designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the town, approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant
from the court having jurisdiction within the town.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 52.120  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data provided by an industrial user to the
POTW Director and Public Works Director pursuant to this chapter identifying
the nature and frequency of a discharge, shall be available to the public
without restriction. All other information which may be so submitted by an
industrial user to the POTW Director in connection with any required reports
shall also be available to the public unless the industrial user or other
interested person specifically identifies the information as confidential
upon submission and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW
Director that the disclosure of such information or a particular part thereof
to the general public would divulge methods or processes entitled to
protection as trade secrets.



   (B)   Information provided by an industrial user to the POTW
Director and Public Works Director that is determined to be entitled to
confidential treatment shall be made available upon written request to the
Division of Water Quality or any state agency for uses related to the
pretreatment program, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit, collection system permit, stormwater permit, and/or
non-discharge permit, and for uses related to judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.



   (C)   Information and data received by the Division or other state
agency in division (B) above shall be subject to the processes set forth in
G.S. § 143-215.3C.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.121  ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Notification of violation.  Whenever the POTW Director and/or
Public Works Director finds that any industrial user has violated or is
violating this chapter, wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or
requirements contained therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW
Director and/or Public Works Director may serve upon such a person a written
notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days from the date of
this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction thereof shall be submitted to the town and Public Works Director
by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.



   (B)   Consent orders.  The POTW Director is hereby empowered to
enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for
the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by
the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect
as an administrative order issued pursuant to division (D) of this section. A
copy of the aforementioned consent order shall be furnished to the town.



   (C)   Show cause hearing. 



      (1)   The POTW Director and/or may order any industrial user
who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this
chapter or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show
cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the
POTW Director and/or Public Works Director determines that a show cause order
should be issued, a notice shall be served on the user specifying the time
and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for
such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any
agent or officer of a corporation.



      (2)   The POTW Director and/or Public Works Director shall
review the evidence presented at the hearing and determine whether the
proposed enforcement action is appropriate.



      (3)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a
prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under § 52.122 nor is any
action or inaction taken by the POTW Director or Public Works Director under
this section subject to an administrative appeal under § 52.051(H).



   (D)   Administrative orders.  When the POTW Director and/or Public
Works Director finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to
violate this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement the POTW Director and/or Public Works Director may
issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those
persons in noncompliance to do any of the following:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements;



      (2)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set
forth in the order;



      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the
event of a continuing or threatened violation; or



      (4)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices
or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a
specified time period.



   (E)   Emergency suspensions.



      (1)   The POTW Director and or town may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary
in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to
violate any condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit.



      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the
notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the
user’s waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director and/or town
shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of
the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
endangerment to any individuals. The POTW Director and/or Public Works
Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the wastewater treatment
service upon proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge. The
industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement describing the
causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence to the POTW Director and/or town prior to the date of the
above-described hearing.



   (F)   Termination of permit or permission to discharge. 



      (1)   The POTW Director and/or Public Works Director may
revoke a wastewater discharge permit or permission to discharge for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



         (a)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his or  her discharge;



         (b)   Failure to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



         (d)   Violation of conditions of the permit or
permission to discharge, conditions of this chapter, or any applicable state
and federal regulations.



      (2)   Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the
proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an
opportunity to show cause under this section why the proposed action should
not be taken.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.122  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty of up to $25,000 per day
per violation.  Penalties between $10,000 and $25,000 per day per violation
may be assessed against a violator only if:



      (1)   For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has
been imposed against the violator within the five years preceding the
violation; or



      (2)   In the case of failure to file, submit, or make
available, as the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by
this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder,
only if the POTW Director determines that the violation was intentional and a
civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five years
preceding the violation.



   (B)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW
Director and/or Public Works Director shall consider the following:



      (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural
resources, to the public health or to public or private property resulting
from the violation;



      (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



      (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or
quality or on air quality;



      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



      (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



      (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or
intentionally;



      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing
to comply with the pretreatment program; and



      (8)   The costs of enforcement to the town.



   (C)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this
section shall be as provided in § 52.051(H).



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.123  OTHER AVAILABLE REMEDIES.



   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this chapter,
and are available to the POTW Director and/or Public Works Director who may
use any single one or combination against a noncompliant user. Additional
available remedies include, but are not limited to:



   (A)   Criminal violations.  The District Attorney for the
applicable Judicial District may, at the request of the town, prosecute
noncompliant users who violate the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B. [Note:
Under state law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term, condition, or
requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to apply for a
pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. § 143-215.6B(f)), to
knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or requirement of a
pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a
pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. § 143-215.6B(g)), to
knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment
permit issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply for a
pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in imminent
danger of death or serious bodily injury, (G.S. § 143-215.6B(h)), and to
falsify information required under G.S. Chapter 143, Article 21 (G.S. §
143-215.6B(i)).]



   (B)   Injunctive relief.  Whenever a user is in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW
Director, through the Town Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
Justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and
permanent injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question.



   (C)   Water supply severance.  Whenever an industrial user is in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service
will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated ability to comply.



   (D)   Public nuisances.  Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued
hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the POTW Director, Town Manager or Public Works
Director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of the appropriate ordinances of the town governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing,
abating or remedying said nuisance.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.124  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The POTW
Director, Town Manager or Public Works Director may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the town’s
enforcement response plan. However, the POTW Director may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW Director,
Town Manager or Public Works Director is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.125  ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a list of those industrial users which
were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable
noncompliance, in 15A NCAC 2H .0903(b)(10), with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.126  ADJUDICATORY HEARINGS.



   (A)   Hearings.  An applicant whose permit is denied, or is granted
subject to conditions he or she deems unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed
a civil penalty under § 52.122, or one issued an administrative order under
§ 52.121 shall have the right to a hearing or hearing(s) in accordance with
regular local government hearing procedures upon making written demand,
identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the POTW Director and
Public Works Director within 30 days following receipt of the significant
industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment or administrative order.
Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the
action shall be final and binding and further appeal is barred. For modified
permits, only those parts of the permit being modified may be adjudicated.
The term and conditions of a permit under review shall be as follows:



      (1)   New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in
the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued
permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the
permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or
until the parties reach a mutual resolution.



      (2)   Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review
in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed
permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect
until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a
mutual resolution.



      (3)   Terminated permits. Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the General Courts of Justice, of a terminated permit, no permit is
in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.



   (B)   Judicial review.  Any person against whom a final order or
decision of the Council or Board serving the town is entered, may seek
judicial review of the order or decision by filling a written request for
review by the Superior Court of the county.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



§ 52.127  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upset.



      (1)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of subsection (2) below are met.



      (2)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and



         (c)   The user has submitted the following information
to the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days with a copy provided to the Public Works Director:



            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and
cause of noncompliance;



            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
is expected to continue; and



            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      (3)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



      (4)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      (5)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the
facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.



   (B)   Prohibited discharge standards defense.  A user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 52.015(A) or the specific
prohibitions in § 52.015(B)(2), (3), (5) through (7) and (9) through (23) if
it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would
cause pass through or interference and that either:



      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and
the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the town or county utilities POTW was regularly in compliance with its
NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with
applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.



   (C)   Bypass.



      (1)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (2) and (3) of this
division.



      (2)   (a)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director and Public Works
Director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible.



         (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW
Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided to the POTW and Public Works
Director within five days of this time the user becomes aware of the bypass.
The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its
cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director may waive the written report on
a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.



      (3)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited and the POTW Director
and/or Public Works Director/Town Manager may take an enforcement action
against a user for a bypass, unless:



            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage;



            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the
bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.
This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent
a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



            3.   The user submitted notices as required under
subsection (2) of this section.



         (b)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated
bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (3)(a)
of this section.



(Ord. 2013-00, passed 7-7-2012)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      71.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      72.   VEHICLE LICENSING



      73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      74.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Compliance with chapter required




Rules of Operation




   70.15   Persons propelling pushcarts, riding bicycles or animals to
obey traffic regulations



   70.16   Special provisions relating to drivers of authorized
emergency vehicles



   70.17   Jumping on or off moving vehicle prohibited



   70.18   Use of horn restricted



   70.19   Bicycle regulations




Traffic-Control Devices, Signals and Markings




   70.30   Obedience required



   70.31   Placement, change and removal



   70.32   Prohibited installation



   70.33   Effect of previously installed devices



   70.34   Signs, markers and directives as to turning



   70.35   One-way street signs



   70.36   Stop and yield signs



   70.37   Stop signs at intersections of through streets



   70.38   Signs concerning vehicle type or weight



   70.39   Speed limit signs



   70.40   Zones of quiet



   70.41   Play streets



   70.42   School zones



   70.43   Traffic-control signal legend



   70.44   Flashing signals




Railroads




   70.55   Jumping on or off trains prohibited



 



   70.99   Traffic Code penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMBULANCE. Vehicle equipped for transporting wounded, injured or sick
persons.



   AUTHORIZED. Official; by authority of the Board of Commissioners, or by
authority of the State Department of Transportation.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.



      (1)   A vehicle operated by a police officer, highway patrol
officer, sheriff or deputy;



      (2)   A fire department vehicle traveling in response to a
fire alarm; or



      (4)   An ambulance as defined above traveling in an emergency.



   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral
curblines or, if none, then the lateral edge of roadway lines of two or more
highways which join one another at any angle whether or not one such highway
crosses the other. Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the
event that such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be
regarded as a separate INTERSECTION.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
designed to run upon the highways which is pulled by a self-propelled
vehicle. This shall not include mopeds as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(27).



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of
the Chief of Police or the State Commissioner of Public Safety, for the
purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic or for the purpose of
prohibiting or regulating the parking of vehicles.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, placed or erected by authority of the Town Board of
Commissioners or the State Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, by which traffic
is alternately directed to stop and go.



   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Town Police Department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.



   STREET, HIGHWAY or ROADWAY.



      (1)   HIGHWAY. The entire width between property or
right-of-way lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the
purposes of vehicular traffic. The terms HIGHWAY and STREET and their
cognates are synonymous.



      (2)   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event
a highway includes two or more separate roadways the term ROADWAY as used
herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such
roadways collectively.



      (3)   STREET. A highway, as defined in division (1) above. The
terms HIGHWAY and STREET and their cognates are synonymous.



   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks; provided, that for the
purposes of this Traffic Code, bicycles shall be deemed vehicles and every
rider of a bicycle upon a highway shall be subject to the provisions of this
Traffic Code applicable to the driver of a vehicle except those which by
their nature can have no application. This term shall not include a device
which is designed for and intended to be used as a means of transportation
for a person with a mobility impairment, is suitable for use both inside and
outside a building, and whose maximum speed does not exceed 12 mph when the
device is being operated by a person with a mobility impairment.



(1991 Code, § 70.01)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1953)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law definitions, see G.S. § 20-4.01



§ 70.02  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required by Chapter 70.



(1991 Code, § 70.02)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1953)  Penalty, see § 70.99



RULES OF OPERATION



§ 70.15  PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS, RIDING BICYCLES OR ANIMALS TO OBEY
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal
upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions of this Traffic Code which by their very
nature can have no application.



(1991 Code, § 70.10)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1953)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.16  SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO DRIVERS OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY
VEHICLES.



   The provisions of this Traffic Code regulating the operation, parking
and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as
defined in § 70.01, except as follows:



   (A)   A driver, when operating such a vehicle in an emergency,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may:



      (1)   Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter
71;



      (2)   Proceed past a red light or a stop signal or stop sign,
but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits as set forth in G.S.
§ 20-145 so long as he or she does not endanger life or property;



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property; and



      (5)   Disregard the right-of-way rule, but only as set forth
in G.S. § 20-156.



   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the
driver of any such vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway, nor protect such driver from the
consequences of any arbitrary exercise of such exemption.



(1991 Code, § 70.11)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1953)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.17  JUMPING ON OR OFF MOVING VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to jump into or enter a motor
vehicle which is in motion, or to alight from a motor vehicle which is in
motion.



(1991 Code, § 70.12)  (Ord. 6, passed - -1930)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.18  USE OF HORN RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sound the horn or warning signal
of any motor vehicle in such manner as to disturb the public, either by
sounding the horn for an unusual period of time, or by blowing a horn that
has sound similar to a fire siren.



(1991 Code, § 70.13)  (Ord. 2, passed - -1930)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.19  BICYCLE REGULATIONS.



   All persons riding bicycles in town during the period from one-half
hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise, or at any other time
when there is not sufficient light to render clearly visible any person on
the street at a distance of 200 feet ahead, shall be required to have
attached thereto a lighted lamp; and those riding bicycles in the town at any
time shall have bells thereon, which shall be rung at a point no closer than
30 feet of a person whom they are approaching. No person shall ride a bicycle
upon the sidewalks of the town.



(1991 Code, § 70.14)  (Ord. 2, passed - -1930)  Penalty, see § 70.99



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS



§ 70.30  OBEDIENCE REQUIRED.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any applicable
official traffic-control device unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted by this chapter to the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle; provided, that no provision of this chapter
for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if
at the time and place of the alleged violation an authorized sign is not in
proper place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required,
such section shall be effective without signs being placed to give notice
thereof.



(1991 Code, § 70.20)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.31  PLACEMENT, CHANGE AND REMOVAL.



   The Department of Transportation with reference to state highways, and
local authorities with reference to highways under their jurisdiction, are
authorized to control vehicles by erecting or installing signs, signals or
other traffic-control devices. Unless otherwise provided by the Town Manager
in any instance, such erection or installation shall be executed under
direction of the Director of Public Works.



(1991 Code, § 70.21)  (Ord. passed 6-8-1965)



§ 70.32  PROHIBITED INSTALLATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect upon the streets or
sidewalks of the town, or at the margin thereof, any traffic sign or
traffic-control signal or device of any description, except such as may be
specifically authorized by the Town Manager, or by an officer or agent of the
town acting under authority of the Town Manager.



(1991 Code, § 70.22)  (Ord. 2, passed - -1930)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.33  EFFECT OF PREVIOUSLY INSTALLED DEVICES.



   All traffic-control devices, signals, signs and markings heretofore
installed by authority of the Board of Commissioners and which are in place
on the effective date of this code shall be deemed to be official
traffic-control devices until such time as they may be removed by authority
of the Board of Commissioners, and until they are so removed it shall be
unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any instruction or directive
indicated by any such official traffic-control device.



(1991 Code, § 70.23)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.34  SIGNS, MARKERS AND DIRECTIVES AS TO TURNING.



   The town, with reference to streets that are not state highways, may
place, erect or install signs indicating that no right, left or “U” turn
is permitted; and may also place, erect or install markers, buttons or other
indications within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles traveling or turning thereat.



(1991 Code, § 70.24)



§ 70.35  ONE-WAY STREET SIGNS.



   The town, with reference to streets that are not state highways, may
place, erect or install signs indicating that traffic shall proceed only in a
certain direction.



(1991 Code, § 70.25)



§ 70.36  STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.



   (A)   The town, with reference to streets that are not state
highways, may place, erect or install stop signs indicating that vehicles
shall be brought to a stop before proceeding into an intersection.



   (B)   The town, with reference to streets that are not state
highways, may place, erect or install yield or yield right-of-way signs
indicating that no vehicle shall enter an intersection without first yielding
the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from any direction.



(1991 Code, § 70.26)



§ 70.37  STOP SIGNS AT INTERSECTIONS OF THROUGH STREETS.



   The town, with reference to streets which are not state highways, may
designate streets or portions thereof as through streets, and may direct that
stop signs be placed at entrances to intersections thereof.



(1991 Code, § 70.27)



§ 70.38  SIGNS CONCERNING VEHICLE TYPE OR WEIGHT.



   The town, with reference to streets that are not state highways, may
place, erect or install signs indicating that vehicles of certain types or in
excess of certain weights are prohibited on certain streets or portions of
certain streets.



(1991 Code, § 70.28)



§ 70.39  SPEED LIMIT SIGNS.



   The town, with reference to streets that are not state highways, may
place, erect or install signs indicating speed limits.



(1991 Code, § 70.29)



§ 70.40  ZONES OF QUIET.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating a
zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall
sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an
emergency, nor shall he or she permit a radio to emit sound that can be heard
above the sound of traffic within such zone, or make any unnecessary noise.



(1991 Code, § 70.30)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.41  PLAY STREETS.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating
any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle
upon any such street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having
business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such
driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving any such street or portion
thereof.



(1991 Code, § 70.31)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.42  SCHOOL ZONES.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating
any street or part thereof as a school zone, all drivers of motor vehicle
using such street or part thereof shall exercise the greatest care in driving
for the protection of children.



(1991 Code, § 70.32)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.43  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
the words “Go,” “Caution” or “Stop,” or exhibiting different
colored lights successively one at a time, the following colors only shall be
used, and those words and lights shall indicate as follows.



   (A)   Green alone or “Go”



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either
such turn, but vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such
signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (B)   Yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green
or “Go” signal.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot
be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the
intersection.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that
there is insufficient time to cross a roadway, and any pedestrian then
starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.



   (C)   Red alone or “Stop.”



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as
may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain standing until
green or “Go” is shown alone.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway
unless he or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.



      (3)   Except as hereinafter provided, no operator of a vehicle
approaching an intersection or other designated crossing at which a traffic
light has been installed on any highway or street in the town street system,
shall enter such intersection or crossing with such vehicle while the traffic
light is emitting a red light for the traffic moving on the street or highway
in the direction that such approaching vehicle is traveling. Any vehicle,
after coming to a complete stop for a red light facing the vehicle, may make
a right turn after yielding to pedestrians and other vehicles. The making of
a right turn on particular traffic signals emitting a red light may be
prohibited by ordinances passed by the Town Board, which ordinances shall
become effective after posting of a sign giving notice thereof.



(1991 Code, § 70.33)  (Ord. passed 1-7-1975)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.44  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.



   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at a limit line when marked, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop
at a stop sign.



   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution sign). When yellow lenses are
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.



(1991 Code, § 70.34)  Penalty, see § 70.99



RAILROADS



§ 70.55  JUMPING ON OR OFF TRAINS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than railroad employees to
jump off or on a moving train within the town.



(1991 Code, § 70.42)  (Ord. 6, passed - -1930)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  TRAFFIC CODE PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Civil penalties as set forth in division (D) below
shall be assessed for the violation of the provisions of Chapters 70, 71, 72,
73 and 74.



      (2)   Any person who fails to deliver or mail the penalty
charge to the Town Hall office and accumulates five or more delinquent
parking tickets shall have his or her vehicle impounded. The owner shall be
allowed to pick up his or her automobile upon payment of the assessed penalty
charge plus a $25 impound fee, and any additional private or wrecker
transportation fees.



   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of Title VII for
which no specific penalty is otherwise provided shall be responsible for an
infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of not more than $50.



      (2)   A citation for said civil penalty shall be issued by the
Town Manager.



   (C)   Title VII may also be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)    Schedule of civil penalties.



      (1)   The violation of those provisions of the Traffic Code
referenced hereinafter are subject to civil penalties as set forth
hereinafter. Each violation and any delinquent penalty are not subject to the
penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4, but instead constitute civil penalties to
be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt when the
violator does not pay the penalty within the prescribed period of time,
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(c).



      (2)   The following civil penalties are hereby established:



 


Violation

 

Penalty



Illegally parking in a fire lane
 

$35



Overtime parking
 





   First violation

 

$10




   Second or subsequent violation within a 24-hour period

 

Additional civil penalty of $15



Unauthorized parking in a handicapped parking space
 

$100



All other violations enumerated in Title VII
 

$10




 



      (3)   Parking violations included in this section shall be
delinquent after the tenth day from the issuance of the citation; thereafter
the following civil penalties shall apply to the foregoing parking
violations, in addition to the stated penalty:



 


Delinquent Period

 

Additional Penalty



10 to 20 days delinquent on $10 or $15 penalty
 

$25



10 to 20 days delinquent on $35 penalty
 

$25



10 to 20 days delinquent on $100 penalty
 

$25



For each additional 10-day period of delinquency thereafter for the penalties
set forth in above, the town may assess an additional $25 penalty, with a
maximum of three delinquency penalties per violation, pursuant to this table.



 



   (E)   Traffic schedule penalties.



      (1)   Whoever violates any provision of Ch. 73, Sch. I shall
be responsible for an infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of
not more than $50, unless otherwise provided by law.



(G.S. § 14-4(b))



      (2)   Whoever violates any provision of Ch. 73, Sch. II shall
be responsible for an infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of
not more than $50, unless otherwise provided by law.



(G.S. § 14-4(b))



      (3)   Whoever violates any provision of Ch. 73, Sch. III shall
be responsible for an infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of
not more than $50, unless otherwise provided by law.



(G.S. § 14-4(b))



   (F)   Parking schedule penalties.



      (1)   Any violation for the penalty shall be issued by the
Town Manager.



         (a)   A citation for the civil penalty shall be issued
by the Town Manager.



         (b)   Each citation for a civil penalty must be paid
within 72 hours of issuance.



      (2)   Each and every day that the violator continues in
violation of any provision of Ch. 74, Sch. I shall be a separate and distinct
offense.



      (3)   Ch. 74, Sch. I may also be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. passed 11-14-2006)



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Compliance with chapter required



   71.02   Compliance with parking signs required



   71.03   Parking in marked spaces



   71.04   Two-hour zones; payment of tickets



   71.05   Yellow lines denote no parking area



§ 71.01  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required by Chapter 71.



(1991 Code, § 71.01)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.02  COMPLIANCE WITH PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED.



   When authorized signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof, in
contradiction or violation of such signs.



(1991 Code, § 71.02)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1953)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  PARKING IN MARKED SPACES.



   Where parking spaces are marked by white lines, it shall be unlawful
for any person to park a vehicle within any such parking space except
completely within such space and with no part of the vehicle extending over
any such white line.



(1991 Code, § 71.03)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1953; Ord. passed 12-4-1962) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.04  TWO-HOUR ZONES; PAYMENT OF TICKETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on the
street of the town and leave it parked for more than two hours when signs
advising that there is a two-hour limit have been posted by the town. In the
event a motorist shall violate this section, he or she shall first be given a
parking ticket which can be paid at the Town Hall by the payment of $5. In
the event such parking ticket is not paid within 30 days, a violation of this
section of overparking and failing to pay the $5 fine shall constitute a
misdemeanor and a warrant shall be issued returnable to the proper state
court.



(1991 Code, § 71.04)  (Ord. passed 10-7-1969)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.05  YELLOW LINES DENOTE NO PARKING AREA.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within any area
which is designated by yellow lines as a no parking area.



(1991 Code, § 71.05)  (Ord. passed 12-4-1962)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 72:  VEHICLE LICENSING



Section



   72.01   Compliance with chapter required



   72.02   Definition



   72.03   Annual tax on certain vehicles



   72.04   Tax and registration year



   72.05   Registration and payment of tax



   72.06   Issuance of license decal or plate



§ 72.01  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required by Chapter 72.



(1991 Code, § 72.01)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1953)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RESIDENT. Any person who has had a place of abode within the corporate
limits of the town for a period of six months or intends to remain within the
corporate limits for such period.



(1991 Code, § 72.02)  (Ord. passed 12-22-1953)



§ 72.03  ANNUAL TAX ON CERTAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual license tax in the maximum
amount permitted by G.S. § 20-97 upon each motor vehicle listed for property
tax purposes in the town.



   (B)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to motor
vehicles operated for display or exhibition purposes by manufacturers or
dealers and which bear dealers’ license plates issued by the state.



(1991 Code, § 72.03)  (Ord. passed 12-22-1953; Ord. passed 6-14-1983; Ord.
passed 6-11-1985; Ord. passed 6-21-1988)



§ 72.04  TAX AND REGISTRATION YEAR.



   The annual license tax imposed by this chapter shall be for each
registration year beginning with January 1 and terminating at midnight on the
next succeeding December 31; and the license tax imposed by this chapter
shall not be prorated for any period less than a registration year.



(1991 Code, § 72.04)  (Ord. passed 12-22-1953)



§ 72.05  REGISTRATION AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   (A)   The owner of any motor vehicle upon which a tax is levied by
this chapter shall pay the prescribed tax at the time required for paying
property taxes.



   (B)   Each registration shall include the name and address of the
owner of the vehicle, the make thereof, and its model, serial number and
motor number.



(1991 Code, § 72.05)  (Ord. passed 12-22-1953)



§ 72.06  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE DECAL OR PLATE.



   The Tax Collector of the town, upon the proper registration of any
motor vehicle and the payment of the license tax imposed by this chapter,
shall issue, without additional cost to the owner, one license decal or
license plate for each motor vehicle so registered.



(1991 Code, § 72.06)  (Ord. passed 12-22-1953)



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Speed limits



   II.   One-way streets



   III.   No through trucks allowed



   IV.   Four-way stops



SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   Speed limits as indicated shall be in force at the following
locations:



 


Street

 

Location

 

Speed Limit (mph)

 

Ord. No.

 

Date





East Duncan
 
One block section at the recreation park area from First Street to the
eastern boundary of the park
 

20

 

-

 

7-12-1983



East Edgar
 
One block section at the recreation park area from Main Street to First Street
 

20

 

-

 

7-12-1983



First Street
 
One block section at the recreation park area from D Street to E Street
 

20

 

-

 

7-12-1983



Front Street
 
From midpoint between Eighth and Ninth Street to Second Street
 

20

 

-

 

- -



Main Street
 
From Killgrey Street to Harnett Street
 

20

 

-

 

- -



NC 27
 
From SR 1286 eastward to a point 0.03 miles east of SR 1254
 

50

 

-

 

4-14-1992



SR 1286
 
From SR 1291 eastward to NC 27
 

50

 

-

 

4-14-1992



SR 1291
 
From a point approximately 0.30 miles west of SR 1286 eastward to a point
0.24 miles south of US 421
 

50

 

-

 

4-14-1992



Washington Street
 
 

20

 

-

 

1-12-1982





 



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required by this schedule.



(1991 Code, Ch. 73, Sch. I)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1953; Ord. passed 1-12-1982;
Ord. passed 7-12-1983; Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 11-15-1992) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II.  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   (A)   The following is designated as a one-way street and all
vehicles shall be moved only in the direction indicated:



 


Street

 

Location

 

Direction

 

Ord. No.

 

Date



Eighth Street
 
From Front Street to James Street
 

South

 

-

 

- -



Ninth Street
 
Between Ivey Street and Front Street
 

North

 

-

 

4-13-1982




 



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required by this schedule.



(1991 Code, Ch. 73, Sch. II)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1953; Ord. passed
4-13-1982)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III.  NO THROUGH TRUCKS ALLOWED.



   (A)   The following are designated as a no through truck streets.



 


Street

 

Location

 

Direction

 

Ord. No.

 

Date



First Street
 
From McNeill Street to Lofton Street
 
North and south
 

-

 

6-8-1993



Lofton Street
 
From First Street to Main Street
 
East and west
 

-

 

6-8-1993




 



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required by this schedule.



(Ord. passed 6-8-1993) Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV.  FOUR-WAY STOPS.



   The following are designated as four-way stops.



 


Intersection

 

Ord. No.

 

Date



South 10th Street and West Lofton Street
 

2014-18

 

4-9-2014



South 13th Street and West Ivy Street and South 13th Street and West
Killiegrey Street
 

2014-02

 

8-13-2013



South 13th Street and West McNeill Street
 

2016-01A

 

8-11-2015




 



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 2014-18, passed 4-9-2014; Ord.
2016-01A, passed 8-11-2015)



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Parking prohibited



SCHEDULE I.  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations:



 


Street

 

Location

 

Side

 

Ord. No.

 

Date



East James
 
From intersection with Main Street, east to 1st Street
 

South

 

-

 

3-10-1992



Front Street
 
From its intersection with Ninth Street to approximately 50 feet west of the
intersection
 

South

 

-

 

4-11-1989




 



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required by this schedule.



(1991 Code, Ch. 74, Sch. I)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1953; Ord. passed 3-10-1992) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMAL CONTROL



      91.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES



      92.   FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS



      93.   NUISANCES



      94.   NOISE CONTROL



      95.   PARADES, STREET FESTIVALS AND DEMONSTRATIONS



      96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      97.   VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMAL CONTROL



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Purpose and intent



   90.02   Establishment of bird sanctuary




General Regulations




   90.20   Hunting and killing of animals



   90.21   Keeping livestock within town limits



   90.22   Number of chickens (hens) permitted



   90.23   Number of dogs permitted



   90.24   Number of cats permitted



   90.25   Confinement and running at large



   90.26   Possession of animals and strays




Dangerous Animals




   90.40   Potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs



   90.41   Inherently dangerous exotic animals




Administration and Enforcement




   90.60   Impoundment and reclaiming of animals



   90.61   Enforcement agents designated



 



   90.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide and define authority of the
County Animal Control Department within the towns of Angier, Coats, Erwin and
Lillington. The County Animal Control now has charge of protecting the
citizens of these towns from rabies transmitted by unconfined, uncontrolled
or un-immunized animals, to regulate animals that may be a nuisance, to
insure that all animals are treated in a humane manner and in the promotion
of responsible pet ownership and animal welfare. The County Animal Control in
cooperation with the towns of Angier, Coats, Erwin and Lillington are hereby
charged with the responsibility of animal control in conjunction within these
town’s jurisdictions. This chapter will supersede all town animal control
ordinances and shall pertain to the towns of Angier, Erwin, Coats and
Lillington only. The most current county animal control ordinance shall also
pertain to the towns in agreement of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)



§ 90.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF BIRD SANCTUARY.



   (A)   The area embraced within the corporate limits of the town and
all land owned or leased by the town outside the corporate limits is hereby
designated as a bird sanctuary.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally trap, hunt, shoot, or
otherwise kill, within a sanctuary hereby established, any native wild bird.
It shall be lawful to trap birds or fowl specifically declared a nuisance by
the Town Board when such birds or fowl are found to be congregating in such
number in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace
to health or property.



   (C)   The bird clubs of the town are hereby granted permission to
erect artistic signs, giving notice of the regulations therein provided, at
such places and of such design as may be approved by the Town Board.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013) Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Bird sanctuary establishment, see G.S. § 160A-188



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 90.20  HUNTING AND KILLING OF ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or kill any animal within
the territorial limits of the town. Trapping may be done with permission from
the County Animal Control Department. This section does not apply to the
Police Department or County Animal Control, or duly authorized agents when
enforcing the provisions provided in this chapter.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.21  KEEPING LIVESTOCK WITHIN TOWN LIMITS.



   No person may keep within the town any livestock and/or fowl except in
accordance with this section.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep, house
or stable any: horse, mule, pony, cow, sheep, goat, swine or any other
livestock including ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas within the corporate
limits of the town.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep or house
any cattle, goat, horse, swine, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas or any other
livestock on a fenced lot with in the corporate limits of the town.



   (C)   Any chickens kept within the corporate limits of the town must
be contained by a fence, building or other enclosure that will ensure that
the chickens will not run at large.



   (D)   Any fowl found running at large may be taken into possession
and/or destroyed by County Animal Control anywhere within the corporate
limits of the town.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.22  NUMBER OF CHICKENS (HENS) PERMITTED.



   (A)   A maximum of six hens (Gallus gallus domesticus) will be
allowed per household.



   (B)   No roosters or other poultry breeds will be permitted.



   (C)   No free-ranging permitted; hens must be kept in a chicken coop
or enclosed runs at all times and are not permitted to roam freely on the
owner’s lot.



   (D)   The location of the coop and enclosed run must be in the rear
of the owner’s lot as determined by the line projected along the rear of
the dwelling to each sideline and be 20 feet away from the adjoining lots.



   (E)   The coop and enclosed run must be a minimum of ten feet in
length and ten feet in width and a maximum of 16 feet in length and 16 feet
in width.



   (F)   Coop design should provide ample ventilation to avoid odors
and be made predator proof.



   (G)   All manure and wood shavings from the coop must be disposed of
properly by removing off-site by the owner or professional removal service.



   (H)   Prior to beginning coop and enclosure construction, a land use
application shall be submitted and approved by the Zoning Administrator, for
all coop and run designs.



   (I)   The Code Enforcement officer, and its designees, has the right
to enter onto a property for the purpose of inspecting coop and run to ensure
compliance with these requirements. The homeowner will be notified no less
than three days prior to the inspection date and has the right to be present
during the inspection.



   (J)   Owners who are determined to be in violation may be allowed to
correct the violation(s) and/or be subject to a fine, as per the town’s
code. Daily penalties will be assessed in the event that the violation(s)
continue. The town may revoke this privilege if an owner has had three or
more violations during one calendar year.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.23  NUMBER OF DOGS PERMITTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on any lot or premises
within the corporate limits more than three dogs. This limitation shall not
apply to dogs less than four months of age. Any person wanting to keep more
than three dogs will apply to the town for a license to operate a dog kennel.
Prior to the issuing of such license it shall be determined that the kennel
would be in compliance with all town and state regulations.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.24  NUMBER OF CATS PERMITTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on any lot or premises
within the corporate limits more than four cats. This limitation shall not
apply to cats less than four months of age.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.25  CONFINEMENT AND RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   No person owning or having possession, charge, custody or
control of any animal may cause, permit or allow the animal to stray or in
any manner to run at large upon any public street, sidewalk or other public
property or to stray, run at large or otherwise trespass upon the private
property of another.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow such
animal to be at large on any town  property.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping
or in charge of any animal to fail or refuse to remove feces deposited by the
animal on any street, sidewalk, park or other publicly-owned property.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail or
refuse to remove feces deposited by the animal on any private property.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.26  POSSESSION OF ANIMALS AND STRAYS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the town knowingly and
intentionally, unless with consent of the owner, to harbor, feed and keep in
their possession by confinement or otherwise allow to remain on their
property any animal which does not belong to them unless they notify the
County Animal Control within 48 hours from the time such animal came into his
or her possession.



   (B)   Any person who feeds a stray animal and/or allows the animal
to stay on their property for at least two days will be considered the
legally responsible for such animal and any violations caused by the animal.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to surrender any
such stray animal to the Police Department or County Animal Control or person
duly authorized upon demand.



   (D)   The purpose of this section is to aid in rabies control and to
prevent the intentional or unintentional possession of pets belonging to
other persons.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)  Penalty, see § 90.99



DANGEROUS ANIMALS



§ 90.40  POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a citizen to keep a dog within the
corporate limits of the town a dog that has been deemed potentially dangerous
or dangerous by County Animal Control and any other animal services agency in
the state.



   (B)   Any owner found in violation of this section will be required
to release the dog to the County Animal Control Department for euthanasia and
will face a civil fine of $400.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013; Ord. 2016-08, passed 4-11-2016)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.41  INHERENTLY DANGEROUS EXOTIC ANIMALS.



   This section shall be in accordance with the County Animal Control
Ordinance .



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 90.60  IMPOUNDMENT AND RECLAIMING OF CAPTURED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any animal within the town without an owner, any animal
running at large within the town, or any animal whose owner fails to have the
animal vaccinated in accordance with the laws of the state, or an animal
appearing within the town without a rabies vaccination tag shall be taken by
County Animal Control and confined for a period of time until reclaimed by
the owner with a pre-paid rabies voucher, adopted with a pre-paid rabies
voucher or euthanized by the County Animal Control Department.



   (B)   If any animal is not redeemed by the owner within three days
from the time Animal Control takes possession of the animal, the animal shall
be put up for adoption or disposed of under the regulations set forth by the
county animal control ordinance and the state statutes.



   (C)   In order for the owner to redeem an animal, such owner must
first show that the rabies vaccination tag has been procured. In addition the
owner shall pay a penalty of $50 for allowing the animal to run at large. The
fee may be adjusted in the new fiscal years in the county animal fees. The
owner must pay daily expenses for boarding and caring for the animal.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)



§ 90.61  ENFORCEMENT AGENTS DESIGNATED.



   Primary responsibility for enforcing the provisions of this chapter is
assigned to the County Animal Control Department. Municipal police
departments will assist when needed.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Penalties and remedies shall be in accordance with the county animal
control ordinance.



(Ord. passed 7-16-2013)



CHAPTER 91:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES



Section



   91.01   Existence of state of emergency



   91.02   Declaration of emergency by proclamation



   91.03   Imposition of restrictions; exemptions



   91.04   Authorization of specific restrictions



   91.05   Compliance with restrictions imposed by proclamation
mandatory



   91.06   Extension, alteration and rescission of proclamation



   91.07   Authority to request state police and military forces;
martial law



   91.08   End of emergency period



   91.09   Powers of Mayor pro tem while Mayor absent or disabled



   91.10   Effective time, publication, amendment and recision of
proclamation



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  EXISTENCE OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.



   A local state of emergency may be declared for any disaster as provided
by G.S. §§ 166A-19.22 and 166A-19.31.



(G.S. § 166A-8)  (1991 Code, § 91.01)



§ 91.02  DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY BY PROCLAMATION.



   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the
town, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is
hereby empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the
existence of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively
protect the lives and property of people within the town, to place in effect
any or all of the restrictions authorized by this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 91.02)



§ 91.03  IMPOSITION OF RESTRICTIONS; EXEMPTIONS.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by proclamation
the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area
specifically designated or described within the town and to specific hours of
the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law
enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees, doctors,
nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military
personnel whether state or federal; on duty employees of public utilities,
public transportation companies and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting
and television broadcasting corporations operated for profit; and such other
classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order
and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of
the people within the town.



(1991 Code, § 91.03)



§ 91.04  AUTHORIZATION OF SPECIFIC RESTRICTIONS.



   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may
impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:



   (A)   Prohibit or regulate the possession off one’s own premises
of explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind, and
prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof;



   (B)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or
intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off
one’s own premises;



   (C)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil
or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon
any public property;



   (D)   Prohibit or regulate the sale or use of gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha or any other explosive or flammable fluids or substances;



   (E)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street or upon any
other public property, except by those in search of medical assistance, food
or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of
themselves or their families or some member thereof;



   (F)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of
any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of
business, places of entertainment, and any other place of public assembly; and



   (G)   Establish hours during which a curfew shall be in effect.



(1991 Code, § 91.04)



§ 91.05  COMPLIANCE WITH RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED BY PROCLAMATION MANDATORY.



   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed
by any proclamation authorized by this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 91.05)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  EXTENSION, ALTERATION AND RESCISSION OF PROCLAMATION.



   Any proclamation of emergency promulgated pursuant to this chapter may
be extended, altered or rescinded in any particular during the continued or
threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent
proclamation.



(1991 Code, § 91.06)



§ 91.07  AUTHORITY TO REQUEST STATE POLICE AND MILITARY FORCES; MARTIAL LAW.



   If, in the sound discretion of the Mayor, it shall appear that the
emergency is, or that a threatened emergency is likely to be, of such
proportions that the means available to the town to maintain law and order
within the police jurisdiction of the town are insufficient for such purpose,
the Mayor shall, promptly and by the most expeditious means of communication,
inform the government of the situation and request that such police or
military forces of the state be provided promptly; and if, during an actual
state of emergency the Mayor shall find that the civil courts within the
police jurisdiction of the town are unable to perform their lawful duties and
that, by reason of widespread lawlessness, writes and other process cannot be
served or executed, the Mayor shall inform the governor of his or her
findings and may recommend to him or her that a state of martial law be
proclaimed within the police jurisdiction of the town.



(1991 Code, § 91.07)



§ 91.08  END OF EMERGENCY PERIOD.



   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or
any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by the Board of Commissioners.



(1991 Code, § 91.08)



§ 91.09  POWERS OF MAYOR PRO TEM WHILE MAYOR ABSENT OR DISABLED.



   If the Mayor is absent or unable for any reason, temporarily to perform
his or her duties, then during such absence or inability, the Mayor pro tem
is hereby empowered to exercise all the powers granted the Mayor by this
chapter.



(1991 Code, § 91.09)



§ 91.10  EFFECTIVE TIME, PUBLICATION, AMENDMENT AND RECISION OF
PROCLAMATION.



   (A)   This section applies to proclamations issued under the
authority of G.S. §§ 166A-19.22 and 166A-19.31, and any other applicable
statutes and provisions of the common law.



   (B)   All prohibitions and restrictions imposed by proclamation
shall take effect immediately upon publication of the proclamation in the
area affected unless the proclamation sets a later time. For the purpose of
requiring compliance, publication may consist of reports of the substance of
the prohibitions and restrictions in the mass communications media serving
the affected area or other effective methods of disseminating the necessary
information quickly. As soon as practicable, however, appropriate
distribution of the full text of any proclamation shall be made. This
division (B) shall not be governed by the provisions of G.S. § 1-597.



   (C)   Prohibitions and restrictions may be extended as to time or
area, amended or rescinded by proclamation. Prohibitions and restrictions
imposed by proclamation under the authority of G.S. §§ 166A-19.22 and
166A-19.31 shall expire five days after their last imposition unless sooner
terminated under G.S. § 166A-19.31. Prohibitions and restrictions imposed by
publication of the Governor shall expire five days after their last
imposition unless sooner terminated by proclamation of the Governor.



(1991 Code, § 91.10)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50 or imprisoned not more than
30 days.



(G.S. § 14-4(a))  (1991 Code, § 91.99)



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS



Section




General Provisions




   92.01   Burning of trash



   92.02   Removal of flammable wastes



   92.03   Smoking near flammable material



   92.04   Negligent use or carrying of fire prohibited




Fire Prevention Code




   92.15   Adoption by reference



   92.16   Amendments



   92.17   Administration and enforcement



   92.18   Permits; period of validity



   92.19   Permit fees



   92.20   Bond required for blasting permits



   92.21   Modifications



   92.22   Appeals from decisions of Chief of Fire Department



   92.23   New materials, processes or occupancies which may require
permits



   92.24   Violations; remedy of prohibited conditions




Firearms and Explosives




   92.35   Firearms and explosives



 



   92.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department, see §§ 32.020 through 32.029



   Police Department, see §§ 32.001 through 32.005



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  BURNING OF TRASH.



   No person shall burn or cause to be burned any trash, refuse, leaves,
litter or other material of any kind outside any building, on or in any
street, sidewalk, lot or yard within the first fire limit district of the
town; except that it shall be permissible for any property owner to burn off
his or her lot or yard within the secondary fire district upon applying to
the Town Manager for a permit, subject to the discretionary approval of the
permit after a safety inspection of the lot or yard by the Fire Chief or
Assistant Fire Chief and subject to the presence of the Fire Department at
the scene of the burning at a date and time that is completely within the
discretion of the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief and Town Manager.



(1991 Code, § 92.01)  (Ord. passed 4-13-1982)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.02  REMOVAL OF FLAMMABLE WASTES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall permit any accumulation of waste
paper, weeds, litter or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind
to remain upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot or other open space.



      (2)   Every owner or occupant of property shall cut down and
remove therefrom, all weeds, grass, vines and other growth which endangers
such property or any other property, or which is likely to be fired.



      (3)   Any person who fails to remove any of the above hazards
within five days after notice from the Chief of the Fire Department, such
hazards may be corrected by the town and the cost thereof assessed against
the property.



   (B)   (1)   No person making, using, storing or having charge or
control of any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter or
combustible trash or waste, shall fail, neglect or refuse at the close of
each day to cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked
in an orderly manner to be removed from the premises or stored in
noncombustible containers.



      (2)   This section shall not apply to sawmills, planing mills
or similar business establishments, where the usual litter or refuse is
reasonably cared for and disposed of.



(1991 Code, § 92.02)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  SMOKING NEAR FLAMMABLE MATERIAL.



   No person shall bring or suffer to be brought into any barn or outhouse
within the town wherein there is any straw, hay, fodder or other flammable
material, or into any structure which is in the process of erection, any
lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, candle or lamp, or any other thing which may
ignite such flammable material.



(1991 Code, § 92.03)  (Ord. 4, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  NEGLIGENT USE OR CARRYING OF FIRE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or carry fire in the streets
or thickly settle parts of the town in a careless and negligent manner.



(1991 Code, § 92.04)  Penalty, see § 92.99



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 92.15  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion,
that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code recommended by the
American Insurance Association, being particularly the most current edition
thereof and the whole thereof, except insofar as inconsistent with the laws
of the state (including the North Carolina State Building Code), this code
and other ordinance of the town, of which Code a copy thereof has been placed
and is now on file in the office of the Town Clerk, and such code is hereby
adopted and incorporated in this subchapter as fully as if set out at length
herein.



(1991 Code, § 92.15)  (Ord. passed 6-10-1970)



§ 92.16  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Wherever the word “municipality” is used in the Fire
Prevention Code hereby adopted it shall be construed to mean the Town of
Lillington, in Harnett County, North Carolina.



   (B)   Wherever the term “corporation counsel” is used in the
Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted, it shall be construed to mean the Town
Attorney.



   (C)   Wherever the term “bureau of fire prevention” is used in
the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted it shall be construed to mean the
Board of Commissioners; and wherever the term “chief of the bureau of fire
prevention” is used in such code it shall be construed to mean the Chief of
the Fire Department, or such other person as may be designated by the Board
of Commissioners for such purposes.



   (D)   The limits referred to in that section of the Fire Prevention
Code hereby adopted in which the storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited, shall be coextensive with the corporate limits of the town.



   (E)   The limits referred to in that section of the Fire Prevention
Code hereby adopted, in which storage of flammable liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as the fire limits of
the town.



   (F)   The limits referred to in that section of the Fire Prevention
Code hereby adopted, in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are
prohibited, are hereby established as the fire limits of the town.



   (G)   The limits referred to in that section of the Fire Prevention
Code hereby adopted in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted, are hereby established as industrial zones.



(1991 Code, § 92.16)  (Ord. passed 6-10-1970)



§ 92.17  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 92.15 shall be administered and
enforced by the Chief of the Fire Department, with the cooperation of the
Town Manager and such other persons as may be designated for such purpose by
the Mayor and the Board of Commissioners.



(1991 Code, § 92.17)



§ 92.18  PERMITS; PERIOD OF VALIDITY.



   Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code
adopted by § 92.15 shall be valid for a period of one year, or for such
lesser period as may be specified therein; provided, that where a license is
required by the town in addition to a permit required by the Fire Prevention
Code, then such permit shall be valid for the period of such license and may
be made renewable to the same extent that the license may be made renewable.



(1991 Code, § 92.18)



§ 92.19  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Each applicant for a permit required by the Fire Prevention
Code adopted by § 92.15 shall pay to the Town Clerk, prior to the issuance
of the permit, such fee therefor as provided in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution from time to
time, prepare schedules of fees for permits issued pursuant to the Fire
Prevention Code and for which a fee is not provided or prohibited by state
law. Copies of such schedules shall be posted for public information in the
offices of the Chief of the Fire Department and the Town Clerk.



(1991 Code, § 92.19)



§ 92.20  BOND REQUIRED FOR BLASTING PERMITS.



   With reference to the appropriate section of the Fire Prevention Code
adopted by § 92.15, before a permit to do blasting shall be issued, the
applicant for such permit shall file a bond deemed adequate in each case by
the Board of Commissioners, which bond shall become available for the payment
of any damages arising from the permitted blasting.



(1991 Code, § 92.20)  (Ord. passed 5-8-1962)



§ 92.21  MODIFICATIONS.



   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 92.15, upon application
in writing by the owner or lessee of any property affected thereby, or his or
her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of the Fire Prevention Code; provided, that
the spirit of the Fire Prevention Code shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification,
when granted or allowed, and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department
thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Fire Department and a signed
copy shall be furnished the applicant for such modification.



(1991 Code, § 92.21)



§ 92.22  APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, adopted by § 92.15, do not
apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Fire Prevention Code has
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the Board of Commissioners
within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.



(1991 Code, § 92.22)



§ 92.23  NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS.



   (A)   The Mayor, the Chief of the Fire Department, the Town Manager
and any two members of the Board of Commissioners shall act as a committee to
determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be
heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require
permits, in addition to those enumerated in Fire Prevention Code adopted by
§ 92.15.



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall post such list in a
conspicuous place in the office and on the bulletin board at the Town Hall,
and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.



(1991 Code, § 92.23)



§ 92.24  VIOLATIONS; REMEDY OF PROHIBITED CONDITIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to
comply with any provision of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 92.15, or
to violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or to violate
any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or to fail to comply with such order as affirmed or
modified by the Board of Commissioners or by a court of competent
jurisdiction within the time fixed therein. The imposition of a penalty for
any violation or permit shall not excuse the violation or authorize it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The application of any penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(1991 Code, § 92.24)  Penalty, see § 92.99



FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES



§ 92.35  FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   The discharge of firearms is prohibited at any time or place
within the town except when used in defense of person or property or pursuant
to lawful directions of law enforcement officers.



(G.S. § 160A-189)



   (B)   The sale, possession, storage, use or conveyance of any
explosive, corrosive, inflammable or radioactive substances, or any weapons
or instrumentalities of mass death and destruction, is hereby prohibited
within the town.



(G.S. § 160A-183)  (1991 Code, § 92.35)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50 or imprisoned for not
more than 30 days.



(1991 Code, § 92.99)



CHAPTER 93:  NUISANCES



Section



   93.01   Public nuisances generally; offensive businesses



   93.02   Investigation



   93.03   Notice to abate



   93.04   Removal by town upon failure or refusal to obey notice



   93.05   Cost of removal to be charged to owner



   93.06   Unpaid charges to be lien on property



   93.07   Provisions of chapter cumulative



 



   93.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Abatement of public health nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-193



§ 93.01  PUBLIC NUISANCES GENERALLY; OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES.



   (A)   The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant
lot or other parcel of land within the corporate limits is hereby declared to
be dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or safety and to constitute
a public nuisance:



      (1)   The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds or grass to a
height in excess of 12 inches, causing or threatening to cause a hazard
detrimental to the public health or safety;



      (2)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is
offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitance therein of rats,
mice, snakes and vermin of any kind which are or may be dangerous or
prejudicial to the public health;



      (3)   Any accumulation of rubbish, trash or junk, causing or
threatening to cause a fire hazard, or causing or threatening to cause the
accumulation of stagnant water, or causing or threatening to cause the
inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which are or
may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health; and



      (4)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which
violates the rules and regulations of the County Health Department.



   (B)   No person shall establish or operate within the town any tan
yard, slaughterhouse, slaughter pen or other business which, in its nature,
is offensive to the public.



(1991 Code, § 93.01)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.02  INVESTIGATION.



   The Town Manager, upon notice from any person of the existence of any
of the conditions described in § 93.01, shall cause to be made by the
appropriate County Health Department or town official such investigation as
may be necessary to determine whether, in fact, such conditions exist as to
constitute a public nuisance as declared in § 93.01.



(1991 Code, § 93.02)



§ 93.03  NOTICE TO ABATE.



   Upon a determination that conditions constituting a public nuisance
exist, the Town Manager shall notify, in writing, the owner, occupant or
person in possession of the premises in question of the conditions
constituting the public nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement thereof
within 15 days from the receipt of the written notice.



(1991 Code, § 93.03)



§ 93.04  REMOVAL BY TOWN UPON FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO OBEY NOTICE.



   If any person, having been ordered to abate a public nuisance as
provided in this chapter fails, neglects or refuses to abate or remove the
condition constituting the nuisance within 15 days from receipt of the order,
the Town Manager may cause the condition to be removed or otherwise remedied
by having employees of the town go upon the premises and remove or otherwise
abate the nuisance, under the supervision of an officer or employee
designated by the Town Manager.



(1991 Code, § 93.04)  (Ord. passed 4-9-1974)



§ 93.05  COST OF REMOVAL TO BE CHARGED TO OWNER.



   The actual cost incurred by the town in removing or otherwise remedying
a public nuisance shall be charged to the owner of the lot or parcel of land
from which the nuisance is removed, and it shall be the duty of the Tax
Collector to mail a statement of the charges to the owner and other person in
possession of the premises, with instructions that the charges are due and
payable within 30 days from the receipt thereof.



(1991 Code, § 93.05)



§ 93.06  UNPAID CHARGES TO BE LIEN ON PROPERTY.



   In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance
are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges as
provided for in § 93.05, those charges shall become a lien upon the land or
premises where the public nuisance existed and shall be collected as unpaid
taxes, as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.



(1991 Code, § 93.06)



§ 93.07  PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER CUMULATIVE.



   The procedure set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to any
other remedies that may exist under law for the abatement of public
nuisances, and this chapter shall not prevent the town from proceeding in a
criminal action against any person violating the provisions of this chapter,
as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



(1991 Code, § 93.09)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a
fine not to exceed $50 or imprisoned not to exceed 30 days. Each day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



(1991 Code, § 93.99)



CHAPTER 94:  NOISE CONTROL



Section



   94.01   Unreasonably loud or disturbing sound levels prohibited



   94.02   Permit required to engage in regulated activities



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  UNREASONABLY LOUD OR DISTURBING SOUND LEVELS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
create or assist in creating any unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels
in the town, taking into consideration volume, duration, frequency and other
characteristics of the sound.



   (B)   The following activities, among others, are hereby declared to
be unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels, but said enumeration shall not
be deemed to be exclusive:



      (1)   The playing of any musical instrument or electronic
sound amplification equipment in such manner or with such volume,
particularly during hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that a
reasonably prudent person would recognize as likely to unreasonably disturb
persons in the vicinity;



      (2)   The keeping of any animal or bird which makes frequent
or long continued sounds such that a reasonably prudent person would
recognize as likely to unreasonably disturb persons in the vicinity;



      (3)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out
of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to created unreasonably loud,
disturbing sounds;



      (4)   The operating of any garage or service station in any
residential area so as to cause unreasonably loud, disturbing sounds to be
emitted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day;



      (5)   The creation of unreasonably loud, disturbing sound
levels adjacent to any school, educational facility, church or court during
normal operating hours, or within 150 feet of any hospital, which a
reasonably prudent person would recognize as likely to unreasonably interfere
with the working of such institutions, provided conspicuous signs are
displayed indicating that such area is a school, educational facility,
church, court or hospital area;



      (6)   The erection (including excavation), demolition,
alteration or repair of any building in a residential or business district
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any day, except in
the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety, and then only
under the direction of an appropriate town official; and



      (7)   The use of any electronic sound amplification equipment
for advertising or solicitation purposes, except with an appropriate permit.



(1991 Code, § 94.01)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.02  PERMIT REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN REGULATED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Persons wishing to engage in activities regulated by this
chapter may do so when a specific permit is approved by the Town Manager or
his or her designee. Applications shall be submitted on forms supplied by the
town. The permit shall not be unreasonably withheld, and may contain
appropriate conditions, including maximum decibel levels, designed to
minimize the disruptive impact. Permits for such activities significantly for
religious or political purposes shall be granted, subject only to reasonable
time, place and manner restrictions. Permits issued under this section may
specify that the permission granted will continue for a stated period or
until revoked after acting in conformity with permit conditions, but any
permit may be revoked after acting in conformity with permit conditions, but
any permit may be revoked if it is determined that the authorized activity
has resulted in generation of unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels.



   (B)   In case an application is denied, a permit is approved with
conditions unacceptable to the applicant, or a permit is revoked, the
applicant or permit holder shall be entitled to a prompt, informal hearing
with the Town Manager or his or her designee, upon submission of a written
request. Any person aggrieved by a matter regulated by this chapter may
submit to the Town Manager written comments, including requests for
appropriate relief.



(1991 Code, § 94.02)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a
fine not to exceed $50 or imprisoned not to exceed 30 days. Each day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



(1991 Code, § 94.99)



CHAPTER 95:  PARADES, STREET FESTIVALS AND DEMONSTRATIONS



Section



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Permit required



   95.03   Applications for permits



   95.04   Issuance of permits



   95.05   Alternate permits



   95.06   Processing time and notice



   95.07   Revocation of permit



   95.08   Interference prohibited



   95.09   Signs and posters



   95.10   Parking restrictions



   95.11   Sidewalk obstructions



   95.12   Exemptions



   95.13   Violation of state law



   95.14   Street festivals



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK. That portion of any street lying between its intersections with
other streets.



   DEMONSTRATION. Any assembly together or concert of action between more
than four persons for the purpose of protesting any matter, making known any
position, or promoting certain persons or organizations, or attracting
attention to such assembly.



   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of
any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other
public places, involving more than four persons or more than three vehicles.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or
other organization, whether formal or informal.



   STREET FESTIVAL. Any festival, fair, carnival or market held on the
public streets or rights-of-way of the town.



(1991 Code, § 95.01)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987; Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 95.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or
participate in any parade or demonstration in or upon any street, sidewalk,
alley or other public place within the town unless a permit has been issued
by the town in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or participate
in any parade or demonstration for any purpose or in any manner other than
those set out in the application and permit.



(1991 Code, § 95.02)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.03  APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS.



   (A)   A written application on a form supplied by the town shall be
made to the Town Manager by persons desiring to have a parade or
demonstration. Such applications shall be submitted at least 72 hours in
advance of any Board of Commissioner’s meeting. However, where good cause
is shown or, in the judgement of the Town Manager, the activity would involve
significant political or religious features and therefore be entitled to
enhanced deference or protection under the state and federal constitutions,
the Town Manager shall consider applications filed after the deadline.
Employees at the Town Hall shall immediately indicate the time of receipt on
the face of the application.



   (B)   The application shall be signed by the applicant, and shall
include the following:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;



      (2)   If the parade or demonstration is proposed to be
conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and
telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and the authorized
and responsible head of such organization;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person to
be present and responsible for the conduct of the parade or demonstration;



      (4)   The date when the parade or demonstration will be
conducted;



      (5)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such
parade or demonstration;



      (6)   The time when units of the parade or demonstration will
begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas;



      (7)   The times when the parade or demonstration will begin
and terminate;



      (8)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point, or the location if stationary;



      (9)   A statement as to whether the parade or demonstration
will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalks,
parks, alleys or other public places proposed to be traversed or occupied;



      (10)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles
expected to participate, and the type of animals and a description of the
vehicles; and



      (11)   Whether minors are likely to participate.



(1991 Code, § 95.03)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)



§ 95.04  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   (A)   (1)   The application is expressly included as part of any
permit granted. A permit shall be issued on a form supplied by the town, to
the person who signed the application. Such person shall be required to
accompany the parade or demonstration, and the permit shall be invalid unless
in his or her possession. The permit shall be deemed issued under the terms
and for the purposes stated in the application only, unless otherwise noted.



      (2)   The permit shall set the duration, speed of travel and
space between persons and vehicles in the parade or demonstration; may
prescribe the portions or areas of streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public
places to be used; and may impose such other reasonable requirements
necessary for the control and free movement of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic and to protect the safety and property rights of participants and the
general public.



   (B)   The Town Manager shall issue a permit after approval of the
Board of Commissioners unless he or she makes written findings based upon
specified facts that:



      (1)   The activity cannot be conducted without unreasonable
interference with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the area;



      (2)   The activity cannot be held without unreasonably
interfering with provision of normal police and fire protection to the public;



      (3)   The activity is being held for an unlawful purpose, or
would violate a federal, state or local law or ordinance; or



      (4)   The event will require the closing of or unreasonably
restrict the flow of vehicular traffic along a highway under the control of
the state, in which case permission should be sought by the applicant from
appropriate state officials.



(1991 Code, § 95.04)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)



§ 95.05  ALTERNATE PERMITS.



   The Town Manager, in denying an application as submitted, may grant
after approval of the Board of Commissioners a permit for a date, time, place
or over a route different from that named by the applicant, or subject to
stated requirements and conditions. An applicant desiring to accept an
alternate permit shall, within 24 hours after notice of the action of the
Town Manager, file a written notice of acceptance with the Town Manager, on a
form supplied by the town.



(1991 Code, § 95.05)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)



§ 95.06  PROCESSING TIME AND NOTICE.



   Applications shall be processed and decisions made as expeditiously as
possible. If the application was submitted more than seven days in advance of
the event, the permit, alternate permit or written notice of denial shall be
mailed to the applicant. Otherwise the Town Manager shall exercise reasonably
diligence in attempting to notify the applicant of the action taken as soon
as possible by telephone or other means. Any person aggrieved by action taken
on a permit application may file a written notice of appeal, first with the
Mayor and then the governing body. The Mayor shall act on the appeal as
expeditiously as possible, in good faith. The Board of Commissioners shall
hear an appeal at the first meeting at which the law allows the matter to be
considered.



(1991 Code, § 95.06)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)



§ 95.07  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The Town Manager or Chief of Police acting on his or her behalf may
revoke any permit granted for a parade or demonstration for the following
causes:



   (A)   The substantial violation of this chapter or the terms and
conditions of a permit; or



   (B)   Violation of other laws by those participating in the parade
or demonstration.



(1991 Code, § 95.07)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)



§ 95.08  INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade
or demonstration being conducted under authority of a lawfully issued permit.
No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade or demonstration when such vehicles or persons are in
motion and identifiable as a parade or demonstration under this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 95.08)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.09  SIGNS AND POSTERS.



   Signs or posters carried by participants shall be made of cardboard no
thicker than one-fourth-inch. Supports for such signs or posters shall be
made of a nonmetallic material no wider than two and one-half inches and no
thicker than one inch. The diameter of round supports may not exceed two
inches.



(1991 Code, § 95.09)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.10  PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   The Town Manager, when reasonably necessary, may prohibit or restrict
the parking of vehicles along a street or highway constituting a part of the
route of a parade or demonstration. The Manager shall cause signs to be
posted to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or
leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable
for parking on a street if such signs are posted less than 24 hours in
advance.



(1991 Code, § 95.10)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.11  SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS.



   Police officers observing unreasonable obstructions of sidewalks as a
result of a parade or demonstration, such that pedestrians are unreasonably
hindered or forced to step into the street, shall take reasonable steps to
make the sidewalk available for pedestrian travel.



(1991 Code, § 95.11)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)



§ 95.12  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Funeral processions;



   (B)   Students going to or from school classes or participating in
education or recreational activity where such activity is under the
supervision and direction of the proper school authorities;



   (C)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions;



   (D)   Picketing or other orderly processions on the sidewalks,
involving fewer than ten persons, and conducted entirely within one block,
that do not violate any other municipal or state law; and



   (E)   A parade that is conducted under the sponsorship of the town.



(1991 Code, § 95.12)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)



§ 95.13  VIOLATION OF STATE LAW.



   The prohibition contained in G.S. § 14-277.2 against possession of
dangerous weapons and other provisions of law shall be strictly enforced.



(1991 Code, § 95.13)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1987)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.14  STREET FESTIVALS.



   Because of their more lengthy nature, and the potential for greater
interference with the public, the following special provisions shall apply
only to street festivals as defined in § 95.01. No street festival shall be
held, nor any public street closed for the purpose of holding such a
festival, without prior approval of a majority of the Board of Commissioners
after public hearing. Notice of such public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of local circulation at least once not less than ten nor more than
25 days prior to the public hearing. Application for a permit to conduct a
street festival shall be made upon a form provided by the Town Manager.
Applicants shall be required to pay the cost of advertising notice of the
public hearing. The Board of Commissioners may attach any reasonable
conditions to the street festival permit that serve to promote protection of
the public safety, health and welfare. The closing of streets owned or
maintained by the state shall require concurrence of the State Department of
Transportation.  Street festival  permits may be revoked by the Board of
Commissioners for any substantial violation of the provisions of this section
or of other laws by those participating in the festival. Sections 95.02
through 95.11 shall be inapplicable to this section.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2007)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50, or imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.



(G.S. § 14-4(a))  (1991 Code, § 95.99)



CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




General Provisions




   96.01   Encroachments



   96.02   Overhanging awnings, signs and the like



   96.03   Signs, advertisements and merchandise prohibited on sidewalks



   96.04   Placement of obstructions; consent required of town
authorities



   96.05   Sidewalks to be maintained and kept clear of obstructions;
duty of property owners



   96.06   Sidewalks to be kept clean; removal of snow



   96.07   Throwing balls and playing games on streets and sidewalks




Construction




   96.20   Curb and gutter construction



   96.21   Sidewalk, curb and gutter sections; conformance




Excavations




   96.35   Permit required



   96.36   Bond



   96.37   Removal of sand, dust or stone; permit



   96.38   Condition of street or sidewalk after opening or digging of
ditch



   96.39   Barricades and reflectors




Trees




   96.50   Removal of condemned trees



 



   96.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  ENCROACHMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to encroach upon the
streets or sidewalks of the town by erecting any piazza, porch, shed, stoop,
paling, chimney or other building or structure, or by means of any open
cellar, pit or open entrance to a basement or cellar.



   (B)   Any construction work, not authorized by the town, in the
right-of-way of any street or sidewalk of the town shall be stopped forthwith
upon discovery that such construction work encroaches upon such right-of-way.



(1991 Code, § 96.01)  (Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 5-8-1962)  Penalty,
see § 96.99



§ 96.02  OVERHANGING AWNINGS, SIGNS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or repair over
any street or sidewalk any wooden shed or awning, or any wooden frame for the
support of any awning, or to erect upon any street or sidewalk any wooden
post for the support thereof; provided, that this division (A) shall not be
construed to prevent the erection over the sidewalk of cloth awnings upon
metallic frames, securely suspended from buildings or supported by metallic
standards; nor shall it be construed so as to prohibit the erection of upper
piazzas or verandas over sidewalks at such points as the Board of
Commissioners may grant the privilege of erection. Such piazzas or verandas
are to be supported by such standards as the Board of Commissioners may
designate in each instance.



   (B)   It shall be lawful to have cloth awnings on iron frames
securely suspended from the building and extending across the sidewalks in
front of stores, shops, business houses and the like; provided, that they are
acceptable to the Board of Commissioner and that they are kept in neat and
sightly condition and in good repair.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have or permit any
shelter, sign or other contrivance whatsoever over any sidewalk in the town;
provided, that this shall not prevent signs extending to the utilities strip
but not beyond such utilities strip and provided that such sign is placed at
such height as not to interfere in any way with the use of the sidewalk.



   (D)   Any town police officer shall have authority to remove an
obstruction which shall be suffered to remain on or over any sidewalk in
violation of this section.



(1991 Code, § 96.02)  (Ord. 2, passed - - ; Ord. passed 6-10-1970) 
Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  SIGNS, ADVERTISEMENTS AND MERCHANDISE PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or place any sign,
advertisement or merchandise on the sidewalks or utility strips on the
streets in the town.



(1991 Code, § 96.03)  (Ord. passed 1-13-1965)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.04  PLACEMENT OF OBSTRUCTIONS; CONSENT REQUIRED OF TOWN AUTHORITIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place an obstruction upon the
sidewalks or in the gutters or streets of the town, without the prior consent
of the Town Manager or Board of Commissioners to do so.



(1991 Code, § 96.04)  (Ord. 2, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.05  SIDEWALKS TO BE MAINTAINED AND KEPT CLEAR OF OBSTRUCTIONS; DUTY OF
PROPERTY OWNERS.



   Every person owning property in the town shall keep the sidewalks
adjacent thereto free from hazardous conditions; provided, that such
sidewalks shall first be laid off by the town. If any property owner shall be
negligent in complying with any of the requirements of this section after ten
days’ notice, then it shall be the duty of the Department of Public Works
to have such sidewalks put in good and passable condition, and tax the
expense therefor against the property thereto adjacent, and such expense
shall be a lien on the property.



(1991 Code, § 96.05)  (Ord. 2, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.06  SIDEWALKS TO BE KEPT CLEAN; REMOVAL OF SNOW.



   (A)   The tenant or occupant, or if there be no tenant, the owner,
agent or custodian of any building or lot of land bordering on any street in
the town, where there is a sidewalk abutting, shall keep such sidewalk in
front of and adjoining such property clean.



   (B)   After any fall of snow, such tenant, occupant, owner, agent or
custodian shall, within 24 hours after the snow shall have ceased to fall,
remove or cause such snow to be removed from the sidewalks of their
respective premises.



(1991 Code, § 96.06)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.07  THROWING BALLS AND PLAYING GAMES ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw a ball or other object, or
to play at any game, or engage in any activity upon the public streets and
sidewalks in such manner as to endanger persons or property or obstruct any
street or sidewalk.



(1991 Code, § 96.07)  (Ord. 5, passed - -1930)  Penalty, see § 96.99



CONSTRUCTION



§ 96.20  CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION.



   When a property owner proposes to construct a sidewalk, curb and gutter
so as to abut his or her property, at his or her own expense, the town shall
furnish the proper standards for such curb and gutter so that said curb and
gutter is placed in proper relation to center of street and property line for
drainage and alignment. The property owner is responsible for payment of any
and all applicable charges for such services of the town.



(1991 Code, § 96.20)  (Ord. passed 3-3-1964)



§ 96.21  SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER SECTIONS; CONFORMANCE.



   It shall be the policy of the town to require, insofar as feasible,
that the sidewalk, curb and gutter sections of streets within the town
conform to the plan set forth in the diagram below entitled “Typical
Sidewalk - Curb and Gutter Section:”







(1991 Code, § 96.21)



EXCAVATIONS



§ 96.35  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any hole, ditch or
excavation of any kind whatsoever on any street or sidewalk in the town
without having first secured a permit therefor in writing from the Town
Clerk, except as may be provided otherwise in this code.



(1991 Code, § 96.35)  (Ord. 2, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.36  BOND.



   Any person desiring a permit as required in § 96.35 shall, as a
prerequisite thereto and before such permit is issued, file with the town a
bond, in such sum as shall be determined by the Town Manager, conditioned
upon the restoration of the street, pubic alley or sidewalk, in accordance
with § 96.38.



(1991 Code, § 96.36)



§ 96.37  REMOVAL OF SAND, DUST OR STONE; PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any sand, dirt or stone
from any street, road or sidewalk in the town without having first secured a
permit therefor in writing from the Town Clerk.



(1991 Code, § 96.37)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.38  CONDITION OF STREET OR SIDEWALK AFTER OPENING OR DIGGING OF DITCH.



   It shall be the duty of every person who shall open or dig a ditch,
trench or hole in any street, public alley or sidewalk of the town, to put
such street, public alley or sidewalk in as good condition in all respects as
it was before the ditch, trench or hole in question was opened or dug. Every
day of failure, neglect or refusal to put such street, alley or sidewalk in
as good condition as it was before the ditch, trench or hole in question was
opened or dug shall constitute a separate offense.



(1991 Code, § 96.38)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.39  BARRICADES AND REFLECTORS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person making any excavation for
any purpose whatsoever in any street or sidewalk of the town to fail to cover
such excavation securely with plank or to place barricades around the
excavation.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person making any excavation for
any purpose whatsoever in any street or sidewalk of the town to fail to place
a sufficient number of reflectors around such excavation before dark and to
keep such reflectors visible all night during every night such excavation
shall be open.



(1991 Code, § 96.39)  Penalty, see § 96.99



TREES



§ 96.50  REMOVAL OF CONDEMNED TREES.



   Any tree within the limits of a public street, street curb or sidewalk
shall be deemed to have been condemned and it may be removed by the town
without further authority to do so.



(1991 Code, § 96.50)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1948)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject
the violator to a civil penalty in the sum of $50 per day.



      (1)   A citation for said civil penalty shall be issued by the
Town Manager.



      (2)   Each citation for a civil penalty must be paid within 72
hours of issuance.



   (B)   Each and every day that the violator continues in violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense.



   (C)   This chapter may also be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



(1991 Code, § 96.99)



CHAPTER 97:  VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNK



Section



   97.01   Administration



   97.02   Definitions



   97.03   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   97.04   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   97.05   Junked motor vehicles registered; removal authorized



   97.06   Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles;
pre-towing notice requirements



   97.07   Exceptions to prior notice requirement



   97.08   Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements



   97.09   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final
disposition of vehicle



   97.10   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings



   97.11   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle



   97.12   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property



   97.13   Protection against criminal or civil liability



   97.14   Exceptions



   97.15   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle



§ 97.01  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Police Department and Town Manager shall be responsible for
administering the removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be
“abandoned” on the public streets and highways within the town, and on
property owned by the town. The Town Manager shall be responsible for
administering the removal and disposition of “abandoned,” “nuisance”
or “junked motor vehicles” located on private property. The town may, on
an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or towing
businesses to remove, store and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance
vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this chapter and
applicable state laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit
the legal authority or powers of officers of the town Police Department and
Fire Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their
duties.



(1991 Code, § 97.01)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, an
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE is one that:



      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of
a law or ordinance prohibiting parking;



      (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than
seven days;



      (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for
longer than 24 hours; or



      (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the
owner, occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two hours.



   AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Police Department
or the Town Manager, respectively, designated to authorize the removal of
vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.



   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303.2
the term, JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE means a vehicle that does not display a
current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that:



      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;



      (2)   Cannot be self propelled or moved in the manner in which
it originally was intended to move; or



      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less
than $100.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel
over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.



   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance
and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



      (1) A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects,
rats or other pests;



      (2) A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation
over eight inches in height;



      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;



      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil
or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;



      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be
operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods and the like;



      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it
falling or turning over;



      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food
waste, animal waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;



      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or
contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or



      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and
safety hazard and a public nuisance by the governing body.



(1991 Code, § 97.02)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.03  ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be
abandoned as the term is defined herein.



   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town
may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle
removed.



(1991 Code, § 97.03)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.04  NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or
occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a
nuisance vehicle.



   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorized officials of the town
may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle
removed.



(1991 Code, § 97.04)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.05  JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES REGISTERED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner,
lessee or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is
located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the
vehicle has been ordered removed.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor
vehicle, as defined herein, on the premises of public or private property.
Single, permitted junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location
and concealment requirements of this section.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the
possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of
the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to
comply with the locational requirements or the concealment requirements of
this section.



   (D)   Subject to the provisions of division (E) below, upon
investigation, the Town Manager may order the removal of a junked motor
vehicle, as defined in this chapter, after finding in writing that the
aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on
the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the
monetary loss or enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance. The
following, among other relevant factors, may be considered:



      (1)   Protection of property values;



      (2)   Promotion of economic development opportunities;



      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;



      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the
community; and



      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional
stability of area residents.



   (E)   Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicle:



      (1)   One junked motor vehicle. One junked motor vehicle, in
its entirety, can be located in the rear yard as defined by the town’s
zoning ordinance if the junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from
public view from a public street and from abutting premises by an acceptable
covering. The Town Manager has the authority to determine whether any junked
motor vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this division (F). The
covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to deteriorate.
The covering or enclosure must be compatible with the objectives of this
chapter.



      (2)   More than one junked motor vehicle. Any other junked
motor vehicles must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a
complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicles cannot be seen from a
public street or abutting property. A garage or building structure means
either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected
pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been
constructed in accordance with all zoning and building code regulations.



(1991 Code, § 97.05)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.06  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, NUISANCE OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES;
PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as set forth in § 97.07, an abandoned, nuisance or
junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to the
registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the
owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is
located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the
notice shall be given by first class mail. The person who mails the notice
shall retain a written record to show the name and address to which mailed,
and the date mailed. If such name and address cannot be ascertained or if the
vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by
affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a
notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified
date (no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed). The notice
shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date,
no sooner than seven days after the notice if affixed or mailed, unless the
vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.



   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property,
nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to
given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not
remove the vehicle, but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle
is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle
that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens,
such appeal shall be make to the governing body in writing, heard at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body, and further proceedings to
remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.



(1991 Code, § 97.06)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.07  EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of
an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a
special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to
otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings
shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the
appropriate daily records.



   (B)   Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior
notice includes:



      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on
the public streets and highways, the governing body hereby determines that
immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:



         (a)   Obstructing traffic;



         (b)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or
restricting parking;



         (c)   Parked in loading zones;



         (d)   Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;



         (e)   Parked in bus zones; or



         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking
restrictions imposed under code sections.



      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to
abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on town-owned property other than the
streets and highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed
without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing
official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the
public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of
limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing
ingress or egress to business and residences, vehicles causing damage to
public or private property.



(1991 Code, § 97.07)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.08  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been
ordered removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage
or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracted to perform
such services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the
authorized town official shall immediately notify the last known registered
owner of the vehicle, such notice to include the following:



      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;



      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;



      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
and



      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a
probable cause hearing on the removal.



   (B)   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through
(A)(4) above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner’s last known
address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his
or her agent.



   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be
given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice
shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of
the vehicle.



   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is
removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates,
the authorized town official shall make reasonable efforts, including
checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known
registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him or her of the information
set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4) above.



(1991 Code, § 97.08)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.09  RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION
OF VEHICLE.



   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked
motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is
entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause
existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in
writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court
judge to receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing
within 72 hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of state law.



(1991 Code, § 97.09)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.10  REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.



   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double
the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing
business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of
a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle
shall not allow or engage in further violations of this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 97.10)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.11  SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.



   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by
the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the
tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle.
Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the
town and in accordance with G.S. Ch. 44A, Art. 1.



(1991 Code, § 97.11)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.12  CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the town from private property without a written
request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a
vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle from private
property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or liability
incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof.



(1991 Code, § 97.12)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.13  PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.



   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to
any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle for disposing of such vehicle as provided in
this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 97.13)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.14  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle:



   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide “automobile graveyard” or
“junkyard” as defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard
Control Act, G.S. § 136-141 et seq.;



   (B)   Which is in an enclosed building;



   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being
operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the
operation of the enterprise; or



   (D)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town.



(1991 Code, § 97.14)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



§ 97.15  UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from
any storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been
impounded pursuant to the provisions of this code unless and until all towing
and impoundment fees which are due or bond in lieu of such fees, have been
paid.



(1991 Code, § 97.15)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1990)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   PRIVILEGE LICENSES



      111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      112.   AMUSEMENTS



      113.   TAXICABS



      114.   UNWHOLESOME FOOD AND BEVERAGES



      115.   CABLE TELEVISION



CHAPTER 110:  PRIVILEGE LICENSES



Section




General Licensing Regulations




   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Construction of this chapter




Levy




   110.10   Levy of tax



   110.11   Who must pay tax



   110.12   Period of license; due date



   110.13   Proration of tax



   110.14   Refunds



   110.15   Separate businesses



   110.16   Exemptions




Licenses




   110.20   Application



   110.21   Reasons for refusal or revocation of a license



   110.22   Unqualified applicants; right to a conference



   110.23   Tax Collector to issue license; payment of tax a
prerequisite



   110.24   Amount of tax disputed



   110.25   Revocation



   110.26   Form and contents of license



   110.27   Assignments



   110.28   Changes in the business conducted by licensee during the
tax year



   110.29   Tax Collector to furnish duplicates



   110.30   Record of conferences



   110.31   Providing notice to an applicant or licensee




Enforcement and Collection




   110.40   Duty to determine whether tax due



   110.41   Tax Collector to investigate



   110.42   Duty to permit inspection



   110.43   Duty to post license



   110.44   Notice of deficiency



   110.45   Request for a conference



   110.46   Deficiency to become final



   110.47   Conference held



   110.48   Collection of deficiency



   110.49   Enforcement of chapter



GENERAL LICENSING REGULATIONS



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  Each trade, occupation, profession, business and franchise
taxed under this chapter.



   SEASONAL.  A business in nature when it is conducted for profit six
months out of the year or less.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.02  CONSTRUCTION OP THIS CHAPTER.



   This chapter is enacted for revenue purposes only.  Therefore, it
should be construed to require payment of the maximum tax permitted under its
terms.  In addition, issuance of a license in accordance with this chapter,
it does not excuse a licensee from compliance with any other applicable
ordinance or statute.  This chapter does not prevent the town from imposing
license taxes on additional businesses, from increasing or decreasing the
amount of any license tax or from regulating any business taxed.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



LEVY



§ 110.10  LEVY OF TAX.



   An annual privilege license tax is hereby levied on each business
conducted within this town listed in the schedule of licenses taxes, which
can be found in the office of the Town Clerk.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.11  WHO MUST PAY TAX.



   Each person who conducts a business as stated in the schedule of
license taxes within this town is subject to this chapter.  A person
conducts business when he or she engages in one act of business taxed under
this chapter.  He or she conducts the business within the town if he or she
maintains a business location within the town; or if, either personally or
through agents, he or she solicits business within the town limits or picks
up or delivers goods or services within the town limits.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990; Ord. passed 3-10-1992)



§ 110.12  PERIOD OF LICENSE; DUE DATE.



   (A)   Annual licenses.  Unless the section of this chapter levying
the privilege license tax applicable to a particular business provides
otherwise, a license issued in accordance with this chapter is good for the
12-month period beginning June 1 and ending May 31.  The tax is due on June
1 of each year.  However, if a person begins a business after June 1 of a
year, the tax for that year is due before the business is begun.



   (B)   Licenses for periods shorter than one year. If the section of
this chapter levying the privilege license tax applicable to a particular
business so provides, a license may be issued for a period of one day, one
week or some comparable period of less than a full license year. A person may
not commence a business conducted within the town and taxed under such a
provision until the privilege license tax due is paid and may not continue
such a business beyond the period for which the license is issued.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.13  PROBATION OF TAX.



   If a business is begun after December 31 and before June 1, the amount
of tax due is half the amount otherwise due.  If a business is seasonal in
nature, the amount of tax due is half the amount otherwise due.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.14  REFUNDS.



   If for any reason a licensee discontinues his or her business during
the license year, he or she is not entitled to a refund.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.15  SEPARATE BUSINESSES.



   A separate license is required and a separate privilege license tax
must be paid for each place of business unless two or more places of business
under common ownership are contiguous to each other, communicate directly
with and open into each other and are operated as a unit. In addition, a
separate privilege license tax must be paid for each business taxable under
this chapter conducted by the taxpayer at any one location; however, the Tax
Collector may issue a single license for all taxable business conducted at
one location by a single taxpayer.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.16  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Generally.  Except as otherwise provided in this section or
by state law, no person is exempt from the payment of a privilege license tax
levied by this chapter.



   (B)   Charitable organizations.  A person who operates a business
for a religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal
purpose, when the entire gross income of the business is used for such a
purpose, is exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this
chapter.



   (C)   Blind persons and members of the armed forces and merchant
marine.  Blind persons and persons who serve in the United States armed
forces or the merchant marine are exempt from paying any privilege license
tax levied by this chapter to the extent provided by G.S. §§ 105-249 and
105-249.1.



   (D)   Must obtain license.  A person exempt from paying a privilege
license tax levied by this chapter shall nevertheless obtain a license from
the Tax Collector.  The license shall state that the licensee is exempt from
paying the privilege license tax,



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



LICENSES



§ 110.20  APPLICATION.



   A person shall apply to the Tax Collector for each license required by
this chapter no less than 30 days before the date the tax is due. The
application, which shall be submitted on forms provided by the Tax Collector,
shall contain:



   (A)   The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an
individual, a partnership, a corporation or some other entity;



   (B)   The nature of the business;



   (C)   Where the business is conducted;



   (D)   An address where notices and statements may be mailed to as
required by this chapter;



   (E)   Whether the business is regulated by a state occupational
licensing board subject to G.S. Chapter 93B, and if so, the serial number of
the state license the applicant currently holds; and



   (F)   Any other information the Tax Collector determines to be
necessary to compute the amount of tax due.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.21  REASONS FOR REFUSAL OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.



   The Tax Collector shall refuse to issue a license or shall revoke a
license for either of the following reasons:



   (A)   The applicant misrepresents a fact relevant to the amount of
tax due or his or her qualifications for a license; or



   (B)   The applicant refuses to provide information necessary to
compute the amount of tax due.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.22  UNQUALIFIED APPLICANTS; RIGHT TO A CONFERENCE.



   (A)   After receipt of the completed application, if the Tax
Collector believes that a reason exists for refusing a license under §
110.21, the Tax Collector shall refuse to accept payment of the tax and shall
not issue the license.  At the applicant’s request, the Tax Collector
shall, in accordance with § 110.31, give the applicant a written statement
of the reason for refusing the license.  The applicant may, within ten days
after the day the statement is received, request a conference to discuss the
refusal.  In the request, the applicant shall specify why the application
for a license should not be refused.  The Tax Collector shall arrange the
conference within a reasonable time.



   (B)   If the Collector refuses to issue a license, the applicant may
reapply for a license at any time thereafter.  If the reason for which the
application was refused no longer exists, and if no other reason exists for
refusing to issue a license, the Tax Collector shall issue the license in
compliance with § 110.24.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.23  TAX COLLECTOR TO ISSUE LICENSE; PAYMENT OF TAX A PREREQUISITE.



   After receipt of the completed application, if the Tax Collector
believes that no reason exists for refusal of a license under § 110.21, the
Tax Collector shall determine the amount of tax due and notify the applicant
of that amount.  The Tax Collector shall not issue a license until the tax
is paid.



(Ord. passed 7-10-90)



§ 110.24  AMOUNT OF TAX DISPUTED.



   If disputes arise over the amount the Tax Collector determines to be
due, the applicant may either refuse to pay and request a conference with the
Tax Collector to discuss the determination or pay the amount and request a
conference to discuss the right to a refund.  If a conference is requested,
the Tax Collector shall arrange it within a reasonable time. (Ord. passed
7-10-1990)



§ 110.25  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Tax Collector shall revoke a license if a reason exists to
revoke it as set forth in § 110.21.  Before revoking a license, the Tax
Collector shall give the licensee written notice of the grounds for
revocation, in accordance with § 110.31.  The licensee may within ten days
after the day on which notice is served request a conference with the Tax
Collector in writing. The request shall specify the reasons why the license
should not be revoked.  The Tax Collector shall arrange the conference
within a reasonable time.



   (B)   If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten days
after the day on which notice is served, the Tax Collector shall revoke the
license.  If the licensee requests a conference, the Tax Collector may not
revoke the license until after the conference.



   (C)   If the Tax Collector revokes a license, the former licensee
may apply for a new license at any time thereafter.  If the reason for which
the license was revoked no longer exists and if no other reason exists for
refusing to issue a license, the Tax Collector shall issue the license in
accordance with § 110.23.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.26  FORM AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE.



   A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where
the business is conducted, the nature of the business licensed, the period
for which the license is issued and the amount of tax paid.  In addition, if
a machine is licensed, the license shall show the serial number of the
machine.  The Tax Collector shall keep a copy of each license issued.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.27  ASSIGNMENTS.



   A license may be assigned if a business licensed under this chapter and
carried on at a fixed place is sold as a unit to any person, and the
purchaser is to carry on the same business at the same place.  Such a change
shall be reported to the Tax Collector in accordance with § 110.28. 
Otherwise, each license issued under this chapter is a personal privilege and
is not assignable.



(Ord., passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.28  CHANGES IN THE BUSINESS CONDUCTED BY LICENSEE DURING THE TAX YEAR.



   A licensee or an assignee shall report a change in the information
contained in the license application to the Tax Collector within ten days
after the change occurs.  If information shown on the license itself is
affected, the licensee or assignee shall surrender the license to the Tax
Collector when reporting the change.



   (A)   Changes affecting the amount of tax due.  If there are no
reasons for revoking the license under § 110.21 and the change results in
the imposition of a separate or additional tax, the Tax Collector shall
reissue a license reflecting the change upon payment of the separate or
additional tax.



   (B)   Changes not affecting the amount of tax due. If there are no
reasons for revoking the license under § 110.21 and the change does not
result in an imposition of a separate or additional tax, the Tax Collector
shall reissue a license reflecting the change upon payment of a fee of $10.



   (C)   Change requiring refusal of a license.  If there is reason
for revoking the license under § 110.21, the Tax Collector shall refuse to
reissue a license and shall instead begin proceedings to revoke the license
in accordance with § 110.25.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.29  TAX COLLECTOR TO FURNISH DUPLICATES.



   Upon satisfactory proof that a license has been lost or destroyed, the
Tax Collector shall furnish a duplicate for a fee of $10.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.30  RECORD OF CONFERENCES.



   The Tax Collector shall maintain for three years a record of each
conference held in accordance with this subchapter.  The record shall
contain the applicant’s or licensee’s name, the date of the conference,
and a brief statement of the issues discussed and the result reached. After
three years, the Tax Collector shall dispose of the record in accordance with
G.S. § 121-5.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.31  PROVIDING NOTICE TO AN APPLICANT OR LICENSEE.



   Whenever this chapter requires the Tax Collector to give a written
statement or notice to an applicant or a licensee, the Tax Collector may do
so in one of three ways:



   (A)   By personally delivering the statement or notice to the
applicant or licensee;



   (B)   By mailing the statement or notice by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the address specified for that purpose in
the license application; or



   (C)   By causing the statement or notice to be served on the
applicant or licensee in accordance with the procedures for service of
process under Rule 4, North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION



§ 110.40  DUTY TO DETERMINE WHETHER TAX DUE.



   Each person has the duty to determine whether the business he or she
conducts is taxed under this chapter and if so, whether that tax has been
paid for the current tax year.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.41  TAX COLLECTOR TO INVESTIGATE.



   If the Tax Collector has reason to believe that a person is conducting
a business in the town in violation of this chapter, the Tax Collector shall
conduct an investigation to determine the persons’s tax liability.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.42  DUTY TO PERMIT INSPECTION.



   Each person who conducts business in the town shall permit the Tax
Collector to inspect the business premises during normal business hours to
determine the nature of the business conducted there and to examine the books
and records to determine the nature of business transacted.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.43  DUTY TO POST LICENSE.



   A licensee shall post the license or licenses conspicuously in the
place of business licensed.  If the licensee has no regular place of
business, the license must be kept where it may be inspected at all times by
the proper town officials.  If a machine is licensed, the license shall be
affixed to the machine.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.44  NOTICE OF DEFICIENCY.



   If the Tax Collector determines that a person has not paid the full
amount of tax due under this chapter, either for the current license year or
for a prior license year, the Tax Collector shall give the person written
notice of the deficiency, in accordance with § 110.31.  The notice of
deficiency shall specify the total amount of tax due; the section of this
chapter upon which the tax is based; the amount of tax paid; any interest
due; the balance owed; the manner and time period in which the person may
respond to the notice of the deficiency; and the consequences of failing to
respond as specified.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.45  REQUEST FOR A CONFERENCE.



   The person may, within ten days after the day on which notice is
served, request a conference in writing.  The request shall specify the
persons’s objections to the notice of deficiency.  By way of illustration
but not limitation, a person who receives notice of a deficiency may object
on the following grounds;



   (A)   That the tax due has already been paid;



   (B)   That the Tax Collector miscalculated the amount of tax due;



   (C)   That the Tax Collector based his or her calculation on
incorrect or insufficient information concerning the nature of business
conducted; or



   (D)   That the Tax Collector based the determination on an erroneous
interpretation of a section of this chapter that establishes a category of
business subject to a particular tax.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.46  DEFICIENCY TO BECOME FINAL.



   If the taxpayer fails to request a conference under § 110.45, the
deficiency becomes final and the Tax Collector shall proceed to collect the
deficiency.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.47  CONFERENCE HELD.



   If the taxpayer requests a conference, the Tax Collector shall not
proceed to collect the deficiency until hearing the taxpayer’s objections
and determining that the deficiency should become final.  The Tax Collector
shall maintain a record of each conference held for three years in accordance
with § 110.45.  The record shall contain the name of the taxpayer, the date
of the conference, a brief statement of the issues discussed and the results
of the discussion. After three years, the Tax Collector shall dispose of the
record in compliance with G.S. § 121-5.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.48  COLLECTION OF DEFICIENCY.



   (A)   The Tax Collector may use any of the following methods to
collect a deficiency:



      (1)   Criminal prosecution in accordance with § 110.49(A);



      (2)   Equitable relief in accordance with § 110.49(B);



      (3)   The remedies of levy, sale, attachment and garnishment
in accordance with G.S. § 160A-207; or



      (4)   The remedies of levy and sale of real and personal
property of the taxpayer within the town in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. § 105-109.



   (B)   Any person who commences or continues to conduct a business
taxed under this chapter without payment of the tax is liable for the
additional tax of 5% every 30 days as imposed by G.S. § 105-109.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



§ 110.49  ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   Criminal remedies.  Conducting business within this town
without having paid the privilege license tax imposed by this chapter, or
without a valid license issued in accordance with this chapter, or without
posting a license in compliance with § 110.43 is a misdemeanor, punishable
as provided in G.S. § 105-109.  Each day that a person conducts business in
violation of this chapter is a separate offense.  Payment of a fine imposed
in criminal proceedings in accordance with this section does not relieve a
person of the liability for taxes imposed under this chapter.



   (B)   Equitable remedies.  In addition to the criminal remedies set
forth in division (A) of this section and in compliance with G.S. §
160A-175(d), the town may seek an injunction against any person who conducts
a business in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 7-10-1990)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




Off-Premises Sale of Beer and Wine




   111.01   License required; term and renewal of license



   111.02   Annual license fees



   111.03   Hours of operation




On-Premise Sale of Beer and Wine




   111.10   License required; term and renewal of license



   111.11   Annual license fees



   111.12   Hours of operation



   111.13   Regulation of alcoholic beverages (G.S. Ch. 18B)



 



   111.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, see §§ 32.140 and 32.141



OFF-PREMISES SALE OF BEER AND WINE



§ 111.01  LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person desiring to make off-premises sales of beer or wine
within the town shall first procure a privilege license to do so from the
Town Board.



   (B)   Each such license shall be for a term of one year, said year
beginning May 1 and ending April 30, and shall be renewable upon payment of
the proper license fee.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell wine or beer
within the town unless he or she holds a currently valid license under this
section.



(1991 Code, § 111.01)  (Ord. passed 9-3-1968; Ord. passed 4-7-1987) 
Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Municipal off-premise beer and wine licenses; issuance and term, see
G.S. § 105-113.70



§ 111.02  ANNUAL LICENSE FEES.



   The annual fee for an off-premises privilege license to sell beer or
wine for off-premises consumption shall be as set forth in G.S. § 105-113.77.



(1991 Code, § 111.02)  (Ord. passed 9-3-1968; Ord. passed 4-7-1987)



Statutory reference:



   Annual fee for municipal beer and wine licenses, see G.S. § 105-113.77



§ 111.03  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Off-premises sales of beer and wine shall be limited as provided in
G.S. § 18B-1004(a),(b) and (c).



(1991 Code, § 111.03)  (Ord. passed 9-3-1968; Ord. passed 4-7-1987; Ord.
passed 7-9-1991)  Penalty, see § 111.99



ON-PREMISE SALE OF BEER AND WINE



§ 111.10  LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   Any person desiring to provide on-premises sales of beer and/or mixed
drinks and/or wine within the town shall first procure a privilege license to
do so from the Town Board. Each such license shall be for a term of one year,
said year beginning May 1 and ending April 30, and shall be renewable upon
payment of the proper license fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell beer and/or mixed drinks and/or wine within the town unless he or she
holds a currently valid license under this section.



(Ord. passed 4-12-2005) Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Municipal on-premises beer and/or mixed drinks and/or wine licenses;
issuance and term, see G.S. § 105-113.70



§ 111.11  ANNUAL LICENSE FEES.



   The annual fee for an on-premises privilege license to see beer and/or
mixed drinks and/or wine for on-premises consumption shall be as set forth in
G.S. § 105-113.77.



(Ord. passed 4-12-2005)



Statutory reference:



   City beer and wine retail licenses, see G.S. § 105-113.77



§ 111.12  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   On-premises sales of beer and/or mixed drinks and/or wine shall be
limited as provided in G.S. § 18B-1004.



(Ord. passed 4-12-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Hours for sale and consumption, see G.S. § 18B-1004



§ 111.13  REGULATION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (G.S. CH. 18B).



   Any person desiring to provide on-premises sales of beer and/or mixed
drinks and/or wine shall also adhere to all the provisions of G.S. Ch. 18B.



(Ord. passed 4-12-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages, see G.S. Ch. 18B



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Criminal remedies. Conducting business within this town
without having paid the license fees imposed by this chapter, or without a
valid license issued in accordance with this chapter, is a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in G.S. § 105-109. Each day that a person conducts
business in violation of this chapter is a separate offense. Payment of a
fine imposed in criminal proceedings in accordance with this section does not
relieve a person of the liability for license fee imposed under this chapter.



   (B)   Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set
forth in division (A) of this section and in compliance with G.S. §
160A-175(d), the town may seek and injunction against any person who conducts
a business in violation of this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 111.99)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Restricting operation of poolrooms and billiard parlors



   112.03   Restricting operation of gamerooms; equipment



   112.04   Revocation of license



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE. All businesses which operate a gameroom or have one or more
items of gameroom type equipment operating in the business will comply with
this chapter.



   GAMEROOM TYPE EQUIPMENT. Any type of equipment such as a pool table,
pinball equipment, video equipment, technical equipment and other equipment
used as game equipment which can be coin- or noncoin-operated.



   GAMEROOMS. Any type of business such as a poolroom, billiard parlor,
video gameroom, electronic gameroom, pinball gameroom, mechanical gameroom
and other gamerooms using gameroom-type equipment which can be coin- or
noncoin-operated.



(1991 Code, § 112.01)  (Ord. passed 5-7-1968; Ord. passed 9-5-1973; Ord.
passed 7-19-1982)



§ 112.02  RESTRICTING OPERATION OF POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD PARLORS.



   (A)   Poolroom and billiard parlor gamerooms operated in the town
shall be open for operation only during the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00
p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays and shall not operate on Sundays. Any
school student 18 years of age and younger shall be prohibited in the
establishment during hours when his or her school is in session.



   (B)   No gambling whatsoever shall be permitted in such gamerooms.



   (C)   The proprietor shall be responsible for prohibiting and
controlling any loud, boisterous or profane language in such gamerooms.



   (D)   Compliance with this chapter is mandatory for businesses with
one or more pool tables.



(1991 Code, § 112.02)  (Ord. passed 5-7-1968; Ord. passed 9-5-1973; Ord.
passed 7-19-1982)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  RESTRICTING OPERATION OF GAMEROOMS; EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   All gamerooms and operation of gameroom-type equipment in the
town shall only be open during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on
Mondays through Saturdays and shall not be in operation on Sundays. Any
school student 18 years of age and younger shall be prohibited in the
establishment during the hours when his or her school is in session.



   (B)   No gambling whatsoever shall be permitted in such gamerooms.



   (C)   The proprietor shall be responsible for prohibiting and
controlling any loud, boisterous or profane language in such gamerooms.



   (D)   Compliance with this chapter is mandatory for businesses with
one or more games.



(1991 Code, § 112.03)  (Ord. passed 5-7-1968; Ord. passed 9-5-1973; Ord.
passed 7-19-1982)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Conviction of a violation of this chapter shall ipso facto revoke any
license that has been granted to such individual to operate a poolroom or a
gameroom and gameroom-type equipment in the town.



(1991 Code, § 112.04)  (Ord. passed 5-7-1968; Ord. passed 9-5-1973; Ord.
passed 7-19-1982)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



(G.S. § 14-4(a))  (1991 Code, § 112.99)



CHAPTER 113:  TAXICABS



Section




General Provisions




   113.01   Proof of financial responsibility required



   113.02   Vehicle licenses required; tax



   113.03   Revocation of permits and licenses




Drivers




   113.15   Permit requirement for taxicab drivers



   113.16   Revocation of permit



 



   113.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 113.01  PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY REQUIRED.



   (A)   The Town Board shall not approve any application for any
certificate of convenience and necessity, franchise, license, permit or other
privilege or authority to any person authorizing such person to engage in the
business of operating a taxicab within the town unless such person first
files with the Town Board proof of financial responsibility as hereinafter
defined.



   (B)   As used in this section, PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
shall mean a certificate of any insurance carrier duly authorized to do
business in the state, certifying that there is in effect a policy of
liability insurance insuring the owner and operator of the taxicab business,
his or her agents, and employees while in the performance of their duties
against loss from any liability imposed by law for damages, including damages
for care and loss of services because of bodily injury to or death of any
person and injury to or destruction of property caused by accident and
arising out of the ownership, use or operation of such taxicab, subject to
limits (exclusive of interests and costs) with respect to each such motor
vehicle as follows: $25,000 because of bodily injury to or death of one
person in any one accident and, subject to said limit for one person, $50,000
because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one
accident and $50,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of other
in any one accident.



(1991 Code, § 113.01)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.02  VEHICLE LICENSES REQUIRED; TAX.



   Every person, before operating any taxicab within the town or between
the town and points not incorporated within a radius of five miles of the
town shall, annually as for other motor vehicle, register with the Tax
Collector each vehicle owned or operated by him or her as a taxicab and shall
pay an annual license tax as shown in the town’s fee schedules.



(1991 Code, § 113.02)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.03  REVOCATION OF PERMITS AND LICENSES.



   If any holder of a taxicab permit or license under this chapter shall
use, or permit to be used, any vehicle operated as a taxicab under this
license or permit for prostitution or other immoral purposes, or for any
purpose in violation of the liquor laws of any government, or subdivision
thereof, having application to this town, or shall use, or permit to be used,
such vehicle for aiding and abetting in prostitution or the violation of such
liquor laws, the Town Board may thereupon revoke such license or permit. And
if the licensee, or operator of any vehicle operated under his or her
license, shall be convicted in any violation of the liquor laws, the license
of such person shall be thereby automatically revoked.



(1991 Code, § 113.03)



DRIVERS



§ 113.15  PERMIT REQUIREMENT FOR TAXICAB DRIVERS.



   (A)   Each person driving a taxicab within the town or between the
town and points not incorporated within a radius of five miles of the town
shall obtain a permit.



   (B)   Before issuance of permit, the following provisions must be
complied with:



      (1)   Each person requesting a permit shall present his or her
driver’s license to the Town Manager for a driver’s license check by the
Police Department. Any violations indicated on such check will be grounds for
nonissuance of a permit; and



      (2)   An annual fee for such permit shall be as shown in the
town’s fee schedule. Each permit shall date from June 1 of the year when
issued and shall expire on May 31 of the following year. However, if the
permit is issued after January, 1, the fee shall be one-half of the amount
required.



(1991 Code, § 113.15)  (Ord. passed 4-13-1982)



§ 113.16  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Any traffic violation convictions during the year of issuance to a
taxicab driver in the town or between the town and points not incorporated
within a radius of five miles of the town, shall serve as reason to revoke
this permit.



(1991 Code, § 113.16)  (Ord. passed 4-13-1982)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



(1991 Code, § 113.99)



CHAPTER 114:  UNWHOLESOME FOOD AND BEVERAGES



Section



   114.01   Sale of unwholesome food or drink



   114.02   Sale of fresh meat, fish and oysters restricted



   114.03   Curb service of food or drinks; permit required



   114.04   Containers in which drinks to be served



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  SALE OF UNWHOLESOME FOOD OR DRINK.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale,
or to serve, any food or drink which is spoiled, contaminated, adulterated,
misbranded or unwholesome for human consumption.



   (B)   The Police Department shall have authority to condemn and
destroy any food or drink found within the town which is spoiled,
contaminated, adulterated or unwholesome for human consumption, and to cause
any misbranded food or drink otherwise unfit for human consumption to be
properly labeled or destroyed.



(1991 Code, § 114.01)  (Ord. 3, passed - - )  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.02  SALE OF FRESH MEAT, FISH AND OYSTERS RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any fresh
meats, fish or oysters at retail, except in a place of business established
for that purpose; provided, that this shall not affect the selling of fish
caught in the streams of this county.



(1991 Code, § 114.02)  (Ord. 6, passed - - )  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.03  CURB SERVICE OF FOOD OR DRINKS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any food service establishment to serve food
or drinks on the streets, curbs or sidewalks of the town without first having
procured a permit to do so from the Town Clerk.



(1991 Code, § 114.03)  (Ord. passed 5-7-1929)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.04  CONTAINERS IN WHICH DRINKS TO BE SERVED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to serve drinks in any container
other than individual sanitary cups or in clean, sanitary cups or glasses
when not served in the original bottle, can or other container.



(1991 Code, § 114.04)  (Ord. passed 5-7-1929)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



(1991 Code, § 114.99)



CHAPTER 115:  CABLE TELEVISION



Section



   115.01   Rates and regulations



§ 115.01  RATES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The town will follow the FCC rate regulations in its
regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and other
cable television system operating in the town, notwithstanding any different
or inconsistent provisions in the franchise.



   (B)   In connection with such regulation, the town will ensure a
reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties.



   (C)   The Town Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to
execute on behalf of the town and file with the FCC such certification forms
or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate
regulations in order to enable the town to regulate basic service rates and
charges.



   (D)   The section shall be effective October 12, 1993.



(Ord. passed 10-12-1993)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



      132.   GAMBLING OFFENSES



      133.   WEAPONS



      134.   YOUTH PROTECTION



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   130.01   Trespassing on town property



   130.02   Injuring private and public property



   130.03   Trees and poles protected against billposting and injury



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  TRESPASSING ON TOWN PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to go or enter upon any of the
lands, rights-of-way, easements or property of the town except as an invitee
or licensee.



(1991 Code, § 130.01)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1957)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  INJURING PRIVATE AND PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wantonly or recklessly
injure any shade tree upon the streets of the town or upon any public square,
or to wantonly or recklessly injure any tree, gate, fence, building or other
species of property of another within the town.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wantonly or willfully
injure, interfere with, obstruct, damage, remove, deface or destroy any
equipment, fixtures, fences, water lines, water storage facilities or other
property of the town.



(1991 Code, § 130.02)  (Ord. 2, passed - -; Ord. passed 11-5-1957) 
Penalty, see § 130.99)



Cross-reference:



   Tampering with water and sewer pipes, see § 51.02



§ 130.03  TREES AND POLES PROTECTED AGAINST BILLPOSTING AND INJURY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to mark on or attach to any shade
or ornamental tree, or to mark on or attach to any pole or apparatus of any
public utility or any building within the town any poster or other form of
advertising; and it shall be unlawful for any person to deface, damage or
injure any shade or ornamental tree or any pole or apparatus of any public
utility or any building within the town.



(1991 Code, § 130.03)  (Ord passed 11-15-1916; Ord. 2, passed - -1930) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



(1991 Code, § 130.99)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



Section



   131.01   Air rifles; throwing explosives



   131.02   Assembly or persons to block street or sidewalk prohibited



   131.03   Consumption of alcoholic beverages



   131.04   Possession, consumption and serving of alcoholic beverages
at special events in the community center



   131.05   Smoking prohibited in municipal buildings



   131.06   Begging, panhandling or soliciting contributions



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  AIR RIFLES; THROWING EXPLOSIVES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to wantonly or mischievously
discharge an air rifle within the town, as to throw or deposit any explosive
substance upon any street or public place or in any place of business in the
town.



(1991 Code, § 131.01)  (Ord. 5, passed - - )  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.02  ASSEMBLY OR PERSONS TO BLOCK STREET OR SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The assembling together of persons on the streets or sidewalks
in such manner as to obstruct the free passage of persons or vehicles thereon
is hereby prohibited.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons,
organization, association or any other persons to conduct themselves in such
a fashion so as to block or impede the use of any street in the town by
motorists or other persons having the right to use such street.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons,
organization, association or any other persons to conduct themselves in such
a fashion so as to block or impede the use of any sidewalk in the town by
pedestrians having the right to use such sidewalk.



(1991 Code, § 131.02)  (Ord. 2, passed - - ; Ord. passed 5-14-1964) 
Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.03  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person of any age to consume beer or wine
or any other alcoholic beverage while riding, walking, standing, sitting in
vehicles and equipment, or any other means of travel, fixed or stationary, on
any municipal street or sidewalk, in any municipal park, or in any municipal
parking lot or any municipal buildings and structures in the town.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.04  POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION AND SERVING OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AT
SPECIAL EVENTS IN THE COMMUNITY CENTER.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 131.03, the possession,
consumption and serving of beer or wine or any other alcoholic beverage,
shall be lawful inside of the Lillington Community Center, located at 607
South Thirteenth Street, following submission of a written request and under
conditions set and approved by the Town Manager. Regulations shall include,
but are not limited to, staffing by one off-duty town police officer during
any event serving alcohol and alcohol consumption and service ceasing one
hour prior to the end of rental and no later than 10:00 p.m.



(Ord. passed 6-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.05  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person of any age to smoke or use
of any tobacco products in any building owned, leased or occupied by the
town, in any municipal vehicle and in all municipal park grounds, including
all buildings, playgrounds, recreational fields, tennis courts or other
athletic fields, and it shall be unlawful for any person of any age to smoke
or use tobacco products within 50 linear feet of any town buildings owned,
leased or occupied by the town that are not situated on municipal park
grounds.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      SMOKING.  The use of a lighted cigarette, or any other lighted
tobacco product.



      TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product containing, made or derived from
tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed or ingested by any other
means, or any component part or accessory of a TOBACCO PRODUCT, including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff and any other
items containing or reasonably resembling tobacco or tobacco products.



   (C)   (1)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall post
signs in and around municipal buildings and municipal parks in a manner and
location that adequately notify employees and visitors that smoking and the
use of any tobacco products by any person is prohibited at all times in all
municipal buildings, municipal vehicles and on all municipal park grounds and
to restrict smoking and the use of tobacco products within 50 linear feet of
any town building that is not situated on municipal park grounds.



      (2)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall ensure
that notice of this code is provided to employees and the public.



(Ord. passed 6-14-2011)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.06  BEGGING, PANHANDLING OR SOLICITING CONTRIBUTIONS.



   (A)   Definitions.   For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      ACCOSTING ANOTHER PERSON.  As approaching or speaking to someone
in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily
harm or the commission of a criminal act or damage to property in his or her
immediate possession.



      BEG, PANHANDLE OR SOLICIT CONTRIBUTIONS.  Includes, without
limitation, the spoken, written, or printed word or such other acts as are
conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining contributions.



      DIRECT WRITTEN APPEAL.  Begging, panhandling, or solicitation by
handing to a person or attempting to hand to a person a written solicitation
for immediate contributions.



      FORCING ONESELF UPON THE COMPANY OF ANOTHER PERSON.



         (a)   Continuing to request or solicit contributions in
close proximity to the person addressed after that person has responded
negatively;



         (b)   Blocking the passage of the person addressed; or



         (c)   Otherwise engaging in conduct which reasonably
could be understood as intended to



force a person to accede to demands.



      INTIMIDATE ANOTHER PERSON.  Acting in such a way as would cause
a reasonable person to fear bodily harm and therefore to do something he or
she would not otherwise have done.



      NIGHTTIME.  The time from dusk to dawn.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes streets, highways, and roadways
(including the shoulders and medians), sidewalks, alleys, and other public
property, as well as town-owned and town-controlled property and private
property open to the public unless permission to solicit has been obtained
from the town or from the property owner or other person in authority.



      VOCAL APPEAL.  Begging, panhandling, or solicitation of
contributions by spoken word or other verbal request. This shall not include
the act of performing music with a sign or other indication that a
contribution is being sought, without any vocal request other than in
response to an inquiry.



   (B)   Activities prohibited.



      (1)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions
in a public place in a manner so as to intimidate another person or by
accosting another person, or by forcing oneself upon the company of another
person.



      (2)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions
from another person within 50 feet of an entrance or exit of any bank or
financial institution or within 50 feet of any automated teller machine.



      (3)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions
in any public transportation vehicle inside the town or at any station for
such vehicle or within six feet of a bus stop sign, bus stop shelter, or bus
stop bench.



      (4)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions
while sitting or standing on a roadway or the shoulder or median of a roadway.



      (5)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions
in a public place by vocal appeal or direct written appeal during nighttime.



(Ord. 2014-08, passed 10-8-2013) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided, he or she shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50, or imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.



(1991 Code, § 131.99)



   (B)   If any person shall violate any provision of § 131.03 he or
she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



   (C)   If any person shall violate any provision of § 131.05 he or
she shall be fined not more than $50. Conviction of an infraction under this
section has no consequence other than payment of a penalty and may not be
assessed court costs and shall not be punishable as a misdemeanor. Employees
of the town who violate any provision of § 131.05 shall be subject to
disciplinary action consistent with the town’s personnel policy.



   (D)   Violation of § 131.06 shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor
and shall subject the violator to a fine of not more than $50 or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days.



(Ord. passed 4-14-1992; Ord. passed 6-14-2011; Ord. 2014-08, passed 10-8-2013)



CHAPTER 132:  GAMBLING OFFENSES



Section



   132.01   Gambling devices and enterprises unlawful



 



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  GAMBLING DEVICES AND ENTERPRISES UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to install or operate any gambling
device or to conduct any gambling enterprise in the town.



(1991 Code, § 132.01)  (Ord. 5, passed - - )  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



(G.S. § 14-4(a))  (1991 Code, § 132.99)



CHAPTER 133:  WEAPONS



Section



   133.01   Posting of signs required



   133.02   Location of signs



   133.03   Effective date



§ 133.01  POSTING OF SIGNS REQUIRED.



   The Town Manager is hereby authorized and instructed to post
conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or within each park and each
building or portion of building owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied,
managed or controlled by the town, as well as the appurtenant premises to
such buildings, indicating that carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited
therein, including:



   (A)   Town Hall;



   (B)   Community Building;



   (C)   Lillington Park;



   (D)   Lillington Public Works;



   (E)   Lillington Waste Water Treatment Plant; and



   (F)   Lillington Water Tower.



(Ord. passed 11-14-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.02  LOCATION OF SIGNS.



   Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each
entrance by which the general public can access the building. The Town
Manager shall exercise discretion in determining the number and appropriate
location of signs to be placed on or within the appurtenant premises and
parks.



(Ord. passed 11-14-1995)



§ 133.03  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be effective on and after December 1, 1995.



(Ord. passed 11-14-1995)



CHAPTER 134:  YOUTH PROTECTION



Section



   134.01   Purpose; authority



   134.02   Definitions



   134.03   Offenses



   134.04   Exceptions



   134.05   Defense



   134.06   Method of enforcement



 



   134.99   Penalty



§ 134.01  PURPOSE; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect young persons from
victimization and exposure to criminal activity by establishing a curfew for
persons under the age of 18 years in the city. This chapter is intended to
promote the health, safety and welfare of both youths and adults by creating
an environment providing better protection and security for all concerned.
The purpose is also to define the duties of parents or guardians and
operators of business establishments and protect minors from improper
influences and criminal activity that occurs after the curfew hour.



   (B)   The Board of Commissioners of the town is authorized by G.S.
§ 160A-198 to impose a curfew on persons of any age less than 18.



(Ord. passed 2-8-2012)



§ 134.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business operated to which
the public has access or is invited including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.



   GUARDIAN. A person who is court-appointed to be the guardian of a
person under 18 or such other adult as may be head of the household in which
the youth dwells.



   OWNER/OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation, operating, managing or conducting any establishment, including
the employees, members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.



   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster
parent or step-parent of another person, or a person to whom legal custody
had been given by court order, or such person who is acting in loco parentis.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place that is generally open to and used by the
public or a substantial group of the public, whether it be publicly or
privately owned, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys,
rights-of-way, public vehicular areas and parking lots, transportation
facilities, shops, restaurants, convenience stores, schools and school
grounds, places of business and amusement, playgrounds, parks church grounds,
similar areas that are open to the public and other common areas open to or
accessible to the public.



   REMAIN. To linger or stay in a public place, or fail to leave the
premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the operator of an
establishment.



   RESTRICTED HOURS. The time of night referred to herein is based upon
the prevailing standard of time, whether eastern standard time or eastern
daylight savings time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the
city. RESTRICTED HOURS will mean 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, until 7:00 a.m. of the following day.



   YOUTH. Any person under the age of 18 years who is not married or been
emancipated.



(Ord. passed 2-8-2012)



§ 134.03  OFFENSES.



   (A)   Time limits. It is unlawful for any youth under the age of 18
years to be or remain upon any public place or establishment within the town
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, Friday and Saturday until 7:00 a.m. of the following day.



   (B)   Out-of-school suspension time limit. It is unlawful for any
youth who has been suspended from school or has failed to attend school for
any reason during regular school hours, who is not in the company of a parent
or guardian, to be or remain upon any establishment or public place in the
city between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on any school day.



   (C)   Parent or guardian in violation. A parent or guardian of a
youth shall be in violation of this section if he or she knowingly permits,
and/or by inadequate supervision, allows the youth to remain on the premises
of any establishment or in any public place within the city during the
restricted hours. The term KNOWINGLY includes knowledge that a parent should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a youth in that
parent’s legal custody. This requirement is intended to hold a neglectful
or careless parent up to a reasonable community standard of parental
responsibility through an objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense
that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or
whereabouts of such youth.



   (D)   Owners, operator or any employee in violation. The owners,
operator or any employee of an establishment shall be in violation to this
section if he or she knowingly allows a youth to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during the restricted hours. The term KNOWINGLY includes
knowledge that an operator or employer should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the patrons of an establishment.



   (E)   Abetting. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person 18 years or older to aid or abet a youth in the violation of division
(A) above.



   (F)   Custody. It shall be a violation of this section for a parent
or guardian of a youth to refuse to take custody of the youth during the
restricted hours.



(Ord. passed 2-8-2012)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   A youth shall not be in violation of this section if the youth is:



   (A)   Accompanied by his or her parent or guardian;



   (B)   Accompanied by an adult 18 years of age of older authorized by
the parent or guardian of such youth to take the parent’s or guardian’s
place in accompanying the youth for a designated period of time and purpose
within an area specified by the youth’s parents or guardian;



   (C)   On the property of his or her parents or guardian;



   (D)   Engaged in a lawful employment activity or using a direct
route to or from a place of employment;



   (E)   In a motor vehicle with parental consent;



   (F)   Traveling in a motor vehicle with a parent or guardian or
traveling in a motor vehicle with an adult 18 years of age or older
authorized by the parent or guardian of such youth to take the parent or
guardian’s place in accompanying the youth for a designated period in time
and purpose within a specified area;



   (G)   Reacting or responding to an emergency;



   (H)   Attending or traveling to or from, by direct route, an
official school, religious or recreational activity that is supervised by
adults and sponsored by a public or private school, the town or other
governmental entity, a civic organization or other similar entity that
accepts responsibility for the youth; and/or



   (I)   Married or emancipated.



(Ord. passed 2-8-2012)



§ 134.05  DEFENSE.



   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter if the owner,
operator or employee of an establishment promptly notifies the Police
Department that a youth was present on the premises of the establishment
during restricted hours and refuses to leave.



(Ord. passed 2-8-2012)



§ 134.06  METHOD OF ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   If a police officer reasonably believes that a youth is in a
public place in violation of the chapter the officer shall notify the youth
that he or she is in violation of the chapter and shall require the youth to
provide his or her name, address and telephone number and how to contact his
or her parent or guardian. In determining the age of the youth and in the
absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a police officer
shall, in the first instance of violation of the chapter, use his or her best
judgment in determining age.



   (B)   The police officer shall issue the youth a written warning
that the youth is in violation of the chapter and order the youth to go
promptly home. The Chief of Police shall send the parent or guardian of the
youth written notice of the violation by certified mail with a warning that
any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the chapter,
including enforcement or parental responsibility and of applicable penalties.



   (C)   Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of
experience and may provide that the police officer may deliver to a parent or
guardian thereof a youth under appropriate circumstances; for example, a
youth of tender age, near home, whose identity and address may readily be
ascertained or are known.



   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following
procedure shall then be to take the youth to the police station where a
parent or guardian shall immediately be notified to come for the youth
whereupon the parent or guardian and the youth shall be questioned when:



         (a)   A youth has received one previous written warning
for violation of this section; or



         (b)   A police officer has reasonable grounds to believe
that the youth has engaged in delinquent conduct.



      (2)   This is intended to permit ascertainment, under
constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and to centralize
responsibility in the person designated there and then on duty for an
accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement, and recording,
thus, making available experienced personnel and access to information and
records.



   (E)   When a parent or guardian, immediately called, has come to
take charge of the youth, and the appropriate information has been recorded,
the youth shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent
cannot be located or fails to take charge of the youth, then the youth shall
be released to the youth authorities, except to the extent that in accordance
with police regulations, approved in advance by youth authorities, the youth
may temporarily be entrusted to an adult, neighbor or other person who will
on behalf of a parent or guardian assume the responsibility of caring for a
youth pending the availability or arrival of a parent or guardian.



   (F)   For the first violation of the chapter by an operator of an
establishment who permits a youth to remain on the premises, a police officer
shall issue a written notice of the violation with a warning that any
subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the chapter,
including enforcement of operator responsibility and of applicable penalties.



(Ord. passed 2-8-2012)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A youth who violates any provision of this chapter is subject
to being adjudicated delinquent. The court may, in its discretion, impose any
dispositional alternative(s) that are provided in the state youth code for
any youth who is delinquent.



   (B)   Any person other than a youth who violates any provision of
this section may be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be subject to a fine not
to exceed $100 for the first offense, and for each subsequent offense the
fine shall be increased by an additional $150. For example, for the second
offense the fine shall be $250, for the third offense, $400, and imprisonment
in the discretion of the court in accordance with G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. passed 2-8-2012)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS



      152.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



      153.   ABANDONED STRUCTURES



      154.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   150.001   Building Code adopted by reference



   150.002   Residential Building Code adopted by reference



   150.003   Plumbing Code adopted by reference



   150.004   Electrical Code adopted by reference



   150.005   Amendments to codes



   150.006   Compliance required



   150.007   Unlawful use of buildings or structures



   150.008   Copies of codes filed with Town Clerk




Permits




   150.020   Permits required; application



   150.021   Plans and specifications



   150.022   Issuance; limitations



   150.023   Fees



   150.024   Time limitations on validity



   150.025   Changes in work after issuance



   150.026   Revocation




Unsafe Buildings




   150.040   Inspection; notice to owner to correct



   150.041   Condemnation of especially dangerous buildings



   150.042   Failure of owner to take corrective action



   150.043   Appeal by owner



   150.044   Enforcement procedures against owner



   150.045   Enforcement




Inspection Department




   150.060   Organization



   150.061   Duties and powers of inspectors



   150.062   Conflicts of interest



   150.063   Records and reports



   150.064   Inspection procedure



   150.065   Violations of regulations not legalized by oversight of
inspector



   150.066   General right to appeal



   150.067   Remedies




Property Numbering System




   150.080   Numbers to be assigned from official numbering book



   150.081   Numbering system



   150.082   Owners to purchase and display numbers



   150.083   Numbers for future buildings



   150.084   Unlawful to deface number



 



   150.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The most current edition of the North Carolina State Building Code,
Volume I, General Construction, as adopted by the North Carolina Building
Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth
herein as the building code of the town to the extent this code is applicable
for safe and stable design, methods of construction, minimum standards, and
use of materials in buildings or structures hereafter erected, enlarged,
altered, repaired, or otherwise constructed or reconstructed.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



§ 150.002  RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The most current edition of the North Carolina Uniform Residential
Building Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Inspectors
Association, and as published by the North Carolina Building Code Council is
hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the
residential building code for one- and two-family residential buildings in
the town.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



§ 150.003  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The most current edition of the North Carolina Plumbing Code
(North Carolina State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing), as adopted and
published by the North Carolina Building Code Council, is hereby adopted by
reference as fully as though set forth herein as the plumbing code of the
town.



   (B)   Whenever the provisions of the North Carolina Plumbing Code
and the provisions of this chapter are in conflict, the more restrictive
provisions shall govern.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



§ 150.004  ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   Volume IV of the North Carolina State Building Code, which consists of
the most current edition of the National Electrical Code of the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA No. 70, ASA Cl-1965), is hereby adopted by
reference as fully as though set forth herein as a part of the electrical
code of the town.  Whenever the provisions of the electrical code and the
provisions of this chapter are in conflict, the more restrictive provisions
shall govern.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



§ 150.005  AMENDMENTS TO CODES.



   Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference in this
subchapter, which are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies
or organizations referred to herein, shall be effective in the town at the
time such amendments are filed with the Town Clerk as provided in § 150.008.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



§ 150.006  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No building or structure shall be constructed, altered,
repaired, or removed, nor shall the equipment of a building, structure, or
premises be constructed, installed, altered, repaired, or removed, except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   No building or structure shall be altered in any manner that
would be in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any authorized
rule or approval made and issued thereunder.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the raising or lowering
of a building to meet a change of grade in the street on which it is located,
provided that the building is not otherwise altered.



   (D)   All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished, or
moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards, and other
provisions of either the State Building Code, General Construction, Volume I,
or the Uniform Residential Building Code, whichever is applicable, or of
both, if both are applicable.



   (E)   Every building or structure intended for human habitation,
occupancy, or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems, or plumbing fixtures
installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired, or reconstructed in
accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of
the North Carolina Plumbing Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume
II, Plumbing).



   (F)   All electrical wiring, installations, and appurtenances shall
be erected, altered, repaired, used, and maintained in accordance with the
minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of the North Carolina
Electrical Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume IV, Electrical).



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.007  UNLAWFUL USE OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain, occupy, or use a building or
structure, or part thereof, that has been erected or altered in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.008  COPIES OF CODES FILED WITH TOWN CLERK.



   An official copy of each regulatory code adopted in this subchapter,
and official copies of all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the
office of the Town Clerk.  These copies shall be the official copies of the
codes and the amendments.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



PERMITS



§ 150.020  PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section,
no person shall commence or proceed with any of the following without first
securing from the Inspection Department with jurisdiction over the site of
the work any and all permits required by the State Building Code and any
other state or local laws applicable to the work:



         (a)   The construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, movement to another site, removal, or demolition of any building or
structure.



         (b)   The installation, extension, or general repair of
any plumbing system except that in any one- or two-family dwelling unit a
permit shall not be required for the connection of a water heater that is
being replaced, provided that the work is performed by a person licensed
under G.S. § 87-21, who personally examines the work at completion and
ensures that a leak test has been performed on the gas piping, and provided
the energy use rate or thermal input is not greater than that of the water
heater which is being replaced, there is no change in fuel, energy source,
location, capacity, or routing or sizing of venting and piping, and the
replacement is installed in accordance with the current edition of the State
Building Code.



         (c)   The installation, extension, alteration, or
general repair of any heating or cooling equipment system.



         (d)   The installation, extension, alteration, or
general repair of any electrical wiring, devices, appliances, or equipment
except that in any one- or two-family dwelling unit a permit shall not be
required for repair or replacement of electrical lighting fixtures or
devices, such as receptacles and lighting switches, or for the connection of
an existing branch circuit to an electric water heater that is being
replaced, provided that all of the following requirements are met:



            1.   With respect to electric water heaters, the
replacement water heater is placed in the same location and is of the same or
less capacity and electrical rating as the original.



            2.   With respect to electrical lighting fixtures
and devices, the replacement is with a fixture or device having the same
voltage and the same or less amperage.



            3.   The work is performed by a person licensed
under G.S. § 87-43.



            4.   The repair or replacement installation meets
the current edition of the State Building Code, including the State
Electrical Code.



      (2)   However, a permit is not required for the installation,
maintenance, or replacement of any load control device or equipment by an
electric power supplier, as defined in G.S. § 62-133.8, or an electrical
contractor contracted by the electric power supplier, so long as the work is
subject to supervision by an electrical contractor licensed under Article 4
of Chapter 87 of the General Statutes. The electric power supplier shall
provide such installation, maintenance, or replacement in accordance with an
activity or program ordered, authorized, or approved by the North Carolina
Utilities Commission pursuant to G.S. § 62-133.8 or G.S. § 62-133.9 or a
similar program undertaken by a municipal electric service provider, whether
the installation, modification, or replacement is made before or after the
point of delivery of electric service to the customer. The exemption under
this division applies to all existing installations.



      (3)   A permit shall be in writing and shall contain a
provision that the work done shall comply with the State Building Code and
all other applicable state and local laws. Nothing in this section shall
require the city to review and approve residential building plans submitted
to the city pursuant to Section R-110 of Volume VII of the North Carolina
State Building Code; provided that the city may review and approve such
residential building plans as it deems necessary. No permits shall be issued
unless the plans and specifications are identified by the name and address of
the author thereof, and if the General Statutes of North Carolina require
that plans for certain types of work be prepared only by a registered
architect or registered engineer, no permit shall be issued unless the plans
and specifications bear the North Carolina seal of a registered architect or
of a registered engineer. When any provision of the General Statutes of North
Carolina or of any ordinance requires that work be done by a licensed
specialty contractor of any kind, no permit for the work shall be issued
unless the work is to be performed by such a duly licensed contractor. No
permit issued under Articles 9 or 9C of Chapter 143 shall be required for any
construction, installation, repair, replacement, or alteration costing $5,000
or less in any single-family residence or farm building unless the work
involves: the addition, repair or replacement of load bearing structures; the
addition (excluding replacement of same size and capacity) or change in the
design of plumbing; the addition, replacement or change in the design of
heating, air conditioning, or electrical wiring, devices, appliances, or
equipment; the use of materials not permitted by the North Carolina Uniform
Residential Building Code; or the addition (excluding replacement of like
grade of fire resistance) of roofing. Violation of this section shall
constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.



   (B)   A city shall not require more than one permit for the complete
installation or replacement of any natural gas, propane gas, or electrical
appliance on an existing structure when the installation or replacement is
performed by a person licensed under G.S. § 87-21 or G.S. § 87-43. The cost
of the permit for such work shall not exceed the cost of any one individual
trade permit issued by that city, nor shall the city increase the costs of
any fees to offset the loss of revenue caused by this provision.



   (C)   No permit shall be issued pursuant to division (A) of this
section for any land-disturbing activity, as defined in G.S. § 113A-52(6),
for any activity covered by G.S. § 113A-57, unless an erosion and
sedimentation control plan has been approved by the Sedimentation Pollution
Control Commission pursuant to G.S. § 113A-54(d)(4) or by a local government
pursuant to G.S. § 113A-61 for the site of the activity or a tract of land
including the site of the activity.



   (D)   No permit shall be issued pursuant to division (A) of this
section for any land-disturbing activity that is subject to, but does not
comply with, the requirements of G.S. § 113A-71.



   (E)   No permit shall be issued pursuant to division (A)(1) of this
section where the cost of the work is $30,000 or more, other than for
improvements to an existing single-family residential dwelling unit as
defined in G.S. § 87-15.5(7) that the owner occupies as a residence, or for
the addition of an accessory building or accessory structure as defined in
the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code, the use of which is
incidental to that residential dwelling unit, unless the name, physical and
mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number, and electronic mail
address of the lien agent designated by the owner pursuant to G.S. §
44A-11.1(a) is conspicuously set forth in the permit or in an attachment
thereto. The building permit may contain the lien agent's electronic mail
address. The lien agent information for each permit issued pursuant to this
division shall be maintained by the Inspection Department in the same manner
and in the same location in which it maintains its record of building permits
issued.



   (F)   A city may by ordinance provide that a permit may not be
issued under divisions (A) and (B) of this section to a person who owes
delinquent property taxes, determined under G.S. § 105-360, on property
owned by the person.  The ordinance may provide that a building permit may
be issued to a person protesting the assessment or collection of property
taxes.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Building inspection and permits, see G.S. § 160A-417



§ 150.021  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for
a permit when the estimated total cost of the building or structure is in
excess of $20,000 and for any other building or structure where plans and
specifications are deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector in order for
him to determine whether the proposed work complies with the appropriate
regulatory codes.  Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to
indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed, and the plans and
specifications together shall contain information sufficient to indicate that
the work proposed will conform to the provisions of this chapter and the
appropriate regulatory codes. Where plans and specifications are required, a
copy of the same shall be kept at the work until all authorized operations
have been completed and approved by the appropriate inspector.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.022  ISSUANCE; LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Issuance.  When proper application for a permit has been made
and the appropriate inspector is satisfied that the application and the
proposed work comply with the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate
regulatory codes, he shall issue such permit, upon payment of the proper fee
provided in § 150.023.



   (B)   Limitations on issuance.



      (1)   No building permit shall be issued for any building or
structure, the estimated total cost of which is more than $30,000, unless the
work is to be performed by a licensed general contractor.



      (2)   If state law requires that plans for certain types of
work be prepared only by a registered architect or registered engineer, no
building permit shall be issued for any building or structure, unless the
plans and specifications bear the state seal of a registered architect or a
registered engineer.



      (3)   Where any provision of the General Statutes of North
Carolina or of any provision of this code or other ordinance requires that
work be done by a licensed specialty contractor of any kind, no permit for
such work shall be issued, unless it is to be performed by such licensed
specialty contractor.



      (4)   Where detailed plans and specifications are required
under this chapter, no building permit shall be issued, unless such plans and
specifications have been provided.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.023  FEES.



   Fees for permits shall be based upon the total estimated cost of the
proposed work, including all subcontracts, if any, but in no case shall the
total estimated cost be less than the market value of similar completed work
in the town, as determined by the appropriate inspector. Permit fees shall be
as established from time to time by the Town Council. Schedules of such fees
shall be maintained on file in the offices of the appropriate inspectors.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



§ 150.024  TIME LIMITATIONS ON VALIDITY.



   All permits issued under this chapter shall expire by limitation six
months after the date of issuance, if the work authorized by the permit has
not been commenced. If, after commencement, the work is discontinued for a
period of 12 months, the permit therefor shall immediately expire. No work
authorized by any permit which has expired shall thereafter be performed,
until a new permit therefor has been secured.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Time limitations on validity of permits, see G.S. § 160A-418



§ 150.025  CHANGES IN WORK AFTER ISSUANCE.



   After a permit has been issued, no changes or deviations from the terms
of the application, plans and specifications, or permit, except where changes
or deviations are clearly permissible under the state building code, shall be
made, until specific written approval of such changes or deviations has been
obtained from the Inspection Department.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Changes in work, see G.S. § 160A-419



§ 150.026  REVOCATION.



   The appropriate inspector may revoke and require the return of any
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for such
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with requirements of this chapter, any applicable state law and/or any
appropriate regulatory codes; or for false statements or misrepresentations
made in securing such permits. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of
any applicable state or local law may also be revoked.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Revocation of permits, see G.S. § 160A-422



UNSAFE BUILDINGS



§ 150.040  INSPECTION; NOTICE TO OWNER TO CORRECT.



   When the inspector finds any defects in a building, or finds that the
building has not been constructed in accordance with the applicable state and
local laws, or that a building because of its condition is dangerous or
contains fire hazardous conditions, it shall be his duty to notify the owner
or occupant of the building of its defects, hazardous conditions, or failure
to comply with law. The owner or occupant shall each immediately remedy the
defects, hazardous conditions, or violations of law in the property he owns.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Defects in buildings to be corrected, see G.S. § 160A-425



§ 150.041  CONDEMNATION OF ESPECIALLY DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Residential building and nonresidential building or
structure.  Every building that shall appear to the inspector to be
especially dangerous to life because of its liability to fire or because of
bad conditions of walls, overloaded floors, defective construction, decay,
unsafe wiring or heating system, inadequate means of egress, or other causes,
shall be held to be unsafe, and the inspector shall affix a notice of the
dangerous character of the structure to a conspicuous place on the exterior
wall of the building.



   (B)   Nonresidential building or structure.  In addition to the
authority granted in division (A) of this section, an inspector may declare a
nonresidential building or structure within a community development target
area to be unsafe if it meets both of the following conditions:



      (1)   It appears to the inspector to be vacant or abandoned.



      (2)   It appears to the inspector to be in such dilapidated
condition as to cause or contribute to blight, disease, vagrancy, fire or
safety hazard, to be a danger to children, or to tend to attract persons
intent on criminal activities or other activities that would constitute a
public nuisance.



   (C)   If an inspector declares a nonresidential building or
structure to be unsafe under division (B) of this section, the inspector must
affix a notice of the unsafe character of the structure to a conspicuous
place on the exterior wall of the building.  For the purposes of this
section, the term COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TARGET AREA means an area that has
characteristics of a development zone under G.S. § 160A-129.3A,  a
nonresidential redevelopment area under G.S. § 160A-503(10), or an area with
similar characteristics designated by the Town Council as being in a special
need of revitalization for the benefit and welfare of its citizens.



   (D)   A municipality may expand divisions (B) and (C) of this
section to apply to residential buildings by adopting an ordinance.  Before
adopting such an ordinance, a municipality shall hold a public hearing and
shall provide notice of the hearing at least ten days in advance of the
hearing.



   (E)   (1)   If any person shall remove any notice that has been
affixed to any building or structure by the inspector that states the
dangerous character of the building or structure, he shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



      (2)   (Effective October 1, 1994).  If any person shall
remove any notice that has been affixed to any building or structure by a
local inspector and that states the dangerous character of the building or
structure, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Unsafe buildings condemned, see G.S. § 160A-426



   Removing notice from condemned buildings, see G.S. § 160A-427



§ 150.042  FAILURE OF OWNER TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION.



   (A)   If the owner of a building or structure that has been
condemned as unsafe pursuant to § 150.041(A) shall fail to take prompt
corrective action, the inspector shall give him written notice, by certified
or registered mail to his last known address or by personal service:



      (1)   That the building or structure is in a condition that
appears to meet one of the following:



         (a)   Constitutes a fore or safety hazard.



         (b)   Is dangerous to life, health, or other property.



         (c)   Is likely to cause or contribute to blight,
disease, vagrancy, or danger to children.



         (d)   Has a tendency to attract persons intent on
criminal activities or other activities which would constitute a public
nuisance.



      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the inspector at a
designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and



      (3)   That following the hearing, the inspector may issue such
order to repair, close, vacate, or demolish the building or structure as
appears appropriate.



   (B)   If the name or whereabouts of the owner cannot after due
diligence be discovered, the notice shall be considered properly and
adequately served if a copy thereof is posted on the outside of the building
or structure in question at least ten days prior to the hearing and a notice
of the hearing is published in a newspaper having general circulation in the
town at least once not later than one week prior to the hearing.



   (C)   If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed in
divisions (A) and (B) above, the inspector shall find that the building or
structure is in a condition that constitutes a fire or safety hazard or
renders it dangerous to life, health, or other property, he shall make an
order in writing, directed to the owner of such building or structure,
requiring the owner to remedy the defective conditions by repairing, closing,
vacating, or demolishing the building or structure or taking other necessary
steps, within a period, not less than 60 days, that the inspector may
prescribe. However, where the inspector finds that there is imminent danger
to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in
such lesser period as may be feasible.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Action in event of failure to take corrective action, see G.S. §
160A-428



   Order to take corrective action, see G.S. § 160A-429



§ 150.043  APPEAL BY OWNER.



   Any owner who has received an order under § 150.042(C) may appeal from
the order to the Town Council by giving notice of appeal in writing to the
inspector and to the Town Clerk within ten days following issuance of the
order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the inspector shall be
final. The Town Council shall hear and render a decision in an appeal within
a reasonable time. The Town Council may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke
the order.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Appeal; finality of order if not appealed, see G.S. § 160A-430



§ 150.044  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AGAINST OWNER.



   (A)   If the owner of a building or structure fails to comply with
an order issued pursuant to § 150.042(C) from which no appeal has been
taken, or fails to comply with an order of the Town Council following an
appeal, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the
discretion of the court.



   (B)   (Effective October 1, 1994).  If the owner of a building or
structure fails to comply with an order issued pursuant to § 150.042(C) from
which no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the Town
Council following an appeal, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Failure to comply with order, see G.S. § 160A-431



§ 150.045  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Initiating appropriate action or proceedings.  Whenever any
violation is denominated a misdemeanor under the provisions of this
subchapter, the city, either in addition to or in lieu of other remedies, may
initiate any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct,
or abate the violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the building or
structure involved.



   (B)   Removal of building.  In the case of a building or structure
declared unsafe under G.S. § 160A-426, or an ordinance adopted pursuant to
G.S. § 160A-426, a city may, in lieu of taking action under division (A),
cause the building or structure to be removed or demolished. The amounts
incurred by the city in connection with the removal or demolition shall be a
lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred. The lien
shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected in the same manner
as liens for special assessments provided in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of
the North Carolina General Statutes. If the building or structure is removed
or demolished by the city, the city shall sell the usable materials of the
building and any personal property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or
attached to the building. The city shall credit the proceeds of the sale
against the cost of the removal or demolition. Any balance remaining from the
sale shall be deposited with the Clerk of the Superior Court of the county
where the property is located, and shall be disbursed by the Court to the
person found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the Court.



   (C)   Additional lien. The amounts incurred by the city in
connection with the removal or demolition shall also be a lien against any
other real property owned by the owner of the building or structure, and
located within the city limits or within one mile of the city limits, except
for the owner’s primary residence. The provisions of division (B) of this
section apply to this additional lien, except that this additional lien is
inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment.



   (D)   The city’s power to declare and abate nuisances
unimpaired.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit
the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.



(Ord. 2016-09, passed 6-14-2016)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Enforcement, see G.S. § 160A-432



INSPECTION DEPARTMENT



§ 150.060  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Inspection Department shall consist of a building
inspector, a plumbing inspector, an electrical inspector, and such other
inspectors or deputy or assistant inspectors as may be authorized by the Town
Council.  The Town Council may, in its discretion, contract the
responsibilities for building inspections to an outside agency.



   (B)   On and after the applicable date set forth in the schedule in
G.S. § 160A-411, no town shall employ an inspector to enforce the State
Building Code as a member of the town Inspection Department who does not have
one of the following types of certificates issued by the North Carolina Code
Officials Qualification Board attesting to his qualifications to hold such
position:



      (1)   A probationary certificate, valid for one year only;



      (2)   A standard certificate; or



      (3)   A limited certificate which shall be valid only as an
authorization for him to continue in the position held on the date specified
in G.S. § 143-151.13(c) and which shall become invalid if he does not
successfully complete in-service training specified by the Qualification
Board within the period specified in G.S. § 143-151.13(c).



   (C)   An inspector holding one of the above certificates can be
promoted to a position requiring a higher level certificate only upon
issuance by the Qualification Board of a standard certificate or probationary
certificate appropriate for such new position.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Inspection Department, see G.S. § 160A-411



   Qualifications of inspectors, see G.S. § 160A-411.1



§ 150.061  DUTIES AND POWERS OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Inspection Department to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted
herein, and to make all inspections necessary to determine whether or not the
provisions of this chapter and such codes are being met. The North Carolina
State Building Code, Volume I, General Construction, and the North Carolina
Uniform Residential Building Code shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector.  The North Carolina Plumbing Code shall be enforced by the
Plumbing Inspector. The North Carolina State Electrical Code shall be
enforced by the Electrical Inspector.



   (B)   (1)   Other duties and responsibilities of the Inspection
Department and of the inspectors therein shall be to enforce within the town,
state, and local laws relating to: 



         (a)   The construction of buildings and other structures;



         (b)   The installation of such facilities as plumbing
systems, electrical systems, heating systems, refrigeration systems, and
air-conditioning systems;



         (c)   The maintenance of buildings and other structures
in a safe, sanitary, and healthful condition; and



         (d)   Other matters that may be specified by the Town
Council.



      (2)   These duties shall include the receipt of applications
for permits and the issuance or denial of permits, the making of any
necessary inspections, the issuance or denial of certificates of compliance,
the issuance of orders to correct violations, the bringing of judicial
actions against actual or threatened violations, the keeping of adequate
records, and any other actions that may be required in order to adequately
enforce those laws. The Town Council shall have the authority to enact
reasonable and appropriate provisions governing the enforcement of those laws.



      (3)   Except as provided in G.S. § 160A-424, the town may not
adopt a local ordinance or resolution or any other policy that requires
regular, routine inspections of buildings or structures constructed in
compliance with the North Carolina Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings in addition to the specific inspections required by the North
Carolina Building Code without first obtaining approval from the North
Carolina Building Code Council. The North Carolina Building Code Council
shall review all applications for additional inspections requested by the
town and shall, in a reasonable manner, approve, or disapprove the additional
inspections. This division does not limit the authority of the town to
require inspections upon unforseen or unique circumstances that require
immediate action.



   (C)   Inspectors are also authorized, empowered, and directed to
enforce all the provisions of this chapter and the regulatory codes herein
adopted.



   (D)   Right of entry.  Inspectors shall have the right of entry on
any premises within the jurisdiction of the Inspection Department, at all
reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection or other enforcement action,
upon presentation of proper credentials. If a permit has been obtained by an
owner exempt from licensure under G.S. § 87-1(b)(2), no inspection shall be
conducted without the owner being personally present, unless the plans for
the building were drawn and sealed by an architect licensed pursuant to G.S.
Ch. 83A.



   (E)   Stop orders.



      (1)   Whenever any building or structure or part thereof is
being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in a
hazardous manner or in  substantial  violation  of  any  state  or town
building law, or in a manner that endangers life or property, the appropriate
inspector may order the specific part of the work that is in violation or
presents such a hazard to be immediately stopped. Such stop order shall be in
writing, directed to the person doing the work, and shall state the specific
work to be stopped, the specific reasons therefor, and the conditions under
which the work may be resumed.



      (2)   The owner or builder may appeal from a stop order
involving alleged violation of the State Building Code or any approved local
modification thereof to the North Carolina Commissioner of Insurance or his
designee within five days after the day the order is issued. The owner or
builder shall give to the Commissioner of Insurance or his designee written
notice of appeal, with a copy to the Town Inspector. The Commissioner of
Insurance or his designee shall as expeditiously as possible provide a
written statement of the decision setting forth the facts found, the decision
reached, and the reasons for the decision.  Pending the ruling by the
Commissioner of Insurance or his designee on an appeal, no further work may
take place in violation of a stop order. In the event of dissatisfaction with
the decision, the person affected shall have the options of:



         (a)   Appealing to the Building Code Council; or



         (b)   Appealing to the Superior Court as provided in
G.S. § 143-141.



      (3)   The owner or builder may appeal from a stop order
involving violation of a local zoning ordinance by giving notice of appeal in
writing to the Board of Adjustment.  The appeal shall be heard and decided
within the period established by the ordinance, or if none is specified,
within a reasonable time. No further work shall take place in violation of a
stop order pending a ruling.



      (4)   (a)   Violation of a stop order shall constitute a
misdemeanor.  (Effective until October 1, 1994).



         (b)   Violation of a stop order shall constitute a Class
1 misdemeanor.  (Effective October 1, 1994).



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Duties and responsibilities, see G.S. § 160A-412



   Failure to perform, see G.S. § 160A-416



   Inspections of work in progress, see G.S. § 160A-420



   Stop orders, see G.S. § 160A-421



§ 150.062  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   (A)   No member of the Inspection Department shall be financially
interested  or employed by a business that is financially interested in the
furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction,
alteration, or maintenance of any building within the town's jurisdiction or
any part or system thereof, or in the making of plans or specifications
therefor, unless he is the owner of such building. No member of the
Inspection Department or other individual or an employee of a company
contracting with the town to conduct inspections shall engage in any work
which is inconsistent with his or her duties or with the interests of the
town, as determined by the town.



   (B)   The town must find a conflict of interest if any of the
following is the case:



      (1)   If the individual, company, or employee of a company
contracting to perform inspections for the town has worked for the owner,
developer, contractor, or project manager of the project to be inspected
within the last two years.



      (2)   If the individual, company, or employee of a company
contracting to perform inspections for the town is closely related to the
owner, developer, contractor, or project manager of the project to be
inspected.



      (3)   If the individual, company, or employee of a company
contracting to perform inspections for the town has a financial or business
interest in the project to be inspected.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Conflicts of interest, see G.S. § 160A-415



§ 150.063  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   The Inspection Department shall keep complete and accurate records in
convenient form of all applications received, permits issued, inspections and
re-inspections made, defects found, certificates of compliance granted, and
all other work and activities of  the Inspection Department.  These records
shall be kept in the manner and for the periods prescribed by the State
Department of Cultural Resources.  Periodic reports shall be submitted to
the Town Council and to the State Commissioner of Insurance as they shall by
ordinance, rule, or regulation require.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Records and reports, see G.S. § 160A-433



§ 150.064  INSPECTION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Inspections of work in process.  The Inspection Department
shall inspect all buildings and structures and work therein for which a
permit of any kind has been issued as often as necessary in order to
determine whether the work complies with this chapter and the appropriate
codes. When deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector, materials and
assemblies may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication, or
inspections may be made by approved and recognized inspection
organizations.  However, no approval shall be based upon reports of such
organizations, unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible
officer of such organization.  All holders of permits, or their agents,
shall notify the Inspection Department and the appropriate inspector at each
of the following stages of construction, so that approval may be given before
work is continued: 



      (1)   Foundation inspection.  To be made after trenches are
excavated and the necessary reinforcement and forms are in place, and before
concrete is placed.  Drilled footings, piles, and similar types of
foundations shall be inspected as installed.



      (2)   Framing inspection.  To be made after all structural
framing is in place and all roughing-in of



plumbing and electrical and heating has been installed, after all fire
blocking, chimneys, bracing and vents are installed, but before any of the
structure is enclosed or covered. Poured-in-place concrete structural
elements shall be inspected before each pour of any structural member.



      (3)   Fireproofing inspection.  To be made after all areas
required to be protected by fireproofing are lathed, but before the
plastering or other fire- proofing is applied.



      (4)   Final inspection.  To be made after the building or
structure has all doors hung and fixtures set and is ready for occupancy, but
before the building is occupied.



   (B)   Calls for inspection.  Request for inspections may be made to
the office of the Inspection Department or to the appropriate inspector. The
Inspection Department  shall  make inspections as soon as practicable after
requests are made therefor, provided such work is ready for inspection at the
time the request is made.



      (1)   Re-inspections may be at the convenience of the
inspector.  No work shall be inspected until it is in proper and completed
condition ready for inspection. All work which has been concealed before the
inspection and approval shall be uncovered at the request of the inspector
and placed in condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the
work shall be furnished by the appropriate inspector in the form of a notice
posted on the building or given to the permit holder or his agent.



      (2)   Failure to call for inspections or proceeding without
approval at each stage of construction shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.



   (C)   Street or alley lines.  Where the applicant for a permit
proposes to erect any building or structure on the line of any street, alley,
or other public place, he shall secure a survey of the line of the street,
alley, or other public place adjacent to the property upon which the building
or structure is to be erected, before proceeding with construction of the
building or structure.  It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to
see that the building does not encroach upon the street, alley, or other
public place.



   (D)   Certificates of compliance.  At the conclusion of all work
done under a permit, the appropriate inspector shall make a final inspection,
and if he finds that the completed work complies with all applicable state
and local laws and with the terms of the permit, he shall issue a certificate
of compliance.  No new building or part thereof may be occupied, no addition
or enlargement of an existing building may be occupied, and no existing
building that has been altered or moved may be occupied, until the Inspection
Department has issued a certificate of compliance. A temporary certificate of
compliance may be issued permitting occupancy for a stated period of
specified portions of the building that the inspector finds may safely be
occupied prior to final completion of the entire building. Violation of this
section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.



   (E)   Periodic inspections.  The Inspection Department shall make
periodic inspections, subject to the Board of Commissioner's directions, for
unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise hazardous and unlawful conditions in
structures within its territorial jurisdiction.  In addition, it shall make
inspections when it has reason to believe that such conditions may exist in a
particular structure. In exercising this power, members of the Department
shall have a right to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
Department at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action, upon presentation of proper credentials.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Inspection of work in process, see G.S. § 160A-420



   Certificates of compliance, see G.S. § 160A-423



   Periodic inspections, see G.S. § 160A-424



§ 150.065  VIOLATIONS OF REGULATIONS NOT LEGALIZED BY OVERSIGHT OF
INSPECTOR.



   No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any inspector or
other official or employee of the Inspection Department shall be deemed to
legalize the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of
any regulatory code herein adopted.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



§ 150.066  GENERAL RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   Unless otherwise provided by law, appeals from any order, decision, or
determination by a member of the Inspection Department pertaining to the
State Building Code or other state building laws shall be taken to the
Commissioner of Insurance or his designee or other official specified in G.S.
§ 143-139, by filing a written notice with him and with the Inspection
Department within a period of ten days after the order, decision, or
determination.  Further appeals may be taken to the State Building Code
Council or to the courts as provided by law.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Appeals in general, see G.S. § 160A-434



§ 150.067  REMEDIES.



   (A)   Whenever any violation is denominated a misdemeanor under the
provisions of this chapter, the town, either in addition to or in lieu of
other remedies, may initiate any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation or to prevent the
occupancy of the building or structure involved.



   (B)   Removal of building.  In the case of building or structure
declared unsafe under G.S. § 160A-426 or an ordinance adopted pursuant to
G.S. § 160A-426, a town may, in lieu of taking action under division (A) of
this section, cause the building or structure to be removed or demolished.
The amounts incurred by the town in connection with the removal or demolition
shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred. 
The liens shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected in the
same manner as liens for special assessments provided in G.S. § 160A-432.10.
If the building or structure is removed or demolished by the town, the town
shall sell the usable materials of the building and any personal property,
fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the building. The town
shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or
demolition. Any balance remaining from the sale shall be deposited with the
Clerk of Superior Court of the county where the property is located and shall
be disbursed by the court to the person found to be entitled thereto by final
order or decree of the court.



   (C)   The amounts incurred by the town in connection with the
removal or demolition shall also be a lien against any other real property
owned by the owner of the building or structure and located within the town
limits or within one mile of the town limits, except for the owner's primary
residence. The provisions of division (B) of this section apply to this
additional lien, except that this additional lien is inferior to all prior
liens and shall be collected as a money judgement.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit
the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Enforcement, see G.S. § 160A-432



PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM



§ 150.080  NUMBERS TO BE ASSIGNED FROM OFFICIAL NUMBERING BOOK.



   The property numbering book entitled “Property Numbering Book, dated
February 12, 1985, Lillington, North Carolina” is hereby adopted as the
official property numbering book of the town, and all property numbers
assigned shall be assigned in accordance with this numbering book, and no
other property numbers shall be used or displayed in the town except numbers
assigned in accordance with the official numbering book. The property
numbering book shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.



(1991 Code, § 150.61)  (Ord. passed 2-12-1985; Am. Ord. 2016-02, passed
9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.081  NUMBERING SYSTEM.



   (A)   On the property numbering book Main Street is hereby
designated as the east-west axis and B Street is hereby designated as the
north-south axis. Whenever possible, 100 numbers shall be allowed to each
block so that the numbers of each consecutive block shall commence with
consecutive 100's and one.



   (B)   One whole number shall be assigned for approximately 50 feet
of vacant property within the corporate limits, excluding the business
district in which case one whole number shall be assigned for approximately
25 feet of vacant property.



   (C)   Even numbers shall be assigned to the west side of all north
and south streets, and odd numbers to the east side.



   (D)   (1)   Odd numbers shall be assigned to the south side of
all west streets and even numbers to the north side.



      (2)   Odd numbers shall be assigned to the north side of all
east streets and even numbers to the south side.



(1991 Code, § 150.62)  (Ord. passed 2-12-1985; Am. Ord. 2016-02, passed
9-15-2015)



§ 150.082  OWNERS TO PURCHASE AND DISPLAY NUMBERS.



   Every property owner of improved property shall purchase and display
the number as above-assigned; said numbers to be at least four inches in
height; said numbers shall be conspicuous and shall be placed adjacent to the
main entrance to the residence or building on either side of the doorway at
eye level (approximately five to six feet), immediately above doorway, or on
the post, pillar or other porch support adjacent to the steps leading to the
main doorway facing the street.



(1991 Code, § 150.63)  (Ord. passed 2-12-1985; Am. Ord. passed 8-9-1988;
Am. Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.083  NUMBERS FOR FUTURE BUILDINGS.



   All residence and business buildings erected after the adoption of this
subchapter shall be assigned a number in accordance with the property
numbering map and shall purchase and display such number as provided in §
150.082.



(1991 Code, § 150.64)  (Ord. passed 2-12-1985; Am. Ord. 2016-02, passed
9-15-2015)



§ 150.084  UNLAWFUL TO DEFACE NUMBER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface or take down any
number placed on any property in accordance with this subchapter, except for
repair or replacement of such number.



(1991 Code, § 150.65)  (Ord. passed 2-12-1985; Am. Ord. 2016-02, passed
9-15-2015)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties provided in § 10.99.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-15-2015)



CHAPTER 151:  MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS



Section




General Provisions




   151.01   Finding; purpose



   151.02   Definitions



   151.03   Responsibilities of owners and occupants




Minimum Standards for Dwelling and Dwelling Unit




   151.15   Compliance required



   151.16   Structural conditions



   151.17   Basic equipment and facilities



   151.18   Ventilation



   151.19   Space, use and location



   151.20   Safe and sanitary maintenance



   151.21   Control of insects, rodents and infestations




Minimum Standards for Rooming Houses




   151.35   Application of regulations



   151.36   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities



   151.37   Minimum floor area



   151.38   Sanitary conditions and facilities




Administration and Enforcement




   151.50   Powers and duties of Building Inspector



   151.51   Right of entry of Building Inspector



   151.52   Enforcement procedure



   151.53   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   151.54   In rem action by Inspector; placarding



   151.55   Costs a lien on premises



   151.56   Alternative remedies



   151.57   Zoning Board of Adjustment to hear appeals



   151.58   Other provisions



   151.59   Violations



 



   151.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  FINDING; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby declared that there
exist in the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other
calamities; lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities and other
conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, dangerous and
detrimental to the health, safety and morals, and otherwise inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the town.



   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the town as authorized by G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 6, it is
the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum standards of fitness for the
initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation,
as expressly authorized by G.S. § 160A-444.



(1991 Code, § 152.01)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 151.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BASEMENT. A portion of a dwelling which is located partly
underground, having direct access to light and air from windows located above
the level of the adjoining ground.



      BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector of the town or any
Building Inspector for whose services the town has contracted or any
authorized agent of the Inspector.



      CELLAR. A portion of a dwelling which is located partly or wholly
underground having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located
partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.



      DETERIORATED. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and
can be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum
standards established by this chapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of its
value, as determined by finding of the Inspector.



      DILAPIDATED. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and
cannot be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum
standards established by this chapter except at a cost in excess of 50% of
its value, as determined by finding of the Inspector.



      DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile
home or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to
be so used, and including any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto
or usually enjoyed therewith, except that it does not include any
manufactured or mobile home as defined in G.S. § 143-145(7), which is used
solely for a seasonal vacation purpose. The term shall include within its
meaning the terms rooming house and rooming unit, as hereinafter defined.



      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as
their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other
recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Inspector.



      GARBAGE. The organic waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



      HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.



      INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or the public.



      MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.



      OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit.



      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



      OWNER. Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others:



         (a)   Shall have title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof;



         (b)   Shall be a mortgagee of record for any dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit; or



         (c)   Shall have charge, care or control of any
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, as owner or agent of the actual
owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the actual owner. Any such person thus representing
the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same
extent as if he or she were the owner.



      PARTY OR PARTIES IN INTEREST. All persons who have interests of
record in a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and any persons who are
in possession thereof.



      PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm partnership,
association, organization or other legal entity.



      PLUMBING. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment:
gas pipe, gas burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal
units (mechanical sink grinders), sewage disposal pipes, water closets,
sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed
clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar
supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.



      PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the town or of the
county or the state relating to health, fire, building regulations or other
activities concerning dwellings in the town.



      ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or
operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or
daughter, mother or father, or brother of the owner or operator.



      ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not
for cooking or eating purposes.



      RUBBISH. Nonorganic waste materials. The term shall include
paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches,
yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass and dust.



      SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the
control of, the owner or operator.



      UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. That conditions exist in a dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house or room unit which violate or do not comply with
one or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or more of the
requirements established by this chapter.



   (B)   Whenever the words DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMING HOUSE,
ROOMING UNIT, PREMISES are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words OR ANY PART THEREOF.



(1991 Code, § 152.02)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 151.03  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   (A)   Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.



   (B)   Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit and premises thereof which he or she occupies and controls.



   (C)   Rubbish disposal.



      (1)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
dispose of all his or her rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner
by placing it in the supplied storage facilities.



      (2)   In all cases, the owner shall be responsible for the
availability of rubbish and garbage storage facilities.



   (D)   Plumbing. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all
supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use
and operation of same.



   (E)   Care of facilities, equipment and structure. No occupant shall
willfully destroy, deface or impair any of the facilities or equipment, or
any part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit.



(1991 Code, § 152.03)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DWELLING AND DWELLING UNIT



§ 151.15  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation,
or held out for use as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the
minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements
of this subchapter.



   (B)   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another
for occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit
which does not comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human
habitation and all of the requirements of this subchapter.



(1991 Code, § 152.15)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.16  STRUCTURAL CONDITIONS.



   The following standards shall constitute the minimum standards for
structural condition of a dwelling or dwelling unit:



   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists,
rafters or other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, and shall
not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks
which might admit rodents;



   (B)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used;



   (C)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation
supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged;



   (D)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or
appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fall
or collapse;



   (E)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall
be provided;



   (F)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways
shall be finished of suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable
household methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be
maintained in such a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain
reasonable privacy between various spaces;



   (G)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors
and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be weather- and water-tight;



   (H)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are
defective, deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in such condition or
location as to constitute a fire hazard; and



   (I)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors
on the ground.



(1991 Code, § 152.16)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.17  BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   Plumbing system.



      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water
supply and to a public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system.



      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen
sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet and adequate supply of both cold
water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.



      (3)   All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the
State Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in
good working order.



      (4)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within
the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water
closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording
privacy to the user.



   (B)   Heating system. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have
facilities for providing heat in accordance with the following.



      (1)   Central and electrical heating systems. Every central or
electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity to heat all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit to
which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70°F measured at a point
three feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.



      (2)   Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric
heating system is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be
provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, gas vents or other
facilities to which heating appliances may be connected to heat all habitable
rooms with a minimum temperature of 70°F measured three feet above the floor
during ordinary winter conditions.



   (C)   Electrical system.



      (1)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for
electrical lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall
contain at least two floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles,
connected in such manner as determined by the State Electrical Code. There
shall be installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and
furnace room at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light
fixture. In the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any
habitable room, then each such habitable room shall contain at least three
floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles.



      (2)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple
dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when
natural daylight is not sufficient.



      (3)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be
maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and
installed in accordance with the State Electrical Code.



(1991 Code, § 152.17)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.18  VENTILATION.



   (A)   General. Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor
area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window or any room and such light-obstructing structures are located less
than five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to
the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required
minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a
skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such
skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total floor area of such room.



   (B)   Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size
or minimum skylight-type window size as required, or shall have other
approved, equivalent ventilation.



   (C)   Bathrooms and water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water
closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements
for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system.



(1991 Code, § 152.18)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.19  SPACE, USE AND LOCATION.



   (A)   Room sizes.



      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum
room size in each habitable room as required by the State Residential
Building Code.



      (2)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square
feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet
of additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at
least 75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional
occupant.



      (3)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area
for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of
floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.



   (B)   Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and
six inches.



   (C)   Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the
basis of habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within the
dwelling unit may count for not more than 10% of the required habitable floor
area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less
than four and one-half feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area
for the purpose of determining maximum permissible occupancy.



   (D)   Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.



   (E)   Basements. No basement shall be used for living purposes
unless:



      (1)   The floor and walls are substantially water-tight;



      (2)   The total window area, total openable window area and
ceiling height are equal to those required for habitable rooms; and



      (3)   The required minimum window area of every habitable room
is entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the
window or windows face a stairwell, window well or accessway.



(1991 Code, § 152.19)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.20  SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Exterior foundation, walls and roofs. Every foundation wall,
exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weather-tight and
rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be
capable of affording privacy: and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use would cause to be placed thereon. Every
exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to
prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather.



   (B)   Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior
wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use would cause to be placed thereon.



   (C)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or
cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weather-tight, water-tight
and rodent proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.



   (D)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every outside and inside
stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use would cause to be placed thereon and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.



   (E)   Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet
compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so that it will
be reasonably impervious to water and will permit such floor to be easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (F)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.



   (G)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded in order to
obtain thorough drainage and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.



   (H)   Noxious weeds. Every yard and all exterior property areas
shall be kept free of species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or
detrimental to health.



   (I)   Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate
means of egress, as required by the State Residential Building Code.



(1991 Code, § 152.20)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.21  CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS AND INFESTATIONS.



   (A)   Screens. In every dwelling unit, for protection against
mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every door opening directly from a
dwelling unit to outdoor space shall be equipped with screens and a
self-closing device. Every window or other device with openings to outdoor
space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be
equipped with screens.



   (B)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or
intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement
which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be equipped with screens or
such other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.



   (C)   Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a
single-dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of insects,
rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a
dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be
responsible for such extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the
only one infested. Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to
maintain a dwelling in a rodent proof or reasonable insect proof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation
exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared
or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.



   (D)   Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every
dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for
storage of rubbish as required by town ordinances, and the owner, operator or
agent in control of such dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
the removal of rubbish.



   (E)   Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every
dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility,
which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink
grinder) in each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can as
required by town ordinances.



(1991 Code, § 152.21)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ROOMING HOUSES



§ 151.35  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   All of the provisions of this chapter, and all of the minimum standards
and requirements of this chapter, shall be applicable to rooming houses, and
to every person who operates a rooming house, or who occupies or lets to
another for occupancy and any rooming unit in any rooming house, except as
provided in §§ 151.36 through 151.38.



(1991 Code, § 152.35)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 151.36  WATER CLOSET, HAND LAVATORY AND BATH FACILITIES.



   (A)   At least one water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower, properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good
working condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming
house wherever these facilities are shared.



   (B)   All such facilities shall be located within the residence
building served and shall be directly accessible from a common hall or
passageway and shall be not more than one story removed from any of the
persons sharing such facilities.



   (C)   Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied
with hot and cold water at all times.



   (D)   Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar.



(1991 Code, § 152.36)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.37  MINIMUM FLOOR AREA.



   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain
at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of
floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square
feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.



(1991 Code, § 152.37)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.38  SANITARY CONDITIONS AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall
be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and
ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming
house. He or she shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of
the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the
rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.



   (B)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by § 151.36 shall be located
within the rooming house and within a room or rooms which afford privacy, are
separate from the habitable rooms, are accessible from a common hall, and are
accessible without going outside the rooming house or through any other room
therein.



(1991 Code, § 152.38)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 151.50  POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   (A)   The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the officer to
enforce the provisions of this chapter and to exercise the duties and powers
herein prescribed. The Building Inspector is authorized to exercise such
powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the
purpose and provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Building Inspector shall have the following powers and
duties:



      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect
dwellings and dwelling units located in the town and in the one-mile
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town, in order to determine which
dwellings and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the
purpose of carrying out the objectives of this chapter with respect to the
repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings and dwelling units;



      (2)   To take such action, together with other appropriate
departments and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect
rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated;



      (3)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made
under this chapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the
minimum standards of fitness herein prescribed;



      (4)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses
and receive evidence;



      (5)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making
examinations and inspections; provided, such entries shall be made in
accordance with § 151.51 and state law, and shall be made in such manner as
to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; and



      (6)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein
or by the Town Board.



(1991 Code, § 152.50)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 151.51  RIGHT OF ENTRY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   (A)   For the purpose of making inspections, the Building Inspector
is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and the premises
associated therewith. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house or rooming unit or the person in charge thereof shall give the
Building Inspector free access to such dwelling and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection, examination and survey.



   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee,
access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with
any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 152.51)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.52  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a
petition is filed with the Inspector by a public authority or by at least
five residents of the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, charging
that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, or whenever
it appears to the Inspector, upon inspection, that any dwelling or dwelling
unit is unfit for human habitation, he or she shall, if his or her
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling or
dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that a hearing will be held before the Inspector at a place therein
fixed, not less than ten nor more then 30 days after the serving of the
complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of such
hearing shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition
relating to such dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend such
hearing and give evidence. Rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or
equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Inspector.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing.



      (1)   After such notice and hearing, the Inspector shall state
in writing his or her determination as to whether the dwelling or dwelling
unit is unfit for human habitation, and, if so, whether it is deteriorated or
dilapidated.



      (2)   If the Inspector determines that the dwelling or
dwelling unit is deteriorated, he or she shall state in writing his or her
findings of fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and cause
to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the
owner to repair, alter or improve such dwelling or dwelling unit to comply
with the minimum standards of fitness established by this chapter within a
specified period of time, which shall be not less than 60 days. Such order
may also direct and require the owner to vacate and close such dwelling or
dwelling unit until such repairs, alterations and improvements have been made.



      (3)   If the Inspector determines that the dwelling is
dilapidated, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact to
support such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner either to repair,
alter or improve such dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum
standards of fitness established by this chapter, or else to vacate and
remove or demolish the same within a specified period of time, which shall be
not less than 60 days.



      (4)   For good cause shown, and prior to the expiration of the
time specified in the original order of the Building Inspector, the owner of
any dwelling or dwelling unit may petition the Building Inspector to allow an
additional period of time to comply with the order hereinabove issued. The
Building Inspector shall give the owners five days’ notice of a hearing on
his or her petition and shall issue an order within ten days of the filing of
the petition for additional time. Said order shall: grant additional time; or
deny the request for additional time. If the request for additional time is
denied, the owner shall not be subject to any penalties for violation of the
original order until such time as the order of the Building Inspector has
been served on him or her denying the request.



   (C)   Failure to comply with order.



      (1)   In personam remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated
dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Inspector
to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the same within the time
specified therein, or if the owner of a dilapidated dwelling or dwelling unit
shall fail to comply with an order of the Inspector to repair, alter or
improve or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same within the
time specified therein, the Inspector may submit to the Town Board at its
next regular meeting a resolution directing the Town Attorney to petition the
Superior Court for an order directing such owner to comply with the order of
the Inspector, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).



      (2)   In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a
deteriorated or dilapidated dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with an order
of the Inspector within the time specified therein, if injunctive relief has
not been sought or has not been granted as provided in the division (C)
above, the Inspector shall submit to the Town Board an ordinance specifying
the property and ordering the Inspector or authorized agent to cause such
dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated, closed,
removed or demolished, as provided in the original order of the Inspector,
and pending removal or demolition, to place a placard on such dwelling as
provided by G.S. § 160A-443 and § 151.54 of this chapter.



   (D)   Appeals from orders of Inspector.



      (1)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Inspector
may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or
commission of the town. Any appeal from the Inspector shall be taken within
ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order, and
shall be taken by filing with the Inspector and with the Zoning Board of
Adjustment a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the
appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Inspector shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision
of the Inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal
shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the
Board, unless the Inspector certifies to the Board, after the notice of
appeal is filed with him or her, that by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension
of his or her requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in
which case the requirement shall not be suspended, except by a restraining
order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one
day’s written notice to the Inspector, by the Board, or by a court of
record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. § 160A-446(f) and division (E) of
this section.



      (2)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
all appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision and order as
in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have
all the powers of the Inspector, but the concurring vote of four-fifths of
the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision
or order of the Inspector. The Board shall have power also in passing upon
appeals, in any case where there are practical difficulties of unnecessary
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to
adapt the application of the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the
end that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and
welfare secured, and substantial justice done.



      (3)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review
by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



   (E)   Petition to Superior Court by owner. Any person aggrieved by
an order issued by the Inspector or a decision rendered by the Board shall
have the right, within 30 days after issuance of the order of rendering of
the decision, to petition the Superior Court for a temporary injunction
restraining the Inspector pending a final disposition of the cause, as
provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).



(1991 Code, § 152.52)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 151.53  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector shall be served upon
persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the
identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot
be ascertained by the Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the
Inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of such
complaint or order upon such owners and persons may be made by publishing the
same at least once, no later than the time at which personal service would be
required under the provisions of this chapter, in a newspaper having general
circulation in the town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Where service
is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.



(1991 Code, § 152.53)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 151.54  IN REM ACTION BY INSPECTOR; PLACARDING.



   (A)   (1)   After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling
unit to comply with an order of the Building Inspector issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, and upon adoption by the Town Board of an
ordinance authorizing and directing him or her to do so, as provided by G.S.
§ 160A-443(5) and § 151.52(C), the Inspector shall proceed to cause such
dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered or improved to comply with
the minimum standards of fitness established by this chapter, or to be
vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of
the Town Board, and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of such
dwelling or dwelling unit a placard with the following words:



         “This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or
occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and
unlawful.”



      (2)   Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a
misdemeanor.



   (B)   Each ordinance so adopted shall be recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds of the county, and shall be indexed in the name of the
property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. § 160A-443(5).



(1991 Code, § 152.54)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.55  COSTS A LIEN ON PREMISES.



   As provided by G.S. § 160A-443(6), the cost of any repairs,
alterations or improvements, or of vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition, caused to be made or done by the Inspector pursuant to § 151.54
shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred.
Such lien shall be filed, have priority and be collected in the same manner
as the lien for special assessments established by G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10.



(1991 Code, § 152.55)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 151.56  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   Neither this chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to
enforce this chapter by a civil citation as authorized by §§ 151.59 and
151.99, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent
the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws.



(1991 Code, § 152.56)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 151.57  ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT TO HEAR APPEALS.



   All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the
Inspector pursuant to § 151.52(D) shall be heard and determined by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. As the appeals body, the Board shall have the
power to fix the times and places of its meetings, to adopt necessary rules
of procedure and any other rules and regulations which may be necessary for
the proper discharge of its duties. The Board shall perform the duties
prescribed by § 151.52(D) and shall keep an accurate journal of all its
proceedings.



(1991 Code, § 152.57)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 151.58  OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this chapter is
found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of
the town, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more
stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the residents of the town shall prevail.



(1991 Code, § 152.58)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 151.59  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling
unit to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to
vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Inspector
duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such
order. Each day that any such failure, neglect or refusal to comply with such
order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to § 151.52,
to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in
such order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacation and
closing. Each day that such occupancy continues after such prescribed time
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(1991 Code, § 152.59)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any violation of any provisions of this chapter shall
subject the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to a civil penalty in the
sum of $50 per day.



      (2)   A citation for said civil penalty for violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be issued by the Town Manager.



      (3)   Each citation for a civil penalty must be paid within 72
hours of issuance.



      (4)   Each and every day that the owner of any dwelling or
dwelling unit violates any provision of this chapter shall be a separate and
distinct offense.



   (B)   In addition to the penalty established by division (A) above,
and the remedies provided by other provisions of this chapter, this chapter
may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.



(1991 Code, § 152.99)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



CHAPTER 152:  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



Section



   152.01   Incorporation by reference



§ 152.01  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   The Comprehensive Development Plan for the Town of Lillington, prepared
June, 1988, and adopted October 11, 1988 as may be amended from time to time
is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.



(1991 Code, § 153.01)



CHAPTER 153:  ABANDONED STRUCTURES



Section



   153.01   Finding; intent



   153.02   Powers and duties of Building Inspector



   153.03   Right of entry of Building Inspector



   153.04   Standards for enforcement



   153.05   Procedure for enforcement



   153.06   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   153.07   In rem action by inspector; placarding



   153.08   Costs a lien on premises



   153.09   Alternative remedies



   153.10   Zoning Board of Adjustment to hear appeals



   153.11   Conflict with other provisions



   153.12   Violations



 



   153.99   Penalty



§ 153.01  FINDING; INTENT.



   It is hereby found that there exists within the town abandoned
structures which the Town Board finds to be hazardous to the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the town due to the attraction of insects or
rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting
a threat to children, or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary facilities. Therefore, pursuant to the authority granted
by G.S. § 160A-441, it is the intent of this chapter to provide for the
repair, closing or demolition of any such abandoned structures in the town
and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, in accordance with the same provisions
and procedures as are set forth by law for the repair, closing or demolition
of dwellings unfit for human habitation.



(1991 Code, § 154.01)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 153.02  POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   (A)   The Building Inspector, as defined in § 151.02, is hereby
designated as the officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector:



      (1)   To determine which abandoned structures within the town
and its extraterritorial jurisdiction are in violation of this chapter;



      (2)   To take such action pursuant to this chapter as may be
necessary to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of such structures;



      (3)   To keep an accurate record of all enforcement
proceedings begun pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and



      (4)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein
or assigned to the Building Inspector by the Town Board.



   (C)   The Building Inspector is authorized to exercise such powers
as may be necessary to carry out the intent and the provisions of this
chapter, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted:



      (1)   To investigate the condition of buildings within the
town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction in order to determine which
structures are abandoned and in violation of this chapter;



      (2)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making
inspections, provided, such entries shall be made in accordance with state
law; and



      (3)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses
and receive evidence.



(1991 Code, § 154.02)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 153.03  RIGHT OF ENTRY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   For the purpose of making inspections, the Building Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all abandoned
structures. The owner of every abandoned structure or the person in charge
thereof shall give the Building Inspector free access to such structures at
all reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection, examination and
survey.



(1991 Code, § 154.03)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.04  STANDARDS FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Every abandoned structure within the town and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be deemed in violation of this chapter
whenever such structure constitutes a hazard to the health, safety or welfare
of the citizens as a result of:



      (1)   The attraction of insects or rodents;



      (2)   Conditions creating a fire hazard;



      (3)   Dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children;
or



      (4)   Frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary facilities.



   (B)   In making the preliminary determination of whether or not an
abandoned structure is in violation of this chapter, the Building Inspector
may, by way of illustration and not limitation, consider the presence or
absence of the following conditions:



      (1)   Holes or cracks in the structure’s floors, walls,
ceilings or roof which might attract or admit rodents and insects, or become
breeding places for rodents and insects;



      (2)   The collection of garbage or rubbish in or near the
structure which might attract rodents and insects, or become breeding places
for rodents and insects;



      (3)   Violations of the State Building Code, the State
Electrical Code or the Fire Prevention Code which constitute a fire hazard in
such structure;



      (4)   The collection of garbage, rubbish or combustible
material which constitutes a fire hazard in such structure;



      (5)   The use of such structure or nearby grounds or
facilities by children as a play area;



      (6)   Violations of the State Building Code which might result
in danger to children using the structure or nearby grounds or facilities as
a play area; and



      (7)   Repeated use of such structure by transients and
vagrants, in the absence of sanitary facilities, for living, sleeping,
cooking or eating.



(1991 Code, § 154.04)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 153.05  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a
petition is filed with the Inspector by a public authority or by at least
five residents of the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction charging that
any structure exists in violation of this chapter or whenever it appear to
the Inspector, upon inspection, that any structure exists in violation
hereof, he or she shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a
basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and
parties in interest in such structure a complaint stating the charges in that
respect and containing notice that a hearing will be held before the
Inspector at a place therein fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days
after the serving of said complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall
have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least one of the persons
signing a petition relating to such structure. Any person desiring to do so
may attend such hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard.
The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Inspector.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing.



      (1)   After such notice and hearing, the Inspector shall state
in writing his or her determination as to whether such structure violates
this chapter.



      (2)   If the Inspector determines that the structure is in
violation, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact to
support such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to either repair,
alter and improve such structure; or else remove or demolish the same within
a specified period of time which shall be not less than 60 days.



      (3)   For good cause shown, and prior to the expiration of the
time specified in the original order of the Building Inspector, the owner of
any abandoned structure may petition the Building Inspector to allow an
additional period of time to comply with the order hereinabove issued. The
Building Inspector shall give the owner five days’ notice of a hearing on
his or her petition and shall issue an order within ten days of the filing of
the petition for additional time. Said order shall grant additional time or
deny the request for additional time. If the request for additional time is
denied, the owner shall not be subject to any penalties for violation of
original order until such time as the order of the Building Inspector has
been served on the owner denying the request.



   (C)   Failure to comply with order.



      (1)   In personam remedy. If the owner of any structure shall
fail to comply with an order of the Inspector within the time specified
therein, the Inspector may submit to the Town Board at its next regular
meeting a resolution directing the Town Attorney to petition the Superior
Court for an order directing such owner to comply with the order of the
Inspector, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).



      (2)   In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a structure
to comply with an order of the Inspector within the time specified therein,
if injunctive relief has not been sought or has not been granted as provided
in division (C)(1) of this section, the Inspector shall submit to the Town
Board an ordinance specifying the property and ordering the Inspector to
cause such structure to be repaired, altered, improved, removed or
demolished, as provided in the original order of the Inspector, and pending
removal or demolition, to placard such dwelling as provided by G.S. §
160A-443.



   (D)   Appeals from orders of Inspector.



      (1)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Inspector
may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or
commission of the town. Any appeal from the Inspector shall be taken within
ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order, and
shall be taken by filing with the Inspector and with the Zoning Board of
Adjustment a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the
appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Inspector shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision
of the Inspector refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any
act, his or her decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed.
When an appeal is from a decision of the Inspector requiring the person
aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the
requirement until the hearing by the Board, unless the Inspector certifies to
the Board, after the notice of appeal is filed with him or her, that by
reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be
furnished the appellant), a suspension of this requirement would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the requirement shall not
be suspended, except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due
cause shown upon not less than one day’s written notice to the Inspector,
by the Board or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. §
160A-446(f) and division (E) of this section.



      (2)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
all appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision and order appealed from, and may make such decision as in its
opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the
powers of the Inspector, but the concurring vote of four-fifths of the
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or
order of the Inspector. The Board shall have power also in passing upon
appeals, in any case where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the chapter, to
adapt the application of the chapter to the necessities of the case to the
end that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and
welfare secured, and substantial justice done.



      (3)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review
by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



   (E)   Petition to Superior Court by owner. Any person aggrieved by
an order issued by the Inspector shall have the right, within 30 days after
issuance of the order, to petition the Superior Court for a temporary
injunction restraining the Inspector pending a final disposition of the
cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).



(1991 Code, § 154.05)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 153.06  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   Complaints or orders issued by the Building Inspector shall be served
upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the
identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot
be ascertained by the Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the
Inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of such
complaint or order upon such owners and persons may be made by publication in
a newspaper having general circulation in the town and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction at least once, no later than the time at which personal service
is required under § 153.05. Where service is made by publication, a notice
of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected by the complaint or order.



(1991 Code, § 154.06)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 153.07  IN REM ACTION BY INSPECTOR; PLACARDING.



   (A)   After failure of an owner of a structure to comply with an
order of the Building Inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and upon adoption by the Town Board of an ordinance authorizing and
directing him or her to do so, as provided by G.S. § 160A-443(5) and §
153.04(C) of this code, the Inspector shall proceed to cause such structure
to be repaired, altered, improved, removed or demolished, as directed by the
ordinance of the Town Board, and shall cause to be posted on the main
entrance of such structure a placard prohibiting the use or occupation of the
structure. Use or occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a
misdemeanor.



   (B)   Each ordinance so adopted shall be recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds of the county, and shall be indexed in the name of the
property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. § 160A-443(5).



(1991 Code, § 154.07)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 153.08  COSTS A LIEN ON PREMISES.



   As provided by G.S. § 160A-446(6), the amount of the cost of any
repairs, alterations, improvements, removal or demolition caused to be made
or done by the Building Inspector pursuant to this chapter shall be a lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall
be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special
assessment provided by G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10.



(1991 Code, § 154.08)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 153.09  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   Neither this chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to
enforce this chapter by civil penalty, and the enforcement of any other
remedy or remedies provided herein.



(1991 Code, § 154.09)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 153.10  ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT TO HEAR APPEALS.



   All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the Building
Inspector pursuant to § 153.05(D) shall be heard and determined by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. As the appeals body, the Board shall have the
power to fix the times and places of its meetings, to adopt necessary rules
of procedure and any other rules and regulations which may be necessary for
the proper discharge of its duties. The Board shall perform the duties
prescribed by § 153.05(D) and shall keep an accurate journal of all its
proceedings.



(1991 Code, § 154.10)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 153.11  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this chapter is
found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of
the town, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more
stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the residents of the town shall prevail.



(1991 Code, § 154.11)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



§ 153.12  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any abandoned structure
to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to remove
or demolish the same, upon order of the Building Inspector duly made and
served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order.



   (B)   Each day that any such failure, neglect or refusal to comply
with such order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(1991 Code, § 154.12)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall
subject the owner of any abandoned structure to a civil penalty in the sum of
$50 per day.



      (2)   A citation for said civil penalty for violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be issued by the Town Manager.



      (3)   Each citation for a civil penalty must be paid within 72
hours of issuance.



      (4)   Each and every day that the owner of any dwelling or
dwelling unit violates any provision of this chapter shall be a separate and
distinct offense.



   (B)   In addition to the penalty established by division (A) above,
and the remedies provided by other provisions of this chapter, this chapter
may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.



(1991 Code, § 154.99)  (Ord. passed 10-11-1988)



CHAPTER 154:  ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS



   Editor’s Note:  The Unified Development Ordinance, adopted February
14, 2017, is published separately from this Code of Ordinances.



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   STREET CLOSINGS



TABLE I:  STREET CLOSINGS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


Res. 2014-09
 
4-8-2014
 
Closing of Ochiltre Street


 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to North Carolina General Statutes





References to 1991 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES



 

G.S. Section
 
Code Section




1-593
 
10.05


1-597
 
91.10


12-3
 
10.04, 10.05


12-3(2)
 
10.05


14-4
 
50.99, 52.076, 70.99, 93.07, 134.99


14-4(a)
 
10.99, 91.99, 95.99, 112.99, 132.99


14-4(b)
 
70.99


14-234
 
31.002


14-277.2
 
95.13


14-338
 
Charter, § 14


Ch. 18
 
Charter, S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963, § 5


Ch. 18, Art. 3
 
Charter, S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963, § 5


18-45
 
Charter, S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963, § 5


18-45(15)
 
Charter, S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963, § 7


18-49
 
Charter, S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963, § 5


Ch. 18B
 
Charter, S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963, § 5; 111.12


18B-701
 
32.141


18B-1004
 
111.12


18B-1004(a)
 
111.03


18B-1004(b)
 
111.03


18B-1004(c)
 
111.03


20-4.01
 
70.01


20-4.01(27)
 
70.01


20-97
 
72.03


20-145
 
70.16


20-156
 
70.16


Ch. 35
 
Charter, S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963, § 6


35-2
 
Charter, S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963, § 6


35-2, 12
 
Charter, S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963, § 6


Ch. 35A
 
Charter, S.B. No. 512 CHAPTER 798 Sess. L. 1963, § 6


40A
 
Charter, § 10


Ch. 44A, Art. 1
 
97.11


Ch. 44A-11-1(a)
 
150.020


62-133.8
 
150.020


62-133.9
 
150.020


Ch. 83A
 
150.061


87-1(b)(2)
 
150.061


87-15.5(7)
 
150.020


87-21
 
150.020


Ch. 87, Art. 4
 
150.020


87-43
 
150.020


Ch. 93
 
31.046


Ch. 93B
 
110.20


95-148
 
32.027


105-109
 
110.48, 110.49, 111.99


105-113.70
 
110.10, 111.01


105-113.77
 
111.02, 111.11


105-249
 
110.16


105-249.1
 
110.16


105-301
 
36.02


105-301 et seq.
 
36.01


105-307
 
36.01


105-308
 
36.03


105-309
 
36.02


105-310
 
36.03


105-312
 
36.03


105-321
 
36.05


105-349
 
31.060


105-350
 
31.061


105-360
 
150.020


113A-52(6)
 
150.020


113A-54(d)(4)
 
150.020


113A-57
 
150.020


113A-61
 
150.020


113A-71
 
150.020


121-5
 
110.30, 110.47


136-141 et seq.
 
97.14


136-143
 
97.14


143-139
 
150.066


143-141
 
150.061


143-145(7)
 
151.02


143-151.13(c)
 
150.060


143-213(8)
 
52.002


143-215.1(g)
 
52.051


143-215.3(a)(14)
 
52.002


143-215.3C
 
52.120


143-215.6B
 
52.123


153A-275
 
52.001


159-25
 
31.040


Ch. 159, Article 3, Part 3
 
31.040


160-13 to 160-16
 
Charter, § 12


Ch. 160A
 
Charter, § 9, 10.99


Ch. 160A, Article 10
 
51.15


160A-61
 
Charter, § 9


160A-64
 
Charter, H.B. 569 CHAPTER 353 Sess. L. 1967, § 1


160A-129.3A
 
150.041


160A-171
 
31.045


160A-175
 
50.99


160A-175(c)
 
70.99


160A-175(d)
 
110.49, 111.99


160A-183
 
92.35


160A-188
 
90.02


160A-189
 
92.35


160A-193
 
Ch. 93, 93.06


160A-198
 
134.01


160A-206
 
36.01


160A-207
 
110.48


160A-209
 
36.01, 36.04


160A-266(c)
 
34.04


160A-303
 
97.02


160A-303.2
 
97.02


160A-312
 
52.001


160A-411
 
150.060


160A-411.1
 
150.060


160A-412
 
150.061


160A-415
 
150.062


160A-416
 
150.061


160A-417
 
150.020


160A-418
 
150.024


160A-419
 
150.025


160A-420
 
150.061, 150.064


160A-421
 
150.061


160A-422
 
150.026


160A-423
 
150.064


160A-424
 
150.061, 150.064


160A-425
 
150.040


160A-426
 
150.041, 150.045, 150.067


160A-427
 
150.041


160A-428
 
150.042


160A-429
 
150.042


160A-430
 
150.043


160A-431
 
150.044


160A-432
 
150.045, 150.067


160A-432.10
 
150.067


160A-433
 
150.063


160A-434
 
150.066


160A-441
 
151.01, 153.01


160A-443
 
151.52, 153.05


160A-443(5)
 
151.54, 153.07


160A-443(6)
 
151.55, 153.08


160A-444
 
151.01


160A-446(f)
 
151.52, 153.05


160A-446(g)
 
151.52, 153.05


160A-451 through 160A-454
 
32.090


160A-503(10)
 
150.041


Ch. 160A, Art. 10
 
150.045, 151.55, 153.08


Ch. 160A, Art. 12
 
34.04


Ch. 160A, Art. 19
 
32.055


Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 6
 
151.01


Ch. 160A, Art. 19, §§ 160A-361 and 160A-363
 
32.059


Ch. 163, Art. 23
 
33.01


163-288(a)
 
33.02


163-290
 
33.01


163-292
 
33.01


163-302
 
33.02


166A-19.22
 
91.01, 91.10


166A-8
 
91.01


166A-19.31
 
91.01, 91.10


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1991 CODE



 

1991 Code Section
 
2015 Code Section




10.01
 
10.01


10.02
 
10.02


10.03
 
10.03


10.04
 
10.04


10.05
 
10.05


10.06
 
10.06


10.07
 
10.07


10.08
 
10.08


10.09
 
10.09


10.10
 
10.10


10.11
 
10.11


10.12
 
10.12


10.13
 
10.13


10.14
 
10.14


10.15
 
10.15


10.16
 
10.16


10.17
 
10.17


10.18
 
10.18


10.19
 
10.19


10.20
 
10.20


10.21
 
10.21


10.99
 
10.99


30.01
 
30.01


30.02
 
30.02


30.03
 
30.03


30.04
 
30.04


30.05
 
30.05


30.06
 
30.06


30.07
 
30.07


30.08
 
30.08


30.09
 
30.09


30.10
 
30.10


30.11
 
30.99


31.01
 
31.001


31.02
 
31.002


31.03
 
31.003


31.04
 
31.004


31.10
 
31.015


31.11
 
31.016


31.20
 
31.030


31.21
 
31.031


31.30
 
31.045


31.31
 
31.046


31.60
 
31.060


31.61
 
31.061


31.70
 
31.075


31.80
 
31.090


32.01
 
32.001


32.02
 
32.002


32.03
 
32.003


32.04
 
32.004


32.10
 
32.020


32.11
 
32.021


32.12
 
32.022


32.13
 
32.023


32.14
 
32.024


32.15
 
32.025


32.16
 
32.026


32.17
 
32.027


32.18
 
32.028


32.19
 
32.029


32.45
 
32.055


32.46
 
32.056


32.47
 
32.057


32.48
 
32.058


32.49
 
32.059


32.55
 
32.070


32.56
 
32.071


32.57
 
32.072


32.58
 
32.073


32.59
 
32.074


32.60
 
32.075


32.99
 
32.999


33.01
 
33.01


33.02
 
33.02


34.01
 
34.01


34.02
 
34.02


34.03
 
34.03


34.04
 
34.04


34.05
 
34.05


35.01
 
35.01


35.02
 
35.02


37.01
 
36.01


37.02
 
36.02


37.03
 
36.03


37.04
 
36.04


37.05
 
36.05


50.01
 
50.01


50.02
 
50.02


50.03
 
50.03


50.04
 
50.04


50.10
 
50.15


50.11
 
50.16


50.12
 
50.17


50.13
 
50.18


50.14
 
50.19


50.15
 
50.20


50.99
 
50.99


51.01
 
51.01


51.02
 
51.02


51.03
 
51.03


51.04
 
51.04


51.20
 
51.16


51.21
 
51.17


51.22
 
51.18


51.23
 
51.19


51.24
 
51.20


51.35
 
51.35


51.50
 
51.50


51.51
 
51.51


51.52
 
51.52


51.53
 
51.53


51.54
 
51.54


51.55
 
51.55


51.99
 
51.99


70.01
 
70.01


70.02
 
70.02


70.10
 
70.15


70.11
 
70.16


70.12
 
70.17


70.13
 
70.18


70.14
 
70.19


70.20
 
70.30


70.21
 
70.31


70.22
 
70.32


70.23
 
70.33


70.24
 
70.34


70.25
 
70.35


70.26
 
70.36


70.27
 
70.37


70.28
 
70.38


70.29
 
70.39


70.30
 
70.40


70.31
 
70.41


70.32
 
70.42


70.33
 
70.43


70.34
 
70.44


70.42
 
70.55


71.01
 
71.01


71.02
 
71.02


71.03
 
71.03


71.04
 
71.04


71.05
 
71.05


72.01
 
72.01


72.02
 
72.02


72.03
 
72.03


72.04
 
72.04


72.05
 
72.05


72.06
 
72.06


Ch. 73, Sch. I
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


Ch. 73, Sch. II
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


Ch. 74, Sch. I
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


91.01
 
91.01


91.02
 
91.02


91.03
 
91.03


91.04
 
91.04


91.05
 
91.05


91.06
 
91.06


91.07
 
91.07


91.08
 
91.08


91.09
 
91.09


91.10
 
91.10


91.99
 
91.99


92.01
 
92.01


92.02
 
92.02


92.03
 
92.03


92.04
 
92.04


92.15
 
92.15


92.16
 
92.16


92.17
 
92.17


92.18
 
92.18


92.19
 
92.19


92.20
 
92.20


92.21
 
92.21


92.22
 
92.22


92.23
 
92.23


92.24
 
92.24


92.35
 
92.35


92.99
 
92.99


93.01
 
93.01


93.02
 
93.02


93.03
 
93.03


93.04
 
93.04


93.05
 
93.05


93.06
 
93.06


93.09
 
93.07


93.99
 
93.99


94.01
 
94.01


94.02
 
94.02


94.99
 
94.99


95.01
 
95.01


95.02
 
95.02


95.03
 
95.03


95.04
 
95.04


95.05
 
95.05


95.06
 
95.06


95.07
 
95.07


95.08
 
95.08


95.09
 
95.09


95.10
 
95.10


95.11
 
95.11


95.12
 
95.12


95.13
 
95.13


95.99
 
95.99


96.01
 
96.01


96.02
 
96.02


96.03
 
96.03


96.04
 
96.04


96.05
 
96.05


96.06
 
96.06


96.07
 
96.07


96.20
 
96.20


96.21
 
96.21


96.35
 
96.35


96.36
 
96.36


96.37
 
96.37


96.38
 
96.38


96.39
 
96.39


96.50
 
96.50


96.99
 
96.99


97.01
 
97.01


97.02
 
97.02


97.03
 
97.03


97.04
 
97.04


97.05
 
97.05


97.06
 
97.06


97.07
 
97.07


97.08
 
97.08


97.09
 
97.09


97.10
 
97.10


97.11
 
97.11


97.12
 
97.12


97.13
 
97.13


97.14
 
97.14


97.15
 
97.15


111.01
 
111.01


111.02
 
111.02


111.03
 
111.03


111.99
 
111.99


112.01
 
112.01


112.02
 
112.02


112.03
 
112.03


112.04
 
112.04


112.99
 
112.99


113.01
 
113.01


113.02
 
113.02


113.03
 
113.03


113.15
 
113.15


113.16
 
113.16


113.99
 
113.99


114.01
 
114.01


114.02
 
114.02


114.03
 
114.03


114.04
 
114.04


114.99
 
114.99


130.01
 
130.01


130.02
 
130.02


130.03
 
130.03


130.99
 
130.99


131.01
 
131.01


131.02
 
131.02


131.99
 
131.99


132.01
 
132.01


132.99
 
132.99


150.61
 
150.080


150.62
 
150.081


150.63
 
150.082


150.64
 
150.083


150.65
 
150.084


152.01
 
151.01


152.02
 
151.02


152.03
 
151.03


152.15
 
151.15


152.16
 
151.16


152.17
 
151.17


152.18
 
151.18


152.19
 
151.19


152.20
 
151.20


152.21
 
151.21


152.35
 
151.35


152.36
 
151.36


152.37
 
151.37


152.38
 
151.38


152.50
 
151.50


152.51
 
151.51


152.52
 
151.52


152.53
 
151.53


152.54
 
151.54


152.55
 
151.55


152.56
 
151.56


152.57
 
151.57


152.58
 
151.58


152.59
 
151.59


152.99
 
151.99


153.01
 
152.01


154.01
 
153.01


154.02
 
153.02


154.03
 
153.03


154.04
 
153.04


154.05
 
153.05


154.06
 
153.06


154.07
 
153.07


154.08
 
153.08


154.09
 
153.09


154.10
 
153.10


154.11
 
153.11


154.12
 
153.12


154.99
 
153.99


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


-
 
9-13-1983
 
32.027


-
 
12-13-1988
 
34.05


-
 
6-6-1989
 
35.02


-
 
12-12-1989
 
33.02


2014-09
 
4-8-2014
 
T.S.O. I


 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I, 96.01


-
 
- -
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


2
 
- -
 
50.03, 50.04, 96.02, 96.04, 96.05, 96.35, 130.02, 131.02


3
 
- -
 
51.02, 114.01


4
 
- -
 
92.03


5
 
- -
 
131.01, 132.01


6
 
- -
 
114.02


-
 
11-15-1916
 
130.03


-
 
12-10-1924
 
30.03


-
 
5-7-1929
 
114.03, 114.04


-
 
- -1930
 
36.05


2
 
- -1930
 
70.18, 70.19, 70.32, 130.03


5
 
- -1930
 
96.07


6
 
- -1930
 
70.17, 70.55


-
 
9-8-1931
 
51.51


-
 
2-4-1941
 
51.01, 51.17


-
 
3-2-1948
 
96.50


-
 
10-2-1951
 
51.54


-
 
6-3-1952
 
34.03


-
 
7-7-1953
 
70.01, 70.02, 70.15, 70.16, 71.02, 71.03, 72.01, Ch. 73, Sch. I, Ch. 73, Sch.
II, Ch. 74, Sch. I


-
 
12-22-1953
 
72.02—72.06


-
 
10-5-1954
 
50.02, 50.18


-
 
10-2-1956
 
36.01—36.03


-
 
11-5-1957
 
130.01, 130.02


-
 
7-5-1960
 
31.060


-
 
5-19-1961
 
32.025


-
 
5-8-1962
 
92.20, 96.01


-
 
7-3-1962
 
51.53


-
 
10-2-1962
 
51.51


-
 
12-4-1962
 
71.03, 71.05


-
 
5-7-1963
 
51.18


-
 
7-2-1963
 
30.06


-
 
1-7-1964
 
51.01


-
 
3-3-1964
 
34.01, 96.20


-
 
5-14-1964
 
131.02


-
 
1-5-1965
 
50.15, 50.18


-
 
1-13-1965
 
96.03


-
 
6-8-1965
 
70.31


-
 
5-7-1968
 
112.01—112.04


-
 
9-3-1968
 
111.01—111.03


-
 
10-7-1969
 
71.04


-
 
2-3-1970
 
51.51, 51.54


-
 
6-10-1970
 
30.03, 92.15, 92.16, 96.02


-
 
1-4-1972
 
32.026


-
 
2-8-1972
 
51.35


-
 
12-20-1972
 
33.01, 33.02, 35.01


-
 
8-7-1973
 
32.055—32.059


-
 
9-5-1973
 
112.01—112.04


-
 
12-4-1973
 
10.18


-
 
4-9-1974
 
93.04


-
 
8-6-1974
 
30.03


-
 
1-7-1975
 
31.090, 70.43


-
 
2-3-1976
 
30.03


-
 
3-11-1980
 
51.16


-
 
5-26-1981
 
51.35, 51.51


-
 
1-12-1982
 
31.030, 31.031, Ch. 73, Sch. I


-
 
4-13-1982
 
51.54, Ch. 73, Sch. II, 92.01, 113.15, 113.16


-
 
6-8-1982
 
51.35


-
 
7-19-1982
 
112.01—112.04


-
 
6-14-1983
 
51.35, 72.03


-
 
7-12-1983
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


-
 
11-8-1983
 
51.19


-
 
2-12-1985
 
150.080—150.084


-
 
6-11-1985
 
72.03


-
 
6-25-1985
 
31.030, 31.031


-
 
9-10-1985
 
31.031


-
 
3-11-1986
 
34.04


-
 
5-13-1986
 
31.030


-
 
7-8-1986
 
51.54


-
 
4-7-1987
 
32.070—32.075, 95.01—95.13, 111.01—111.03


-
 
6-21-1988
 
51.02, 51.18, 72.03


-
 
8-9-1988
 
150.082


-
 
9-19-1988
 
31.030


-
 
10-11-1988
 
151.01—151.03, 151.15—151.21, 151.35—151.38, 151.50—151.59, 151.99,
153.01—153.12, 153.99


-
 
4-11-1989
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


-
 
5-9-1989
 
32.070, 32.071, 32.073


-
 
2-13-1990
 
51.16


-
 
3-13-1990
 
97.01—97.15


-
 
7-10-1990
 
51.55


-
 
7-10-1990
 
110.01, 110.02, 110.10—110.16, 110.20—110.31, 110.40—110.49


-
 
2-12-1991
 
50.35—50.37, 50.99


-
 
7-10-1991
 
111.03


-
 
3-10-1992
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


-
 
3-10-1992
 
110.11


-
 
4-14-1992
 
131.03, 131.99


-
 
4-14-1992
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


-
 
11-15-1992
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


-
 
3-9-1993
 
32.070, 32.071, 32.074, 32.075


-
 
6-8-1993
 
Ch. 73, Sch. III


-
 
10-12-1993
 
115.01


-
 
11-17-1993
 
32.070, 32.071


-
 
1-10-1995
 
51.55


-
 
5-9-1995
 
32.090—32.093


-
 
6-13-1995
 
32.100—32.104


-
 
6-27-1995
 
50.50


-
 
11-14-1995
 
133.01—133.03


-
 
6-11-1996
 
51.21


-
 
6-24-1997
 
51.15


98-
 
6-27-1998
 
35.15


2002
 
6-11-2002
 
35.15, 35.16


-
 
4-8-2003
 
51.16


2003
 
6-10-2003
 
35.15, 35.16


-
 
5-11-2004
 
32.005


2004
 
6-8-2004
 
35.15, 35.16


-
 
10-12-2004
 
31.040


-
 
4-12-2005
 
111.10—110.13


2005
 
6-14-2005
 
35.15, 35.16


-
 
10-10-2005
 
32.100


2006-2007
 
6-13-2006
 
35.15, 35.16


-
 
7-11-2006
 
51.54


-
 
11-14-2006
 
70.99


2007-2008
 
6-12-2007
 
35.15, 35.16


-
 
9-11-2007
 
95.01, 95.14


2008-2009
 
6-16-2008
 
35.15, 35.16


-
 
8-12-2008
 
31.030, 31.031, 31.045


-
 
2-10-2009
 
50.21, 50.99


2009-2010
 
6- -2009
 
35.15, 35.16


2010
 
6-22-2010
 
35.15, 35.16


-
 
6-14-2011
 
131.04


-
 
6-14-2011
 
131.05, 131.99


-
 
2-8-2012
 
134.01—134.06, 134.99


2013-00
 
7-7-2012
 
52.001, 52.002, 52.015—52.023, 52.035-52.038, 52.050, 52.051,
52.070—52.084, 52.100—52.102, 52.120—52.127


2013-04
 
1-8-2013
 
31.060, 31.061


2013-08
 
2-12-2013
 
51.70


2013-14
 
4-9-2013
 
32.040—32.044


-
 
7-6-2013
 
90.01, 90.02, 90.20—90.26, 90.40, 90.41, 90.60, 90.61, 90.99


2014-01
 
8-13-2013
 
32.120—32.124


2014-02
 
8-13-2013
 
Ch. 73, Sch. IV


2014-08
 
10-8-2013
 
131.06, 131.99


2014-09
 
10-8-2013
 
32.140, 32.141


2014-18
 
4-9-2014
 
Ch. 73, Sch. IV


2016-02
 
9-15-2015
 
150.001—150.008, 150.020—150.026, 150.040—150.044, 150.060—150.067,
150.080—150.084, 150.999


2016-01A
 
8-11-2015
 
Ch. 73, Sch. IV


2016-08
 
4-11-2016
 
90.40


2016-09
 
6-14-2016
 
150.045


2017-01
 
9-13-2016
 
32.150—32.154


2017-02
 
10-17-2016
 
51.15, 51.22


 
 
 
 
 




 


Lillington, NC Unified Development Ordinance


LILLINGTON, NC
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE




Adopted February 14, 2017










 









 









 



TABLE OF CONTENTS



ARTICLE I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR APPLICABILITY



   1.01   Title



   1.02   Authority



   1.03   Jurisdiction



   1.04   Purpose and Intent



   1.05   Repeal of Existing Zoning & Subdivision Regulations



   1.06   Consistency with Adopted Plans



   1.07   Interpretation and Conflict



   1.08   Conformance to Lillington UDO Provisions



   1.09   Continued Violations



   1.10   Development Under Prior Regulations



   1.11   Fees



   1.12   Administering the UDO



   1.13   Effective Date



ARTICLE II.   ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS



   2.01   Purpose



   2.02   Overview and Applicability



   2.03   Establishment of Zoning Districts



   2.04   Zoning Map



   2.05   Base Zoning Districts



   2.06   Overlay Districts



   2.07   Dimensional Standards Table



ARTICLE III.   USE STANDARDS



   3.01   Use Table and Interpretation



   3.02   Supplementary Use Standards for Specific Uses



   3.03   Residential - Supplemental Use Standards



   3.04   Lodging & Accommodations - Supplemental Use Standards



   3.05   Offices & Services - Supplemental Use Standards



   3.06   Commercial and Entertainment - Supplemental Use Standards



   3.07   Manufacturing, Industrial and Wholesale Trade - Supplemental
Use Standards



   3.08   Education and Institutions - Supplemental Use Standards



   3.09   Agriculture and Forestry - Supplemental Use Standards



   3.10   Communications, Transportation and Infrastructure -
Supplemental Use Standards



   3.11   Temporary Use/Special Events - Supplemental Use Standards



   3.12   Satellite Dish Antennas - Supplemental Use Standards



ARTICLE IV.   DESIGN STANDARDS



   4.01   Generally



   4.02   Basic Development Standards



   4.03   Fences & Walls



   4.04   Parking and Loading



   4.05   Signs



   4.06   Lighting



   4.07   Open Space Standards



   4.08   Landscaping and Buffering



   4.09   Building Design Standards



ARTICLE V.   SUBDIVISIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE



   5.01   Purpose and Intent



   5.02   Scope and Applicability



   5.03   Required Improvements for All Development



   5.04   Land Suitability



   5.05   Required Conformance to Lillington Specification Manual



   5.06   Other Relevant Standards for Site Plans and Subdivisions



   5.07   Placement of Monuments



   5.08   Site for Public Use



   5.09   Property Owner’s Association



   5.10   Lot Standards



   5.11   Streets and Connectivity



   5.12   Utilities and Easements



   5.13   Cluster Subdivision Provisions



   5.14   Transportation Impact Analysis



   5.15   Improvements Guarantees & Performance Securities



   5.16   Ownership & Maintenance of Common Areas



ARTICLE VI.   ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION



   6.01   Flood Damage Prevention



   6.02   Drainage and Stormwater Management



   6.03   Water Supply Watershed Protection



ARTICLE VII.   ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT PROCESSES



   7.01   Administrative Agencies



   7.02   Development Processes and Permits



   7.03   Requirements for Hearings and Decisions



   7.04   Administrative Permits



   7.05   Major Site Plans and Design Review



   7.06   Subdivisions



   7.07   Conditional Use Permits (CUP)



   7.08   Appeals of Administrative Decision



   7.09   Variances



   7.10   Text Amendments and Rezonings (Map Amendments)



   7.11   Conditional Districts



   7.12   Vested Rights



ARTICLE VIII.  NONCONFORMITIES



   8.01   Purpose and Intent



   8.02   General Provisions & Applicability



   8.03   Nonconforming Lots



   8.04   Nonconforming Manufactured Home Parks



   8.05   Nonconforming Plans



   8.06   Nonconforming Uses and Structures



   8.07   Nonconforming Signs



ARTICLE IX.   ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES



   9.01   Complaints Regarding Violations



   9.02   Person Liable



   9.03   Enforcement Authority



   9.04   No Criminal Violations



   9.05   Civil Remedies



   9.06   Equitable Relief



   9.07   Combination of Remedies



   9.08   Permit Revocation



   9.09   Penalties



   9.10   Specific Violations and Penalties



ARTICLE X.   DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS



   10.01   Word Interpretation



   10.02   Abbreviations



   10.03   Definitions (General)



   10.04   Definitions (Specific)



Article I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR APPLICABILITY



Section 1.01  Title



   This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the Town of
Lillington, North Carolina, "Unified Development Ordinance," and may be
referred to as the "ordinance," "UDO" or "Lillington UDO".



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.02  Authority



   The Lillington UDO is hereby adopted under the authority and provisions
in G.S. Chapter 160A (North Carolina General Statutes).



   Whenever any provision of this UDO refers to or cites a section of the
North Carolina General Statutes and that section of the North Carolina
General Statutes is later amended or superseded, this UDO shall be deemed
amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly
corresponds to the superseded section.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.03  Jurisdiction



   The Lillington UDO shall be effective throughout the Town of Lillington
and its extraterritorial planning jurisdiction (ETJ) as identified on the
Official Zoning Map of the Town of Lillington.  However, pursuant to G.S. §
160A-360(k), property that is located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction
which is used for bona fide farm purposes is exempt from the regulations of
this UDO.  The planning jurisdiction of the town may be modified from time
to time in accordance with G.S. § 160A-360. The Official Zoning Map is on
file with the Town Clerk and with the Administrator of this ordinance. The
Official Zoning Map and its boundaries shall be incorporated and made a part
of this ordinance.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.04  Purpose and Intent



   The purpose of the regulations set forth in the Lillington UDO shall be
to fulfill the goals, objectives, recommendations and action items of the
Town of Lillington Land Use Plan 2015, as adopted and as may be amended from
time to time.



   In order to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare
of the town and its ETJ, the Lillington UDO is adopted by the Board of
Commissioners to regulate and restrict by means of zoning and subdivision
regulations the height and size of buildings and other structures; the
appearance and design of developments; the percentage of lots that may be
covered or occupied; the dimensions of setbacks; the size of open spaces; the
density of population; to facilitate the adequate provisions of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other
public requirements, to control development of flood prone areas and regulate
impervious surface areas; signs; to regulate and to facilitate the further
re-subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land and the
location, use and design of landscaping, buildings, structures, and land for
trade, industry, residence, and other purposes.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.05  Repeal of Existing Zoning and Subdivision Regulations



   The existing zoning and subdivision regulations entitled as adopted on
November 11, 2003 and as subsequently amended are hereby repealed. The
adoption of the Lillington UDO, however, shall not affect nor prevent any
pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate an existing violation of
said regulations.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.06  Consistency with Adopted Plans



   In accordance with G.S. § 160A-383, it is the intention of the Board
of Commissioners that the Lillington UDO implements the planning policies
adopted for the town and its ETJ, as reflected in the Town of Lillington Land
Use Plan 2015 and other related planning documents. While the Board of
Commissioners reaffirms its commitment that the Lillington UDO and any
amendment to it, be in conformity with adopted planning policies, the Board
of Commissioners hereby expresses its intent that neither the Lillington UDO
nor any amendment to it may be challenged on the basis of any alleged
non-conformity with any planning document.



   Specific alignments, locations, or areas of public facilities noted in
any adopted plan may be varied on a site by site basis as requested by the
developer or the Administrator, provided the integrity of the proposed
network and connections, location, or area shown in the plan are maintained.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.07  Interpretation and Conflict



   1.07.01      INTERPRETATION



   The Lillington UDO is intended to be administered with the flexibility
to respond to unique circumstances of individual properties in ways that best
achieve its purposes.



   A.   This UDO establishes many, but not all, of the standards and
procedures for development. Other portions of the Code of Ordinances, as well
as other standards, shall apply to development, including, but not limited
to, building codes, fire codes, utility, street and drainage design and
construction standards.



   B.   The issuance of any development approval pursuant to this UDO
shall not relieve the recipient from the responsibility to comply with all
other town, county, state or federal laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.



   C.   References to other regulations or provisions of the UDO are
for the convenience of the reader. The lack of a cross-reference does not
exempt a land, building, structure, or use from other regulations.



   D.   The UDO contains numerous graphics, pictures, illustrations,
and drawings to assist the reader in understanding and applying the UDO.
However, to the extent that there is any inconsistency between the text of
the UDO and any such graphic, picture, illustration, or drawing, the text
controls unless otherwise provided in the specific section.



   1.07.02      CONFLICT



   When provisions of the Lillington UDO impose higher standards than are
required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation, provisions of
the Lillington UDO shall govern. When the provisions of any other statute or
local ordinance or regulation impose higher standards than are required by
the provisions of the Lillington UDO, the provisions of that statute or local
ordinance or regulation shall govern.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.08  Conformance to Lillington UDO Provisions



   Except as otherwise specifically provided in the Lillington UDO, no
land shall be subdivided; no land or structure shall hereafter be used or
occupied; no excavation, removal of soil, clearing of a site, or placing of
fill shall take place on lands contemplated for development; no
infrastructure shall be constructed or installed; and no structure, or part
thereof, shall be constructed, erected, altered, or moved, unless in
compliance with all of the applicable provisions of the Lillington UDO.



   All existing lots of record, platted prior to the adoption of this UDO
or the prior Zoning & Subdivision Regulation and upon which no buildings have
been erected, shall be grandfathered upon the date of adoption of this UDO
and shall not be subject to the new lot standards herein. However, buildings
upon such lots shall be subject to standards in this ordinance including all
related site improvements.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.09  Continued Violations



   Any violation of provisions existing on the effective date of the
ordinance shall continue to be a violation under this ordinance and shall be
subject to the penalties set forth at the time of the violation, unless the
use, development, construction or other activity is clearly consistent with
the express terms of this ordinance.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.10  Development Under Prior Regulations



   1.10.1   ISSUED APPROVALS



   Any building or development for which a permit or plan approval was
issued under prior regulations shall be allowed, provided a valid approval
has not expired. All new applications shall comply with the provisions of
this UDO. Legal non-conforming situations may continue in conformance with
this UDO.



   1.10.2   FILED APPLICATIONS



   A.   Any type of land development application which has been
officially filed with the appropriate town official prior to the effective
date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, may continue to be processed
under the land use rules and regulations in effect prior to said date.



   B.   The application approval process for such applications must be
completed within one year of the filing date. Completion of the application
approval process is considered to be the issuance of the appropriate town
permit, certificate, or other designation sought under the land use rules and
regulations in effect prior to the effective date of this ordinance.



   C.   If the application approval process is not completed within the
specified time, then the application process may be completed only in strict
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.



   D.   The specified time may be extended at the discretion of the
Administrator due to delays in approvals from agencies external to the Town
of Lillington.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.11  Fees



   Any action on an application for development shall be subject to
payment of the required fee in the amount established by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners and filed in the office of the Town Clerk. All
required fees shall accompany an application, shall be made payable to the
Town of Lillington, and shall be submitted to the Administrator.  All fees
are non-refundable.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.12  Administering the UDO



   This UDO is intended to be administered in an efficient manner that
provides appropriate opportunities for public involvement and an efficient
development process. The roles of the Board of Commissioners, Planning Board,
Board of Adjustment, other boards and town staff are established in Article
VII.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 1.13  Effective Date



   Many provisions herein are a restatement of provisions of the
Lillington Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances, adopted November 11, 2003 and
are hereby continued without interruption.  All other provisions of this
ordinance shall become effective February 14, 2017.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)




Article II.
ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS



Section 2.01  Purpose



   It is the purpose of this chapter to establish and adopt zoning
districts to govern the use of land in the Town of Lillington.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 2.02  Overview and Applicability



   This article of the Lillington UDO establishes base and overlay zoning
districts; the official zoning map, as well as the rules for its maintenance,
amendments, interpretation and replacement; the use table, which identifies
the land uses and the types of approvals required for each authorized land
use; and the rules for interpretation of the use table.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 2.03  Establishment of Zoning Districts



   The following zoning districts are declared to be in effect upon all
land and water areas included within the boundaries of each district as shown
on the Official Zoning Map. After adoption of the UDO, amendments to the
Zoning Map shall be made by plat, legal description or metes and bounds
description, which shall be the best evidence of the boundaries, amended or
created, and shall control unless a scriveners or other error in such plat or
description is manifestly contrary to the intent of the amended ordinance.



   2.03.1   BASE ZONING DISTRICTS



   The following base districts are established.



   A.   RR – Rural Residential



   B.   RS20 – Residential Single-Family



   C.   RS10 – Residential Single-Family



   D.   RMF – Residential Multi-Family



   E.   RMX – Residential Mixed Use



   F.   NMX – Neighborhood Mixed Use



   G.   O/S – Office & Services



   H.   CB – Central Business



   I.   NB – Neighborhood Business



   J.   GB – General Business



   K.   LI – Light Industrial



   L.   HI – Heavy Industrial



   M.   FRO – Facilities, Recreation and Open Space



   2.03.2   OVERLAY DISTRICTS



   The following overlay districts are established. The uses allowable by
the underlying zoning district shall apply, except as limited by the use
requirements of the overlay district.



   A.   DOD – Downtown Overlay District



   B.   UROD – Urban Residential Overlay District



   C.   HOD – Highway Overlay District



   D.   WPOD – Watershed Protection Overlay District



   2.03.3   CONDITIONAL DISTRICTS



   A.   Conditional districts are districts with conditions voluntarily
added only in response to a petition by the owner of all the property to be
included in such district.  In accordance with G.S. § 160A-382, specific
conditions applicable to these districts may be proposed by the applicant or
town but only those conditions mutually approved by the town and the
applicant may be incorporated into the conditional district zoning.



   B.   Conditional districts provide for orderly and flexible
development under the general policies of this ordinance without the
constraints of some of the prescribed standards guiding by-right development.
Because conditional district developments are constructed in a comprehensive
manner, they may establish their own building, street, block, and lot pattern
which may be unique from other surrounding blocks or neighborhoods.
Conditional districts may be used in any district but is not intended to
relieve hardships that would otherwise be handled using a variance procedure.



   C.   In addition to modification of specific district provisions
(except use), the various provisions detailed in this article may be varied
if specifically requested by the petitioner as part of a conditional district
application with exception to the following:



 

Article
 
Title
 
Exception to modification:


II
 
Zoning District Provisions
 
Uses permitted may not be added unless the use proposed is not currently
defined or contemplated by the Code. Permitted uses may be removed from the
petition.


VI
 
Subdivisions & Infrastructure
 
May substitute dedication of public open space for payment-in-lieu per Board
of Commissioners approval. Except in areas identified on the Land Use Plan
map as public greenways and linear parks. Amount required may not be reduced.



 



   D.   Upon the approval of the petition for a conditional district,
the subject property shall be identified on the Official Zoning Map by the
appropriate district designation. A parallel conditional zoning designation
shall be identified with the underlying general district letters "CD"
(example CD-RS10).



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 2.04   Zoning Map



   2.04.1   ESTABLISHMENT, AMENDMENTS AND MAINTENANCE



   A.   There shall be a map designated as the Official Zoning Map,
which shall show the boundaries of all zoning districts within the town's
planning jurisdiction. This map shall be stored on the town's geographic
information system (GIS) and printed on durable material. Prints shall be
dated and kept in Town Hall in the Town Clerk's office.



   B.   The Official Zoning Map is adopted and incorporated herein by
reference. Amendments to this map shall be made and posted in accordance with
the provisions of Article VII of this UDO.



   C.   The Administrator shall update the Official Zoning Map as soon
as possible after amendments to it are adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
Upon entering any such amendment on the map, the Administrator shall change
the date of the map to indicate its latest revision. New prints of the
updated map may then be issued. The Administrator shall keep copies of
superseded prints of the zoning map for historical reference.



   D.   No unauthorized person may alter or modify the Official Zoning
Map.



   E.   GIS records shall indicate the zoning designation, the number
and date of the ordinance creating the designation and, where a conditional
zoning district is established, the conditions of that rezoning. GIS records
shall maintain the zoning history.



   F.   Should the Official Zoning Map be lost, destroyed or damaged,
the Administrator may have a new map generated from the most reliable
available data. No further Board of Commissioner authorization or action is
required so long as no district boundaries are changed in this process.



   2.04.2   INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES OF ZONING DISTRICTS



   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts shown on the
Official Zoning Map or any other map incorporated in or referenced by the
UDO, the following rules shall apply:



   A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines
of streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way shall be construed to follow
such centerlines. Where the street, alley or right-of-way has been vacated
through official action of the governing body, the boundary shall be
construed to follow the centerline of the vacated right-of-way.



   B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines, section lines or tract lines shall be construed to follow such lines.



   C.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following town corporate
limit lines shall be construed to follow such town corporate limit lines.



   D.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks.



   E.   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed
to follow such shorelines and in the event of change in the shoreline shall
be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.



   F.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines
of canals, streams or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.



   G.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of any mapped area, the Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.



   H.   When the street or property layout existing on the ground is at
odds with that shown on the Official Zoning Map, the Board of Adjustment
shall interpret the district boundaries in accordance with Article VII.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 2.05   Base Zoning Districts



   2.05.1   RR – RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



   The RR District is intended to accommodate very low-density, rural
residential and agricultural uses; and protect natural vistas and landscape
features.



   A.   To encourage the construction of and continued use of the land
for very low density residential and agricultural purposes;



   B.   To restrict commercial and industrial use of the land and to
prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the
development and continuation of residential dwellings and agriculture in the
district;



   C.   To discourage any use which would generate traffic on minor
streets other than normal traffic to serve the residences and farms on those
streets; and



   D.   To ensure that residential development not having access to
public water supplies and dependent upon septic tanks for sewage disposal
will occur at sufficiently low densities to ensure a healthful environment.



   2.05.2   RS20 – RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT



   The RS20 District is established whereby the principal use of land is
for low-density residential purposes.  The regulations of this district are
intended:



   A.   To encourage the construction of and continued use of the land
for low density residential purposes;



   B.   To restrict commercial and industrial use of the land and to
prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the
development and continuation of residential dwellings in the district;



   C.   To discourage the continuance of existing non-conforming uses
that would not be permitted as uses under the provisions of this district.



   2.05.3   RS10 – RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT



   The RS10 District is established whereby the principal use of land is
for medium single-family density residential purposes. The regulations of
this district are intended to:



   A.   Encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land
for residential purposes;



   B.   Restrict commercial use and prohibit industrial use of the land
and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the
development of dwellings in this district;



   C.   Discourage any use which would generate traffic on minor
streets other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets;



   D.   Discourage the continuance of existing non-conforming uses that
would not be permitted as uses under the provisions of this district; and



   E.   Discourage any use which because of its character or size would
create requirements and costs for public services substantially in excess of
such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for
dwellings.



   2.05.4   RMF – RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT



   The RMF District is established as a district in which to allow
primarily single-family and multi-family residences at a medium-density
(approximately 10-12 dwelling units per acre) in areas served by adequate
public water and sewer systems. The regulations of this district are intended
to:



   A.   Encourage single-family and multi-family residences; and



   B.   Encourage new residential development that is compatible with
that in the existing neighborhoods.



   2.05.5   RMX – RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE DISTRICT



   The RMX District is established to accommodate a variety of housing
types in a neighborhood setting and is intended to provide areas for higher
density residential development in close proximity (within ¼ - ½ mile) to
commercial areas such as the CB, NB, NMX and GB Districts. The intent is to
create higher density residential areas that compliment commercial districts
with physical proximity and pedestrian connectivity.



   2.05.6   NMX – NEIGHBORHOOD MIXED USE DISTRICT



   The NMX District is intended to provide pedestrian-scaled, higher
density residential housing and opportunities for limited scale commercial
activities.  Development in this district should encourage pedestrian
activity through construction of mixed-use buildings and connections to
adjacent neighborhoods. Buildings in this district are typically small and
detached.



   2.05.7   O/S – OFFICE & SERVICE DISTRICT



   The O/S District is designed to accommodate offices, services and
certain institutional uses.  These districts may serve as transitional zones
between high intensity and low intensity land uses.  The regulations of this
district are intended to:



   A.   Encourage land uses that buffer residential districts from
intensive non-residential uses and arterial streets;



   B.   Provide aesthetic controls and dimensional requirements to
ensure compatible office and service development with surrounding residential
uses;



   C.   Allow for single-family dwellings in business corridors to be
used for business or residential purposes; and



   D.   Prohibit drive-through and drive in uses, outside storage and
outside display operations.



   2.05.8   CB – CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



   The CB District is designed to accommodate a wide variety of commercial
activities (particularly those that are pedestrian oriented) in an intensive
development pattern in the town's central business district. The regulations
of this district are intended to:



   A.   Preserve the general character and integrity of the current
development in the central business district;



   B.   Encourage land uses that provide for a multi-purpose central
business district including retail, offices, services, entertainment and
living space;



   C.   Encourage land uses that do not require large amounts of
outdoor use areas; and



   D.   Encourage common or shared off-street parking.



   E.   To restrict heavier commercial and industrial use of the land
and to prohibit uses which would substantially interfere with the
continuation of the uses presently in the district or with the orderly growth
of the district to meet the needs of increased population in the market area;



   F.   To discourage the continuance of existing non-conforming uses
that would not be permitted as uses under the provisions of this district; and



   G.   To permit a concentrated, intensive development of the
permitted uses while maintaining a substantial relationship between the
intensity of land use and the capacity of utilities and streets.



   H.   Prohibit drive-through and drive in uses, outside storage and
outside display operations.



   2.05.9   NB – NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT



   The NB District is established as a district in which the principal use
of land is to provide for the retailing of goods and services to the adjacent
residential neighborhoods. The district is intended to provide for those
commercial uses which are conducive to the everyday needs of a nearby
residential area of a lower intensity than the General Business (GB)
District. Such districts are generally located near residential areas and
cater to the everyday needs of nearby residential neighborhoods, stressing
accessibility by automobiles, bicycles, and pedestrians.  The regulations of
this district are intended to:



   A.   Encourage the location of convenience retail establishments,
professional services and professional offices that are compatible with
surrounding residential uses;



   B.   To prohibit heavy commercial and industrial use of the land and
to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the
development or continuation of the nearby residential neighborhoods;



   C.   To minimize traffic and parking congestion and increase
convenience for neighborhood residents and limit major traffic generators to
thoroughfares;



   D.   To discourage the continuance of existing non-conforming uses
that would not be permitted as uses under the provisions of this district;



   E.   Promote safe and convenient pedestrian access from surrounding
residences;



   F.   Prohibit outdoor storage and outdoor display.



   2.05.10   GB – GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



   The GB District is designed to accommodate highway-oriented retail,
commercial service uses and in some cases light manufacturing.  The major
objectives of this district are to:



   A.   Encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land
for commercial and service uses, particularly those which have a larger land
area requirement;



   B.   Provide for the orderly expansion of such uses within this
district, as designated on the zoning map;



   C.   Discourage the continuance of existing non-conforming uses that
would not be permitted as uses under the provision of this district;



   D.   Discourage small lot development on major highways;



   E.   Encourage vehicular access from service drives and other local
commercial streets rather than directly from arterial streets; and



   F.   Provide a location for major shopping facilities and land uses
requiring large outdoor spaces.



   2.05.11   LI – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



   The LI District is intended to accommodate externally benign industrial
and office uses that pose little nuisance to adjacent residential areas.



   2.05.12   HI – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



   The HI District is established to accommodate those industrial,
manufacturing, or large-scale utility operations that are known to pose
levels of noise, vibration, odor, or truck traffic that are considered
nuisances to surrounding development. This district is customarily located in
proximity to railroad sidings and/or major thoroughfares.



   2.05.13   FRO – FACILITIES, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT



   The FRO District is intended for open space, public facilities and
privately owned and recreation areas. Publicly owned land uses include
governmental, recreational, education, natural resource and utility
facilities. Privately owned land uses include golf resorts and related
facilities, land trusts established to preserve natural resources, schools
and recreational facilities that typically include substantial open space.
The major objectives of this district are to:



   A.   Provide land for publicly-owned governmental facilities and
privately-owned natural and man-made resource and recreation areas; and



   B.   Preclude major residential, retail office, institutional, and
industrial uses that typically provide limited open space.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 2.06   Overlay Districts



   Special overlay districts are intended to be superimposed over the
underlying general zoning districts and the land within each overlay district
may be used in ways that achieve the objectives of each overlay district.
Wherever standards of the underlying zoning district differ from the overlay
standards, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.



   2.06.1   DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT



   A.   Purpose



   The DOD District is established as an overlay in the areas located
within and abutting the CB zoning district.  This district is intended to:



      1.   Establish an area with greater land use flexibility than
the CB and adjoining zoning districts;



      2.   Foster compatible land use transitions between the CB
development and abutting residential neighborhoods;



      3.   Promote compatible design transitions in blocks facing or
adjacent to the DOD; and



      4.   Provide safe and convenient connectivity between the
downtown and nearby neighborhoods for bicyclists, pedestrians and motorists.



   B.   Area of Applicability



   The area affected by the DOD are those lands in the "Main
Street-Downtown" area as indicated on the Official Zoning Map.



   C.   Specific Development Standards



   Dimensional and density standards shall comply with the underlying base
district and other applicable standards except that:



      1.   The minimum height of buildings in areas with CB base
zoning shall be two stories.  The maximum is four stories (may exceed with a
conditional use permit).



      2.   There shall be a minimum of 60% primary street lot
frontage build out on properties.



      3.   For properties fronting on Main Street with CB base
zoning, one of the following shall be provided along the frontage to provide
and continue the "shop-front" design of downtown Lillington:



         a)   Shopfront & Awning: The façade is aligned close to
the property line with building entrance at sidewalk grade.  Substantial
glazing on sidewalk level is provided and an awning that may overlap the
sidewalk to the maximum extent possible.



         b)   Gallery: The façade is aligned close to the
property line with an attached cantilevered roof or lightweight colonnade
overlapping the sidewalk.



         c)   Arcade: A colonnade supporting habitable space
aligned close to the property line, while the façade at sidewalk level is
set back to create a sheltered pedestrian area.



   2.06.2   URBAN RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT



   A.   Purpose



   To promote development that reflects the town's character and is
compatible with established surrounding residential neighborhoods.  Infill
development in this area is encouraged where infrastructure is readily
available and that is designed to be complementary with surrounding
established residential neighborhoods.



   B.   Area of Applicability



      1.   The following standards are applicable to all structures
surrounding the DOD as illustrated on Official Zoning Map.



      2.   Single-family dwellings, duplexes & townhomes subject to
regulation under the North Carolina Residential Code for One and Two Family
Dwellings shall be subject to all provisions in this section except "3.c.i -
Building Frontages" as listed below.



      3.   "3.c.i - Building Frontages" and additional residential
building design standards may be applied to single-family dwellings, duplexes
& townhome structures upon consent by the owner at the time of zoning,
preliminary subdivision plat, or site plan approval.



   C.   Specific Development Standards



      1.   Infill Lot Standards: The minimum front or street yard
required may be reduced for any lot where the average established front yard
on developed lots located within 300 feet on each side of such lot, and
fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum required
yard. In such cases, the minimum front or street yard may be less than that
required but not less than the average of the existing front yards on the
developed lots within 300 feet of each side.  In addition, for new lots
created from existing larger lots, the lot width at the frontage line and the
side yard setbacks shall be consistent with the immediately adjacent
neighboring parcels on the same side of the street.



      2.   Lots less than 50 feet in width: One driveway of no more
than 12 feet in width may be used to provide access to garages or off-street
parking areas. Garages or off-street parking areas shall be located in the
side or rear setback area only.



      3.   Development patterns:  All development subject to this
overlay district should be compatible with the established architectural
character of the town by using a design that is complementary to existing
town architectural styles, designs, and forms. As a means to provide guidance
for the design of buildings that integrate well into the context of the town,
this article has identified five key features necessary to ensure
compatibility.



 

a) Street Frontage:

Along residential side streets, limit interruptions to front setback
landscaping. A key way of achieving this is by preserving existing front yard
landscaping and minimizing the amount of frontage devoted to paved vehicle
areas.
 

 



b) Rhythm of Development Along Street:

Continue established building rhythms along street frontages. Avoid
monolithic massing that disrupts fine-grain neighborhood or mixed-use
corridor pattern.
 

 



c) Building Frontages:

i. Along street frontages, orient windows, main entrances, and other primary
building façade elements toward the street.

ii. Care should be taken to avoid the appearance of buildings turning their
backs or sides toward the street. Courtyard buildings can contribute to this
by orienting main entrances toward courtyards that serve as a semi-public
extension of the public realm of adjacent streets.
 

 



d) Front Setback Patterns:

Continue established building setback patterns, where this is a neighborhood
priority and is practical.
 

 



e) Use of Landscaping & Trees:

Use landscaping and trees to achieve compatibility in areas where these are
unifying elements of community character.
 

 




 



*Image source: A Guide to Infill Development & Infill Design Toolkit; City of
Portland Bureau of Planning



   2.06.3   HOD - HIGHWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT



   A.   Purpose



   It is the intent of the Highway Overlay District to protect natural
resources, provide landscape improvements, and enhance the overall appearance
of the corridors identified. This district has development standards
established to regulate development within a corridor.  Development
standards from the Highway Corridor Overlay District apply to all parcels
within 500 feet of the right-of-way on both sides of the streets as shown on
the Official Zoning Map. In cases where a portion of a tract of land lies
within the Highway Overlay District, the entire tract shall fall into the
same regulation.  This overlay district is established to:



      1.   Prevent unsightly conditions that may destroy or detract
from the natural character, beauty and condition;



      2.   Establish standards as may be necessary to accomplish the
objective;



      3.   Minimize potential safety hazards that may exist along
the roadways in the town; and



      4.   Ensure that development is consistent with the historic
character of the town's natural and built environments.



   B.   Area of Applicability



   Major highway corridors affected by the HOD are U.S. 421, U.S. 401, NC
27 and NC 210, the boundaries of which are shown on the Official Zoning Map.



   C.   Specific Development Standards



   In addition to the design standards in Article IV, the following
regulations shall apply to all new nonresidential structures and site plan
submittals located within the Highway Overlay Zoning District.



      1.   Parking Lot (off-street parking) Landscaping:



         a)   Parking lots, loading areas, and other vehicle use
areas shall be planted with one tree and two shrubs for every ten parking
spaces required.



         b)   At least 65% of the required parking lot trees
shall be large shade trees.



         c)   Trees and shrubs shall be planted within 15 feet of
the vehicle use areas.



         d)   Developments containing 30 or more parking spaces,
50% of the trees and shrubs required shall be planted in islands or medians
located within the parking lot.



         e)   A consecutive strip of parking spaces shall include
landscape islands every 20 spaces apart and at the ends of all parking rows.



         f)   Landscape islands shall be grassed and mowed,
covered with organic material (for example, pine mulch), or a combination of
the two.



         g)   In calculating the number of trees and shrubs,
standard rounding procedures shall be followed. (For example, one and a half
or greater will become two.



      2.   Driveways:



      Driveways serving a new development parcel shall be permitted in
accordance with the standards of the NCDOT; however, the Board of Commissi
oners may require stricter standards as conditions of approval during the
site plan review, if it is determined that the additional conditions may
improve traffic movemen t and safety. Developers of nonreside ntial uses are
required to share parking areas and driveways with adjoining developm ents.
Also, no landscaping or structures shall be allowed near the intersections of
driveways and streets that would impede safe vision of traffic. Subdivision
of land with multiple smaller parcels having frontage on the roadway along
the corridor will not be allowed. NCDOT and the town prohibit this type of
development within the corridor.  Development will be required to have
shared access to the roadway as approved by the NCDOT and the town.







 



      3.   Outdoor Storage:  Outdoor storage, when permitted, shall
be screened from view so that it is not visible from a right(s)-of-way or
adjacent property(s). Any accessory outdoor storage area shall comply with
the requirements set forth in this ordinance.



      4.   Outdoor Advertising Signs:  No outdoor advertising signs
shall be allowed within the Highway Overlay District or on any property(s)
that are partially located within the Highway Overlay District, except in
compliance with Article IV.



   2.06.4   WPOD - WATERSHED PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT



   A.   Purpose



   Pursuant to requirements of G.S. § 143-214.5, two Watershed Protection
Overlay Districts have been established for lands within the Cape Fear River
watershed.  This watershed is classified as a Water Supply IV which the
state classifies as waters used as sources of water supply for drinking,
culinary, or food processing purposes.  These waters are generally in
moderately to highly developed watersheds or protected areas.



   B.   Area of Applicability



   To carry out the above purposes, the town has designated two overlay
districts, the boundaries of which are shown on the Official Zoning Map.



      1.   CF-WPOD-CA – Cape Fear Watershed Protection Overlay
District – Critical Area;



      2.   CF-WPOD-PA – Cape Fear Watershed Protection Overlay
District – Protected Area.



   C.   Specific Development Standards



   See Article VI – Environmental and Natural Resource Protection.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 2.07  Dimensional Standards Table



This table and the setback illustration below provides basic design elements
for each base zoning district.



 

Zoning District
 
Maximum Height
 
Minimum Lot Size
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Maximum Density
 
Front Setback
 
Side Setback
 
Side Street Setback
 
Rear Setback




RR
 

35 ft.

 

40,000 sf

 

150 ft.

 

1 unit per acre

 

40 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

30 ft.



RS20
 

35 ft.

 

20,000 sf

 

100 ft.

 

3 units per acre

 

30 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

25 ft.



RS10
 

35 ft.

 

*10,000 sf

 

50 ft.

 

5 units per acre

 

20 ft.

 

8 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

25 ft.



RMF
 

3 stories

 

10,000 sf plus 3,000 sf for every additional unit

 

100 ft.

 

12 units per acre

 

30 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

30 ft.



RMX
 

**4 stories

 

No minimum

 

No minimum

 

18 units per acre

 

20 ft. max.

 

No minimu m

 

6 ft.

 

6 ft.



NMX
 

**4 stories

 

No minimum

 

No minimum

 

No maximum

 

15 ft. max.

 

No minimum

 

12 ft. max.

 

No minimum



O/S
 

35 ft.

 

12,000 sf

 

80 ft.

 

N/A

 

25 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

15 ft.



CB
 

4 stories

 

No minimum

 

25 ft.

 

No maximum

 

6 ft. max.

 

No minimum

 

6 ft. max.

 

No minimum



NB
 

35 ft.

 

6,000 sf

 

50 ft.

 

N/A

 

30 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.



GB
 

45 ft.

 

20,000 sf

 

100 ft.

 

N/A

 

30 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.



LI
 

80 ft.

 

30,000 sf

 

100 ft.

 

N/A

 

30 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

20 ft.



HI
 

80 ft.

 

2 acres

 

150 ft.

 

N/A

 

40 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

30 ft.



FRO
 

35 ft.

 

No minimum

 

No minimum

 

N/A

 

50 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

25 ft.



Notes to table:

*Lots without both public water and sewer must be 20,000 sf.

**May exceed with a conditional use permit.

^Accessory structures must be a minimum of 10 feet from the side or rear
setback and shall not be located within the front setback.

^^Standards may vary if located in an Overlay District.

 

 

The figure to the right should be used to visually illustrate setbacks and
measurements as listed in the table above.
 





 



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Article III.
USE STANDARDS



Section 3.01  Use Table and Interpretation



   3.01.1   TABLE OF AUTHORIZED USES ESTABLISHED



   The following table lists the principal uses allowed by right within
zoning districts as well as uses that may be authorized subject to approval
of a conditional use permit.  Function codes of the Land Based
Classification Standards (LBCS) of the American Planning Association (APA)
correspond to the authorized uses and shall be used to define uses. All uses
are subject to the standards and regulations within this UDO.



   3.01.2   PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED USES



   Uses not listed as permitted (P); permitted with supplemental use
standards (PS); or requiring a conditional use permit (C) are presumed to be
prohibited ( - ) from the applicable zoning district.



   3.01.3   USES NOT LISTED



   In the event that a particular use is not listed in the Use Table, and
such use is not listed as a prohibited use and is not otherwise prohibited by
law, the Administrator shall determine whether a materially similar use
exists in this chapter. Should the Administrator determine that a materially
similar use does exist, the regulations governing that use shall apply to the
particular use not listed and the Administrator's decision shall be recorded
in writing.



   3.01.4   SIMILAR USES



   The Administrator may determine that a use is materially similar if a
permitted use is similarly classified by one or more of the following use
classification systems:



   A.   Land Based Classification Standards (LBCS) of the American
Planning Association (APA)



   B.   North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS)



   3.01.5   USE TABLE



   Uses listed as (P) or (PS) which require a Transportation Impact
Analysis (according to Article V), and all residential developments with 3
units or more, are subject to the Major Site/Subdivision Plan Review Process
established in Article VII.  See Appendix A – Development Flow Chart for
more information regarding how the development process will be administered
according to the use allowances established below.



 

LAND USE TYPE:
 
RR
 
RS20
 
RS10
 
RMF
 
RMX
 
NMX
 
CB
 
O/S
 
NB
 
GB
 
LI
 
HI
 
FRO





A.   RESIDENTIAL

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





   Class A – Single Family Manufactured Home

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Class B & C – Single Family Manufactured Home

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Manufactured Home Park

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Dwelling – Accessory

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Dwelling – Multi-Family (3 or more units)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Dwelling – Multi-Family Conversion

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Dwelling – Single Family Attached (Townhome)

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Dwelling – Single Family Detached

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Dwelling – Two Family (Duplex)

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Family Care Home (6 or fewer residents)

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Live-Work Units

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

P

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Residential Care Facilities (more than 6 residents)

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-



 
RR
 
RS20
 
RS10
 
RMF
 
RMX
 
NMX
 
CB
 
O/S
 
NB
 
GB
 
LI
 
HI
 
FRO



B.   LODGING AND ACCOMMODATIONS

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





   Bed and Breakfast Establishments

 

PS

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Hotel/Motel/Inn

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Rooming and Boarding House

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-



 
RR
 
RS20
 
RS10
 
RMF
 
RMX
 
NMX
 
CB
 
O/S
 
NB
 
GB
 
LI
 
HI
 
FRO



C.   OFFICE AND SERVICES

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





   Banks, Credit Unions, Financial Services

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

P

 

PS

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Dry Cleaning & Laundry

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Funeral Homes/Crematoria

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Home Occupation

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Medical Clinic

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Personal Care Service

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




      Restricted Personal Care Service

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Post Office

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Professional Service

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Veterinary Service

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-



 
RR
 
RS20
 
RS10
 
RMF
 
RMX
 
NMX
 
CB
 
O/S
 
NB
 
GB
 
LI
 
HI
 
FRO



D.   COMMERCIAL AND ENTERTAINMENT

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





   Adult Establishments

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-




   Alcoholic Beverage Sales or Services

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Outdoor Amusement or Theme Park

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

-

 

P

 

-

 

-




   Indoor Amusement

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-




   Automobile/Vehicle Sales, Rental, Service & Repair

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Bar/Tavern

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Bicycle Sales & Repair

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-




   Camps & Camping Establishments

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C




   Drive-In Theater

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Drive-Thru/Drive-in Facility (principal or accessory)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Electronic Gaming Operations

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Games Arcade Establishment

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Gas/Fueling Station

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-




   General Commercial

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   General Commercial (greater than 25,000 sf)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Golf Course

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C




   Hardware, Home Center Sales or Services

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Heavy Equipment/Manufactured Homes Rental/Sales/Service

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-




   Night Club

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Open Air Retail

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Outside Sales

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

PS

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Parking Lot/Structure (Principal Use)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Pawnshops

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Racetrack

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Restaurant

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Riding Stables

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P




   Shooting Range, Indoor

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Shooting Range, Outdoor

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-




   Theater, Indoor Movie or Live Performance

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Theater, Outdoor

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Vehicle Rental (moving trucks)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Vehicle Service (major repair/body shop)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Vehicle Service (minor maintenance/repair)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

PS

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-




E.   MANUFACTURING, INDUSTRIAL & WHOLESALE TRADE

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





   Chemical, Medals, Machinery and Electronic Manufacturing

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-




   Foods, Textiles and Related Products

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Light Industry Uses

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-




   Heavy Industry Uses

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

-




   Landfill

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-




   Light Manufacturing Workshops

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Materials Recovery & Waste Transfer Facilities

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

PS

 

-




   Recycling Collection Stations

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-




   Storage – Self Service

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Warehouse & Storage (Outdoor)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 


 

P

 

P

 

-




   Warehouse and Storage (Indoor)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Wholesaling and Distribution Establishments

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Wood, Paper and Printing Products

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-



 
RR
 
RS20
 
RS10
 
RMF
 
RMX
 
NMX
 
CB
 
O/S
 
NB
 
GB
 
LI
 
HI
 
FRO



F.   EDUCATION AND INSTITUTIONS

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





   Business Associations, Non-profits and Civic Clubs

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Cemetery

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

PS




   Child/Adult Day Care (8 or less persons)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Child/Adult Day Care (more than 8 persons)

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-




   College or University

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 





   Community Support Facility

 

PS

 

PS

 

C

 

C

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS




   Conference/Convention Center

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Correctional Institution

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

-




   Halfway House

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C




   Hospital

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-




   Museum/Cultural Facility

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Public Administration/Civic Meeting Facilities

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

P




   Public Safety Station

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

PS

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




   Recreation Facility (Indoor)

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 

P




   Recreation Facility (Outdoor)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

P




   Religious Institutions

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-




   School (elementary or secondary)

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C




   Sports Arena/Stadium

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

-

 

-




   Studio (art, dance, martial arts, music)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-



 
RR
 
RS20
 
RS10
 
RMF
 
RMX
 
NMX
 
CB
 
O/S
 
NB
 
GB
 
LI
 
HI
 
FRO



G.   AGRICULTURAL AND FORESTRY

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





   Animal Production

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Community Gardens

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

P




   Kennels (indoor)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-




   Kennels (outdoor)

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Nurseries and Garden Centers

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   Produce Stands

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

PS




H.   COMMUNICATIONS, TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





   Airstrip

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

C




   Rail Station

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

-

 

-




   Solar Energy System

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

-




   Truck and Freight Transportation Services

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Utilities (Class 1)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




   Utilities (Class 2)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

PP




   Utilities (Class 3)

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

P

 

P

 

-




   Wireless Telecommunications Facility (non-tower)

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS




   Wireless Telecommunications Tower

 

C

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



 
RR
 
RS20
 
RS10
 
RMF
 
RMX
 
NMX
 
CB
 
O/S
 
NB
 
GB
 
LI
 
HI
 
FRO



I.   UNCLASSIFIED OR NO FUNCTION

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





   *Cluster Subdivision

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-




   *Major Subdivision

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS




   Minor Subdivision

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




   Satellite Dishes (greater than 24" in diameter)

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

-

 

PS

 

PS

 

P

 

P

 

PS




   **Temporary Uses/Special Events

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS

 

PS





 



*Requires quasi-judicial "major subdivision" approval process.



**Requires Board of Commissioners approval if located on public
street/property.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 3.02  Supplementary Use Standards for Specific Uses



   3.02.1   APPLICABILITY



   There are certain uses that exist which may be constructed, continued,
and/or expanded provided they meet certain conditions specific to their
design or operation. Such conditions ensure compatibility so that different
uses may be located in proximity to one another without adverse effects to
either. When uses are listed in the Use Table above as permitted with
supplemental use standards (PS) or uses requiring conditional use permits (C)
they shall comply with the additional criteria set forth in this article for
that use in addition to other applicable criteria contained in this ordinance.



   3.02.2   LAND USES PERMITTED WITH SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARDS (PS)



   A.   Land uses with supplemental standards are uses permitted by
right, provided that the specific standards set forth in this article are met.



   B.   The specified standards are intended to ensure that these uses
fit the vision of the zoning districts in which they are permitted, and that
these uses are compatible with other development permitted within the
districts.



   3.02.3   CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS



   A.   Purpose



   There are uses that are generally compatible with other land uses
permitted in a zoning district but, because of their unique characteristics
or potential impacts on adjacent land uses, are not permitted in zoning
districts as a matter of right. These uses may be permitted through the
issuance of a conditional use permit (CUP) after ensuring that the use
complies with the approval criteria listed below. No inherent right exists to
receive a CUP. Such authorization must be approved under a specific set of
circumstances and conditions. Each application and situation is unique and
may be subject to specific requirements to mitigate the impacts of the
proposed use.



   B.   Criteria



      1.   All conditional uses shall at a minimum meet the
standards for the zoning district in which they are located and the specific
or supplemental use standards set forth in this article for that specific
use. In addition to determining that the application meets all other
requirements of this ordinance (no variances are permitted) the Board of
Commissioners must find the following:



         a)   The proposed use shall conform to the character of
the neighborhood in which it is located and not injure the use and enjoyment
of property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted;



         b)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage,
sanitation or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided;



         c)   The proposed use shall not impair the orderly
development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted within
the zoning district or substantially diminish or impair the property values
within the neighborhood;



         d)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the
proposed use shall not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety or general welfare;



         e)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to
provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize the traffic congestion
in the public streets;



         f)   The proposed use shall not be noxious or offensive
by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas; and



         g)   The proposed use is consistent with the officially
adopted plans and policies of the town.



      2.   The Planning Board shall provide a recommendation in an
advisory capacity to the Board of Commissioners in assisting the Board of
Commissioners to make its determination.



      3.   In approving any CUP, the Planning Board may recommend
and the town Council may impose such reasonable standards, conditions, or
requirements, in addition to or superseding any standard specified in the
UDO, as it may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.



      4.   Approval procedures for conditional use permits are found
in Article VII.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 3.03  Residential – Supplemental Use Standards



   3.03.1   GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL MANUFACTURED HOUSING



   All manufactured HUD homes and offices, whether used for residential or
business purposes and whether placed in a manufactured home park or on an
individual lot of record, shall meet the following requirements:



   A.   Each manufactured home stand and space shall be graded to
provide adequate storm drainage away from the structure and such that there
will exist no more than 3 feet difference between the chassis of the home or
office and the finished grade of the stand along the entire perimeter of the
home or office proper.



   B.   The manufactured home or office is set up in accordance to the
standards set by the North Carolina Department of Insurance in the current
edition of the North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes, including,
but not limited to, all footings, supporting piers, anchors, and tie downs.



   C.   The tongue, moving hitch, wheels, axles, and transporting
lights are all removed.



   D.   Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps, and other means of
entrance and exit to and from the home are installed in accordance with the
requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code, attached firmly to
the primary structure, and anchored securely to the ground.



   E.   Other than those within the manufactured home or office itself,
all installations of plumbing and electrical wiring and all gas and oil
appliances shall comply with the provisions of the building, plumbing,
electrical, heating, and gas regulations of the North Carolina State Building
Code.



   F.   Empty liquefied petroleum gas containers and other objects and
materials not approved by the Fire Department shall not be stored under
manufactured homes or offices.



   3.03.2   CLASS A MANUFACTURED HOMES (DOUBLE-WIDES):



   A continuous permanent masonry foundation, unpierced except for
required ventilation and access, shall be installed around the entire
perimeter of the home or office. If the masonry foundation is not brick,
stone, or decorative concrete block it shall be coated with a mortar-like
finish on the visible side. Class A Manufactured Homes have additional
requirements, as described in the definition section of this ordinance.



   3.03.3   CLASS B (SINGLE-WIDE) OR CLASS C (MOBILE HOME) MANUFACTURED
HOMES:



   A.   Each single-wide manufactured home or office shall be installed
with skirting provided by the manufacturer specifically for such use,
unpierced except for required ventilation and access, around the entire
perimeter of the home or office. Skirting shall be made of a material
compatible with the siding of the home or office.



   B.   Class B and Class C Manufactured Housing (single-wide
manufactured HUD homes) shall be permitted in manufactured home parks only.



   3.03.4   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK



   A.   General Park Requirements



      1.   No manufactured home park shall be approved for a site
less than ten contiguous acres under single ownership or control.



      2.   The manufactured home park shall be screened from all
adjacent property with a 20-foot Type B buffer in accordance with Article IV.



      3.   The operator/manager of a manufactured home park shall
designate and enforce a uniform type of underpinning of all manufactured
homes in the community.



      4.   All streets within a manufactured home park shall comply
with the standards set forth in Article V.



      5.   An acceptable plan for the collection and disposal of
garbage shall be included in the site plan for the manufactured home park.
The size and type of all garbage receptacles shall be in conformance with
town standards. No person shall throw or leave garbage or refuse upon the
ground of any manufactured home park. It shall be the duty of the
manufactured home park operator to make certain that all garbage and refuse
are regularly disposed of in a sanitary manner.



      6.   Recreational space shall be provided in accordance with
Article V.



      7.   Existing manufactured homes (mobile homes) in any
district and in manufactured home parks that are to be replaced shall be
replaced with a manufactured home that is no older than five years.



      8.   Maximum density is five units per acre; minimum area is
three acres.



   B.   Space Requirements



      1.   Each manufactured home space shall be clearly established
on the ground by permanent monuments or markers.



      2.   No more than one manufactured home may be parked on any
manufactured home space.



      3.   Minimum setbacks for all sides for a manufactured home
within a space (any attached accessory structure, such as room extensions,
porches and porch roofs and carports shall, for the purpose of this setback
requirement, be considered to be part of the manufactured home) shall be 15
feet.



      4.   No manufactured home space shall have direct vehicular
access to a thoroughfare street.



      5.   Each manufactured home stand and space shall be graded to
provide adequate storm drainage away from the structure and such that there
will exist no more than three feet difference between the chassis of the home
or office and the finished grade of the stand along the entire perimeter of
the home or office proper.



      6.   Each home shall be at least 40 feet from any property
line.



      7.   Each manufactured home space shall have a permanent site
number sign that is clearly visible from the street running in front of the
home.



      8.   A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided for
each manufactured home.



      9.   A visitor parking area, consisting of one space for each
five manufactured home units located within the park, shall be provided. This
parking area does not have to be paved.



   3.03.5   ACCESSORY DWELLINGS



   A.   One accessory dwelling unit is permitted as an accessory to a
residential use.



   B.   The dwelling unit may be attached or detached, located on the
side or rear of the property.



   C.   The maximum size of accessory dwellings is the lesser of 50% of
the living area of the principal structure or 1,000 square feet.



   D.   Accessory dwellings must be a minimum of ten feet from the side
or rear setback and shall not be located within the front setback.



   E.   If the accessory dwelling is attached to the primary residence,
then access is limited to the side or rear of the accessory dwelling or to an
existing door.



   F.   Attached or detached accessory dwellings must have the same
architectural appearance of the primary residence such as same type and color
of siding, trim and roofing appearance.



   G.   Manufactured housing, campers, travel trailers and recreational
vehicles are not permitted for use as an accessory dwelling.



   H.   Must contain complete kitchen facilities including a stove or
cook top and a full bath including lavatory, water closet, and tub or shower
(or combination).



   I.   One off-street parking space shall be provided in addition to
those required for the principal dwelling.



   3.03.6   MULTI-FAMILY CONVERSIONS



   A.   A maximum of four units is permitted in a converted
single-family dwelling and it shall be designed such that a maximum of two
main entrances are on the fronting façade (similar to a duplex
configuration). Additional building entrances may be provided on the side and
rear of the building.



   B.   Must result from the conversion of a single building containing
at least 2,000 square feet of gross floor area that was in existence on the
effective date of this ordinance and that was originally designed,
constructed and occupied as a single-family residence.



   3.03.7   MULTI-FAMILY



   First or main floor of building must be non-residential and must
provide a "shop-front" appearance at the sidewalk level in accordance with
Article IV.



   3.03.8   FAMILY CARE HOME (6 OR FEWER RESIDENTS)



   A.   Family care homes shall be certified by the International
Building Code, as amended by the NC Building Code.



   B.   No family care home shall be closer than ½ mile to another
such use.



   3.03.9   LIVE-WORK UNITS



   Construction shall meet requirements of the International Residential
Code, and the following:



   A.   The maximum total size of a live-work unit shall be 3,000
square feet and three stories in height.



   B.   The work area shall occupy a maximum of 50% or less of the
total unit.



   C.   The non-residential area function shall be limited to the first
or main floor only.



   D.   A maximum of three non-residential worker or employees are
allowed to occupy the non-residential area at any one time.



   E.   The same tenant shall occupy the work area and living area.



   3.03.10      RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES (MORE THAN 6 RESIDENTS)



   A.   Residential care facilities must be buffered from adjacent
residentially zoned property with a 20-foot Type B buffer in accordance with
Article IV .



   B.   Prior to the submission of an application, an owner/operator of
a residential care facility shall have received a license from the State of
North Carolina for such a facility.



   C.   Unless located and having access on an arterial or marginal
access street, no residential care facility shall contain more than 16 units.



   D.   To the extent practicable, the community shall provide access
connectivity (vehicular and pedestrian) to adjacent neighborhoods.



   E.   The following accessory uses are permitted: congregate dining
facilities, recreational and social facilities, health care facilities, gift
shops, snack shops, banks, barber/beauty shops, and similar services for
residents.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 3.04  Lodging & Accommodations – Supplemental Use Standards



   3.04.1   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS



   Bed and breakfast establishments, where allowed, are subject to the
following standards:



   A.   No more than eight guest rooms that offers bed and breakfast
accommodations may be provided on each private residence;



   B.   Serves only the breakfast meal, and that meal is served to
overnight guests of the business;



   C.   An owner/manager of a bed and breakfast home shall reside on
the property.



   3.04.2   ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSE



   A.   In residential and mixed use districts, parking areas shall not
be permitted in the front yard and shall be screened from adjacent properties
by a 20-foot Type B buffer.



   B.   The owner shall serve as a full-time manager or otherwise
designate a fulltime manager, either of which shall permanently reside on the
premises.



   C.   The minimum size of any sleeping room shall be 200 square feet
per resident.



   D.   One full bath consisting of tub or shower, toilet and sink
shall be provided for each four residents.



   E.   Full kitchen facilities, consisting of a stove, oven, sink,
refrigerator, food preparation area, and storage areas shall be provided and
accessible to all tenants.



   F.   Signs, other than address/tenant identification signs which
meet the requirements of Article IV , shall not be permitted.



   G.   All of the lot area which is not used for parking, sidewalks,
buildings, utility structures or site access must be landscaped and
maintained.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 3.05  Office & Services – Supplemental Use Standards



   3.05.1   BANKS, CREDIT UNIONS, FINANCIAL SERVICES



   A.   Teller & ATM traffic queues will not interfere with pedestrian
movement along public sidewalks or create a traffic hazard.



   B.   Drive-through lanes or loading spaces shall not be located any
closer than 35 feet to a residential zoning district and shall be located in
the side or rear yards only.



   3.05.2   HOME OCCUPATIONS



   A.   Permitted in the primary dwelling only as an accessory use.



   B.   Clearly incidental and secondary to residential occupancy.



   C.   The use shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed
structure on the premises.



   D.   No more than 25% of the total floor area or 500 square feet,
whichever is less, is used for such purposes.



   E.   No sign or display of products be visible from the streets;



   F.   No more than one person not a resident of said dwelling is
employed in connection with the home occupation.



   G.   The home occupation shall be operated by a resident of the
dwelling.



   H.   Storage of goods and materials associated with the home
occupation must be completely within an enclosed structure.



   I.   Parking must be provided so as not to create hazards or street
congestion.



   J.   All parking associated with the home shall be accommodated
off-street or in spaces directly in front of the residence.



   K.   No generation of dust, odors, noise, vibration or electrical
interference or fluctuation shall be perceptible beyond the property line.



   3.05.3   RESTRICTED PERSONAL CARE SERVICES



   A.   Such facilities shall be at least 1,000 feet from a religious
institution, school or playground or another such facility and shall be a
minimum of 500 feet road frontage spacing from residential uses in a
residential zoned district.



   B.   The facility shall be open to the public only between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.



   3.05.4   VETERINARY SERVICES



   Only animals in veterinary care may stay overnight. No kennels or
storage of animals shall be permitted outside unless otherwise permitted in
the district in which it is located.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 3.06  Commercial and Entertainment – Supplemental Use Standards



   3.06.1   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS



   A.   Some special entertainment uses because of their very nature
can have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when
several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances can produce
deleterious secondary effects on adjacent areas and the community at large,
including increased transients, increased crime, disruptive conduct,
financial instability and negative influences on children and the surrounding
populace.



   B.   Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that
these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of
the surrounding neighborhood due to the deleterious secondary effects listed
above.



   C.   Avoiding concentration of these uses, separating these uses
from other uses and screening these uses can reduce the deleterious secondary
effects listed above.



   D.   These special regulations are itemized in this section. The
primary control or regulation is the purpose of preventing a concentration of
these uses in any one area (i.e., not more than one such use within 2,000
feet of each other which would create such adverse effects):



      1.   Adult bookstores;



      2.   Adult motion picture theaters housed in a permanent
indoor structure;



      3.   Clubs and other places of entertainment operated as a
commercial enterprise providing nude or semi-nude entertainment such as
"topless" dancing;



      4.   Eating and drinking establishments including drive-in
curb service providing nude or semi-nude entertainment such as "topless"
dancing;



      5.   Any physical culture establishment, masseur, massage
parlor, health salon or club not otherwise defined in this UDO.



      6.   Adult motels and hotels.



   E.   Location of uses.



      1.   No use regulated under this section may be located within
2,000 feet of another use permitted under this section which will be measured
from the exterior walls of the building(s) containing such regulated use.



      2.   No use permitted under this section may be located within
1,000 feet of any area zoned for residential use or from the property line of
any residential dwelling.



      3.   One thousand five hundred feet of any religious
institutions, day care center (child/adult) or public or private schools,
public park, library or theater open to the general public in any zoning
districts.



      4.   Measurements of distance separation shall be in a
straight line from the closest points of the building at which the adult uses
are located.



      5.   No use regulated under this section may be located in any
designated Highway Overlay District.



   F.   Signs



      1.   Signage is limited to one wall sign per premise.



      2.   The maximum sign area shall be ten square feet.



   G.   Hours of Operation.



   No adult establishment shall operate before 4:00 p.m. or after 12:00
midnight.



   3.06.2   DRIVE-IN THEATER



   A.   Outdoor theaters shall be buffered from adjoining residential
uses with a 50-foot Type A (option 1) buffer as set forth in Article IV .



   B.   The performance and audience areas for any outdoor theater
shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any adjacent residentially zoned
property.



   C.   Primary access to all outdoor theaters shall be to a collector
or higher order street.



   D.   Lights shall be shielded and positioned so as not to shine onto
adjacent properties.



   3.06.3   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES



   A.   Traffic queues will not interfere with pedestrian movement
along public sidewalks or create a traffic hazard.



   B.   Use of the drive-through service will not interfere with the
use, enjoyment or operations of adjacent properties.



   C.   Drive-through lanes or loading spaces shall not be located any
closer than 35 feet to a residential zoning district.



   D.   If a speaker box faces a residential zoning district, there
shall be a 50-foot landscaped buffer or sound wall between the speaker box
and the residential district.



   E.   Stacking Lane Requirements



      1.   All uses and facilities providing drive-up or
drive-through service shall provide the at least the minimum required vehicle
stacking spaces established below.



      2.   Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet wide by
20 feet long.



      3.   Stacking spaces shall not impede on-site or off-site
traffic movements, including access to parking spaces.



      4.   A solid faced brick, masonry or wooden wall or fence
shall be provided along a property line abutting lots or parcels zoned
residential purposes to block lights from vehicles in the stacking lanes or
drive through facility.



 

Activity
 
Minimum Required Stacking Spaces
 
Measured From



Bank teller lane

 

4

 

Teller or Window




Restaurant, drive-through

 

6

 

Order Box to Beginning of Drive Through Lane




Car wash

 

4

 

Stall Entrance




 



   3.06.4   GAS/FUELING STATION



   A.   Canopies/Pumps



      1.   Must be located to the side or rear of the principal
building.



      2.   Pump canopies must be located at least 50 feet from any
interior side or rear property line that adjoins residentially developed
property.



      3.   Must be buffered from adjoining residential uses with a
20-foot Type B buffer in accordance with Article IV .



      4.   The maximum number of pumps permitted at a single
gas/fueling station shall be 12.



      5.   A conforming principal building is required and shall be
a minimum of 1,600 square feet.



   B.   Lighting



   All lighting must be shielded to direct light and glare only onto the
lot or parcel where the gas/fueling station is located and shall be in
accordance with Article IV.



   3.06.5   OPEN AIR RETAIL



   A.   The use shall be conducted behind the prevailing setback line
for the district.



   B.   Sidewalk kiosks, vendor carts, concession stands, etc: Such
uses shall be permitted to operate within the right-of-way provided that
adequate pedestrian clearance on the sidewalk is maintained (minimum of five
feet) and the automobile and bicycle travel way is clear of obstructions.



   C.   No permanent parking is required but the use must accommodate
reasonable vehicular circulation and parking to preclude off-site impacts as
determined by the Administrator.



   3.06.6   OUTSIDE SALES



   A.   Outside sales must be clearly secondary to the primary use
within the associated permanent structure and shall generally be located to
the side or rear of the principal structure. Display of merchandise for sale
outdoors in the front yard shall not exceed a maximum of 12 feet from the
front face of the building.



   B.   Displays on public sidewalks: Merchandise for sale may be
placed on the public sidewalk in front of the shop where the building is
directly adjacent to the sidewalk provided that adequate pedestrian clearance
on the sidewalk is maintained (minimum of five feet). Such sales may also be
subject to other town ordinances.



   3.06.7   PAWN SHOPS



   Pawn shop facilities shall be at least 1,000 feet from a religious
institution, school or playground or another pawn shop and shall have a
minimum of 500 feet road frontage spacing from residential uses in a
residential zoned district.



   3.06.8   SHOOTING RANGE, OUTDOOR



   A.   Outdoor shooting ranges shall be buffered from adjoining
properties with a 50-foot Type A (option 1) buffer as set forth in Article IV
.



   B.   Outdoor shooting ranges shall be located no closer than 1,000
feet to any religious institution, school or residential dwelling.



   3.06.9   THEATER, OUTDOOR



   A.   Outdoor theaters shall be buffered from adjoining residential
uses with a 50-foot Type A (option 1) buffer as set forth in Article IV .



   B.   Primary access to all outdoor theaters shall be to a collector
or higher order street.



   C.   Lights shall be shielded and positioned so as not to shine onto
adjacent properties.



   3.06.10      VEHICLE RENTAL (MOVING TRUCKS)



   A.   Vehicles must be stored in an area that is screened from the
public right-of-way and adjacent residential neighborhoods by a 50-foot Type
A (option 1) buffer in accordance with Article IV .



   B.   When vehicle rental is an accessory use, the storage of
vehicles shall not occupy more than the minimum number of required spaces.



   C.   All parking areas shall be placed in accordance within the
provisions of Article IV and shall be accessory to an otherwise conforming
building.



   3.06.11      VEHICLE SERVICES – MINOR MAINTENANCE/REPAIR



   A.   All outdoor storage areas shall be screened by a 50-foot Type A
(option 1) buffer in accordance with Article IV .



   B.   Vehicle bays shall be set perpendicular to the street or
otherwise screened from direct view by landscaping.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 3.07  Manufacturing, Industrial and Wholesale Trade – Supplemental
Use Standards



   3.07.1   LIGHT INDUSTRY USES



   A.   No generation of dust, odors, noise, vibration or electrical
interference or fluctuation shall be perceptible beyond the property line.



   B.   All establishments shall be maintained so as not to create
environmental hazards (such as oil or gas leaks or spills) that pose a threat
to ground or surface water quality, air quality, wildlife and/or humans.



   C.   Vehicular access to the site shall be provided on a
thoroughfare of suitable industrial capacity as determined by the
Administrator and/or any required transportation impact analysis.



   3.07.2   HEAVY INDUSTRY USES



   A.   All such uses must be located a minimum distance of 500 feet
from the RS20, RS10, RMF, RMX and CB Districts and any parallel conditional
zoning district to those districts.



   B.   All establishments shall be maintained so as not to create
environmental hazards (such as oil or gas leaks or spills) that pose a threat
to ground or surface water quality, air quality, wildlife and/or humans.



   C.   Vehicular access to the site shall be provided on a
thoroughfare of suitable industrial capacity as determined by the
Administrator and/or any required transportation impact analysis.



   3.07.3   MATERIAL RECOVERY & WASTE TRANSFER FACILITIES



   A.   All such uses must be located a minimum distance of 500 feet
from the RS20, RS10, RMF, RMX and CB Districts and any parallel conditional
zoning district to those districts.



   B.   All establishments shall be maintained so as not to create
environmental hazards (such as oil or gas leaks or spills) that pose a threat
to ground or surface water quality, air quality, wildlife and/or humans.



   C.   Vehicular access to the site shall be provided on a
thoroughfare of suitable industrial capacity as determined by the
Administrator and/or any required transportation impact analysis.



   D.   A minimum 150-foot Type A buffer (option 1) area is required
along all property lines and public rights-of-way. No materials recovery and
waste transfer activities, including parking, access roads, buildings, or
disposal shall occur in the buffer area. Roads for access to the site may
cross the 100-foot area, and monitoring wells may be located within the
100-foot area. All existing trees within the buffer area shall be preserved,
except to allow for construction of necessary road crossings and monitoring
wells.



   E.   A 50-foot Type A buffer (option 1) shall be required in the
buffer area along all property lines and public rights-of-way regardless of
the adjacent zoning. Existing plant material may be included in the
computation of the required plantings, with approval of the Administrator.



   3.07.4   RECYCLING COLLECTION STATIONS (NB, HB, ICD, LI, HI)



   A.   All outdoor storage, collection loading and processing areas
must be located a minimum distance of 500 feet from the RS20, RS10, RMF, RMX
and CB Districts and any parallel conditional zoning district to those
districts.



   B.   All outdoor storage, collection loading and processing areas
must be located a minimum distance of 50 feet from the adjacent property line.



   C.   All establishments shall be maintained so as not to create
environmental hazards (such as oil or gas leaks or spills) that pose a threat
to ground or surface water quality, air quality, wildlife and/or humans.



   D.   Vehicular access to the site shall be provided on a
thoroughfare of suitable industrial capacity as determined by the
Administrator and/or any required transportation impact analysis.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 3.08  Education and Institutions – Supplemental Use Standards



   3.08.1   CEMETERY



   A.   A minimum of three contiguous acres shall be required to
establish a cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum not located on the same tract
of land as a religious institution.



   B.   The minimum yard required for all structures, excluding
gatehouse, is 50 feet from any exterior property line. Gatehouses shall be
excluded from any minimum yard requirement.



   C.   The minimum yard required for mausoleums and columbariums
adjacent to a street shall be equal to a principal building front yard in the
district.



   D.   The minimum yard required for any grave or burial plot is 50
feet from any exterior property line. This requirement does not apply where
the adjacent property contains an existing cemetery.



   E.   The minimum yard required for any grave or burial plot adjacent
to a street shall be equal to a principal building front yard in the district
provided that, where graves or burial plots are adjacent to streets and
closer than 50 feet, a low planted screen shall be provided between the
street and the cemetery. Such screen shall be eight feet wide planted with
evergreen shrubbery placed a maximum of five feet on center. All shrubs shall
achieve a height of four feet within three years.



   3.08.2   CHILD/ADULT DAY CARE CENTER (MORE THAN 8 PERSONS)



   A.   Outdoor play space for child care homes shall be provided in
accordance with the regulations of North Carolina Department of Human
Resources.



   B.   Outdoor play space shall be enclosed on all sides by building
and/or walls or fences in accordance with the standards in ordinance.  The
minimum height for such fences shall be four feet.



   C.   Outdoor play space may not include driveways, parking areas, or
land otherwise unsuitable for children's play space.



   D.   Outdoor play space may not be in the established front yard.



   E.   Adult day care centers: Adult day care centers shall meet the
requirements of the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Service's
"Adult Day Care and Day Health Services Standards for Certification."



   3.08.3   COMMUNITY SUPPORT FACILITY



   No such use may be located within 1,000 feet of another such use
measured as a straight line on a map unless as part of an accessory use to an
existing religious institution.



   3.08.4   HALFWAY HOUSES



   No such use may be located within 2,500 feet of another such use
measured as a straight line on a map.



   3.08.5   SCHOOLS – ELEMENTARY & SECONDARY



   A.   Athletic fields and parking areas must be buffered from
adjacent residentially zoned property with a 20-foot Type B buffer as set
forth in Article IV .



   B.   Connectivity (vehicular and pedestrian) to surrounding
residential areas is required. Where a full vehicular connection is
impractical, a multi-use trail connection shall be provided.



   C.   Student pick-up/drop-off areas shall adhere to NCDOT standards
for vehicular circulation and stacking.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 3.09  Agriculture and Forestry – Supplemental Use Standards



   3.09.1   ANIMAL PRODUCTION



   A.   Animal production may only occur on a lot exceeding two acres
in size.



   B.   Not more than one animal unit shall be kept, maintained or
stabled per 6,000 square feet of land.



   C.   All animals shall be fenced so that they are no closer than 100
feet from a dwelling unit on an adjacent property. This provision shall not
apply if a dwelling unit is constructed so as to encroach upon an existing
animal production use. However, an existing animal production use may not
expand towards a newly established residential use.



   3.09.2   KENNELS, OUTDOOR



   A.   Any building or pen housing animals shall be located a minimum
of 150 feet from any residentially zoned or developed property.



   B.   Areas used for exercising or training of animals shall be
securely fenced to prevent the animals from straying.



   C.   All animal refuse and food shall be kept in airtight containers
and disposed of on a regular basis.



   D.   Animal wastes shall not be stored within 150 feet of any
property line or surface waters unless located indoors.



   E.   All such outdoor kennels and similar animal shelters shall be
buffered from any adjoining residentially zoned property with a 50-foot Type
A (option 1) buffer in accordance with Article IV .



   3.09.3   PRODUCE STANDS



   A.   Produce stands shall be permitted by the Administrator to
operate on an individual parcel for a period of time not to exceed 90
consecutive days and no more than two events per calendar year.



   B.   Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m.



Section 3.10  Communications, Transportation and Infrastructure –
Supplemental Use Standards



   3.10.1   AIRSTRIP



   A.   Hangars or open storage shall be screened with a 20-foot Type B
buffer from all property lines, except those properties with LI and HI zoning.



   B.   No outdoor public address system shall be permitted which can
be heard beyond the boundaries of the property.



   C.   Hours of operation shall be limited from 6:00 a.m. – 10:00
p.m.



   3.10.2   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM



   A.   All equipment shall be a minimum of a 100 feet from all
property lines.



   B.   There shall be a 50-foot Type A (option 1) buffer area along
all property lines.



   C.   The entire site shall be fenced, a minimum of six feet (in
height) and secured to reduce/eliminate trespassing.



   D.   A maximum height (not including power lines) for the solar
panel arrays shall be no more than 15 feet.



   E.   Landscaping including vegetative buffers, security fences and
gates shall be maintained for the duration of the solar farm operation, up to
and including decommissioning.



   F.   Solar panels shall be constructed so as to minimize glare or
reflection onto adjacent properties and roadways.



   G.   The Administrator shall be advised in writing within 30 days by
the solar farm operator or property owners (whichever entity/party holds the
development and building permits) in the event the project is sold or
otherwise transferred to another entity/party and/or the current
operator/owner abandons the project.



   H.   At the time of applying for permits the applicant (solar farm
developer or property owner) shall include a decommissioning plan with the
anticipated life expectancy of the solar farm and the anticipated cost in
current dollars, as well as the method (s) of insuring that funds will be
available for decommissioning and restoration of the project site to its
original, natural condition prior to the solar farm development.



   I.   If the site is damaged, the solar farm operator shall have 12
months to bring the project back to its operational capacity. If for any
reason the solar farm is not generating electricity after six months, the
operator shall have six months to complete decommissioning of the solar farm.



   J.   In the event of bankruptcy or similar financial default of the
solar farm, the property owner of the project site shall bear the
decommissioning costs.



   K.   All solar farms shall be in compliance with the requirements of
the most current State Building and Electrical Codes, the State of North
Carolina and Harnett County.



   L.   Each solar farm shall be required to have the facility
inspected annually for three years by the Administrator or his/her designee
following the issuance of the permit to verify continued compliance with this
ordinance.



   3.10.3   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER)



   A.   Maximum height on any co-located structure shall be 40 feet.



   3.10.4   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS



   A.   Transmission towers may be sited on any held tract of land
exceeding one-half acre in size.



   B.   The site shall be fenced with an eight-foot high fence,
landscaped and buffered.



   C.   Abandoned towers (those not used for a period of six months or
more) shall be removed by carriers.



   D.   Should technology changes render the height of the tower
excessive, the Administrator may require that the tower be reduced in height,
replaced or removed.



   E.   All telecommunication towers must have setbacks from all
property lines of at least one foot for every foot of structure height.



   F.   Height of the structure shall be limited to a maximum of 200
feet in all districts.



   G.   Conditional use permit applications shall provide the following
information that:



      1.   Demonstrates the antenna's compliance with state and
federal radio frequency emission standards.



      2.   Specifies the tower height and design and include a
cross-section of the structure.



      3.   Details any technical, engineering, economic and other
pertinent factors governing the selection of the proposed design.



      4.   Demonstrates the tower's compliance with applicable
structural standards, which may include certification that the tower will
withstand sustained winds in accordance with local building codes or
nationally recognized standards.



      5.   Describes the failure characteristics of the tower and
demonstrates that the site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain
debris.



      6.   Describes the tower's maximum capacity, including the
number of antennas that it can accommodate for collection, taking into
consideration radio frequency interference, mass, height and other
characteristics, as well as options to overcome any problems that these
considerations may pose to service delivery.



      7.   Assesses the environmental impact of the facility siting,
including the impact on adjacent structures and districts as well as on
historic sites and streetscapes.



      8.   Determines whether the construction of the tower and its
reception and transmission functions will interfere with the usual and
customary transmission or reception of radio, television and other services
on adjoining properties.



      9.   Documents the due diligence in seeking and subsequent
failure to find space on an existing tower to collocate their antenna(s) (if
permission for tower construction is being sought).



      10.   Documents compliance with or exemption from FCC, FAA,
MEPA and any other federal or state regulations applicable to the siting;
statements must be issued from the FCC, FAA or the state attesting to the
proposed facility's compliance.



      11.   Includes an agreement between the town and the tower
owners and their successors to allow shared use of the tower if:



         a)   Capacity exists based on existing and planned use;



         b)   A future applicant for space on the tower agrees in
writing;



         c)   The potential use is technically compatible.



      12.   Documents anticipated maintenance needs, including
frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs and traffic, noise or
safety impacts of such maintenance.



      13.   Documents liability insurance or bonding where
applicable.



      14.   Includes approval of the site owner, if different from
the tower owner, to apply for a permit.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 3.11  Temporary Uses/Special Events – Supplemental Use Standards



   Proposed land uses defined as temporary uses shall obtain a zoning
permit that outlines the conditions of operations and shall be consistent
with the applications of this section. Upon conformance to all requirements
of this section, the Administrator has the authority to issue a development
permit for temporary uses such as bazaars, festivals, carnivals, produce
stands, seasonal outdoor sales, races, construction offices, and similar
uses. Such permit shall be issued for a fixed period of time, to be stated in
the permit and shall be subject to such limitations as the Administrator may
impose to protect the character of the district affected. The Administrator
may consider any prior violation of this ordinance by applicant for which the
applicant has received citation or notice from the Administrator as grounds
for denial of an application.



   3.11.1   GENERAL STANDARDS / PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL TEMPORARY
USE/SPECIAL EVENTS



   A.   All permitted temporary uses listed in this section require a
zoning permit for temporary use that shall be reviewed and issued by the
Administrator.



   B.   The property on which a temporary use is proposed must contain
sufficient space to support the temporary use.



   C.   Parking must be adequate to support the proposed temporary use.



   D.   Restroom facilities, if needed, must be provided.



   E.   All inspections and permits required by the building code, fire
marshal, or applicable government agency must be received.



   F.   A temporary use shall last only as long as that time period
stated in the development permit but shall not exceed 140 days within a
calendar year on any individual lot. Duration of a development permit for
temporary use is intended to include days operated, or attended by persons
not employed by or volunteering to work at the event and does not include the
setup, takedown, clean-up, or rehearsal days of the event.



   G.   The applicant is responsible for fully removing from the site
any structures allowed as temporary uses and also any garbage or rubbish
resulting from the temporary use within three days after the expiration of
the zoning permit. Each day after the expiration of the permit in which
applicant fails to fully remove a structure or garbage or rubbish shall be
deemed a violation of this ordinance.



   H.   Temporary uses shall be limited to a maximum duration of 14
days, unless otherwise specifically authorized or extended by the
Administrator. A permittee may request an extension of the approval term in
writing before the expiration of the original approval term and the
Administrator may approve an extension upon a finding that the special event
has substantially complied with all conditions of the original approval, and
that the extension will not create substantial adverse impacts on adjacent
properties.



   I.   Maximum number of special events per property: within any
single calendar year, the same property may host no more than ten special
events. The temporary use permits for these special events may be reviewed
and approved concurrently. A minimum of 14 days shall lapse between special
events on any one property.



   J.   Any temporary use/special event involving usage of a public
street/property shall require Board of Commissioner approval.



   3.11.2   TEMPORARY EVENTS / USES EXEMPT FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS



   Zoning permits for temporary uses are not required for the following
events (this exemption does not exclude any other required permits, such as
building permit, ABC license, health department approval, Board of
Commissioner approval for usage of a public street/property etc.):



   A.   Private events such as weddings, private parties, funerals,
etc.; not open to the general public; and lasting less than 12 hours.



   B.   Government-sponsored events and those governed by the
Lillington Code of Ordinances;



   C.   Regularly established permanent places of worship, sports
facilities, schools, auditoriums, or other similar permanently established
place of assembly for events that do not exceed the maximum capacity of the
structure or site where the assembly is held.



   D.   Events which occur on property possessing site plan approval
for such activities.



   E.   Indoor promotional events where the size and location of such
events shall be reasonably related to the existing building and in no case
shall interfere with the day-to-day business operations of on-site or
adjacent businesses.



   F.   Natural disaster and emergency offices.



   3.11.3   TEMPORARY USES WITH SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS



   A.   Produce Sales, Seasonal Outdoor Sales & Other Similar Uses:
Such temporary uses shall not exceed 90 consecutive days and no more than two
events per calendar year. Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m.
– 10:00 p.m.



   B.   Contractor's Office and Equipment/Storage Sheds: Contractor's
office and/or equipment/storage sheds may be placed in any district
temporarily on the site of construction of a development for which plans have
been approved.  All such equipment shall be removed upon completion of
development.



   C.   Real Estate Office in a Construction Trailer or Temporary
Modular Unit: One temporary structure, such as a construction trailer or
temporary modular unit may be used as a real estate sales office in any new
construction project in any district. Such a temporary structure shall be
used for the sale of units within that project only.  Temporary real estate
offices in construction trailers or temporary modular units may remain on the
site until the development completion date.



   D.   Real Estate Office in a Model Home:  A model dwelling may be
used as a real estate sales office in a new residential development in any
district. Such a model home/sales office may be used for the sale of units
within that project only.



   E.   Large Events (bazaars, festivals, carnivals, fairs, circuses,
concerts & similar outdoor gatherings with the total anticipated assembly of
3,000 or more people and duration of two or more days per calendar year on an
individual parcel or site).  The following information is required as part
of the application process a minimum of 30 days prior to the planned event:



      1.   Anticipated attendance, including previous attendance
figures;



      2.   Anticipated number of days needed to prepare location for
use;



      3.   Means of activity containment (i.e. fencing, security,
etc.);



      4.   Event security, crowd control and traffic safety
measures. Provisions for these must be approved by the Lillington Police
Department;



      5.   Location of temporary signage;



      6.   Existing land uses of all adjacent properties;



      7.   Location of restroom facilities;



      8.   Method and location of garbage impoundment and means of
removal;



      9.   Location and method of site lighting;



      10.   Adequate access for emergency vehicles;



      11.   Applicant is responsible for obtaining all other
applicable permits, such as building permits, ABC licenses, and health
department approval. Proof of application for these permits must be submitted
with the zoning permit application.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 3.12  Satellite Dish Antennas – Supplemental Use Standards



   A.   The provisions of this section shall apply to satellite dish
antennas that are greater than 24 inches in diameter.



   B.   Only one satellite dish antenna shall be allowed per premises,
except for display models as provided in this section.



   C.   In RR and RS20 zoning districts, a ground-mounted satellite
dish antenna may be installed only in a side or rear yard and shall not be
located within any required building setback.



   D.   In all nonresidential zoning districts:



      1.   A satellite dish antenna may be installed at any location
on the Lot except within ten feet of either a public street right-of-way or a
side or rear yard Lot line that abuts a residentially zoned district.



      2.   A satellite dish antenna may be installed on the roof of
the Principal Structure provided it is anchored to a rafter, girder or other
superstructure member of the building so as to be structurally secure.



   E.   A dish antenna shall be permanently ground or roof mounted
(where permitted) and no antenna shall be installed on a portable or moveable
structure except to transport an antenna to a permanent site or to provide a
temporary on-site antenna for testing purposes not to exceed seven days in
duration.



   F.   A dish antenna shall be painted with a dull, non-glossy finish.
No lettering, numerals or pattern shall be permitted on the dish surface
other than the name of the manufacturer in letters not to exceed six inches
in height.



   G.   No antenna shall exceed an overall diameter of 12 feet or an
overall height of 17 feet above existing grade when located on the ground.



   H.   When located on the roof of a building in a non-residential
district, no antenna shall exceed the building height limitation for the
district in which it is located by more than ten feet.



   I.   Inoperative satellite dish antennas, not to exceed two in
number, may be stored outside of commercial establishments in districts in
which satellite dish retail sales are permitted.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Article IV.
DESIGN STANDARDS



Section 4.01  Generally



   The standards in this article are intended to be minimum standards for
development.  Higher standards or relief from standards may be established
through the procedures in Article III and Article VII.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 4.02  Basic Development Standards



   4.02.1   HEIGHT



   A.   Other than the provisions listed in this section, buildings and
structures shall not exceed the maximum heights established in Article II of
this ordinance.



   B.   The height of a building is the vertical distance measured from
the mean elevation of finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the building.



   C.   A story includes any floor above the mean elevation of finished
grade at the front of the building. Where floor levels are staggered, the
number of stories is the number of floors counting vertically from the point
of the mean elevation of finished grade at the building front.



   D.   Roofs with slopes greater than 75% are regarded as walls.



   E.   Chimneys, church spires, water tanks, elevator shafts, scenery
lofts and similar structural appendages not intended as places of occupancy
are exempt from the height limitation set forth in this section, provided
that not more than one-third of the roof area is covered by such structures.



   F.   Heating and air conditioning equipment, solar collectors and
similar equipment, fixtures and devices are exempt from the height limitation
set forth in this section, provided that they are set back from the edge of
the roof a minimum distance of one foot for every foot the feature extends
above the roof surface. Screen or parapet walls shall be constructed to the
height of any fixture taller than three feet in height that would be visible
from a street or residential property abutting the property.



   G.   The height requirements for wireless telecommunications towers
& facilities are provided in Article II & III of this ordinance.



   H.   Light standard heights shall not exceed the limits established
in Section 4.06 of this ordinance.



   I.   Flagpoles and similar devices shall be limited to 35 feet in
height.



   4.02.2   SETBACKS



   A.   Setbacks Required. No portion of any building, excluding eaves,
decks, patios, steps and uncovered porches may be located on any lot closer
to any lot line or to the street right-of-way line than is authorized in
Article II of this ordinance.  All setbacks are expressed in feet and are
minimum setbacks unless otherwise noted. Additional setbacks may be required
to meet parking, landscaping, buffers or other standards specified in this
article, the specific use standards of Article III of this UDO.



   B.   Allowed Setback Encroachments.  A step, stoop, open porch,
awnings or other appurtenances may extend up to five feet into the front
setback, provided such features do not impede pedestrian circulation or
extend more than 25% into the minimum setback.



   C.   Setback Measurement



      1.   Setback distances shall be measured from the property
line or street right-of-way line to a point on the lot that is directly below
the nearest extension of any part of the building that is substantially a
part of the building itself and not a mere appendage to it (such as a
flagpole, etc.).



      2.   If the street right-of-way line is readily determinable
(by reference to a recorded map, set irons, or other means), the setback
shall be measured at a right angle to such right-of-way line. If the
right-of-way line is not so determinable, the setback shall be measured from
the street centerline.



   D.   All setbacks are subject to compliance with adopted applicable
fire code provisions.



   4.02.3   RELATIONSHIP OF BUILDING TO LOT



   In no case shall there be more than one principal building and its
customary accessory buildings on a lot except in the case of a designed
complex of professional, residential or commercial buildings in an
appropriate zoning district.



   4.02.4   STREET ACCESS



   No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut a street or
have access to a street, provided that in a planned development, a building
may be erected adjoining a parking area or dedicated open space which has
access to a street used in common with other lots.



   4.02.5   INFILL LOT STANDARDS



   The minimum front or street yard required may be reduced for any lot
where the average established front yard on developed lots located within 300
feet on each side of such lot, and fronting on the same street as such lot,
is less than the minimum required yard. In such cases, the minimum front or
street yard may be less than that required but not less than the average of
the existing front yards on the developed lots within 300 feet of each side.
In addition, for new lots created from existing larger lots, the lot width at
the frontage line and the side yard setbacks shall be consistent with the
immediately adjacent neighboring parcels on the same side of the street.



   4.02.6   IRREGULAR LOT SETBACKS



   The location of required front, side and rear yards (or setbacks) on
irregularly shaped lots shall be determined by the Administrator. The
determination will be based on the intent and purpose of this ordinance to
achieve an appropriate spacing and location of buildings and buildings on
individual lots. Where questions arise as to appropriateness, the subdivider
may be requested to provide additional design information.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 4.03  Fences & Walls



   All fences and walls shall comply with the requirements of this section
unless specifically approved as part of a conditional zoning, conditional use
permit or variance.



   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, fences that are
no taller than six feet may be built along interior side and rear property
lines.



   B.   Exterior side yard fences that are no taller than six feet
shall be at least two feet from the right-of-way and no closer than two feet
from the inside edge of the sidewalk.



   C.   Fences in front yards are discouraged, but must be:



      1.   Located least two feet from the right-of-way and no
closer than two feet from the inside edge of the sidewalk;



      2.   Less than 60% opaque;



      3.   Be designed as picket or wrought-iron style fences (chain
link and chicken wire are prohibited); and



      4.   Not exceed four feet in height, except that wrought iron
and split rail style fences may be up to five feet tall.



   D.   No fence shall obstruct any traffic safety visibility zone.



   E.   Barbed wire, razor wire or other fence materials designed to
cut or puncture are prohibited in all districts, except in the LI, HI and FRO
Districts.



   F.   Deer fences may be erected around gardens provided that the
fences are located at least ten feet from the nearest property line.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 4.04  Parking and Loading



   4.04.1   PURPOSE AND INTENT



   This section establishes the minimum requirements for the number of
spaces and the design of parking areas in the Town of Lillington. This
section provides administrative flexibility for the Administrator to adjust
the number of required spaces and the design of spaces to provide for
adequate parking, accommodate unique site conditions and capitalize on the
benefits of parking opportunities on-street or in shared parking areas.



   4.04.2   APPLICABILITY



   The requirements of this section shall be applicable to all new
development and changes of use that create the need for parking or increase
existing parking demands.



   4.04.3   PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS



   Permanent off-street parking (including on-street parking in accordance
with the requirements below) is required subject to the table below. If
required, parking shall be provided at the time of erection, alteration,
enlargement, establishment or change of use of any building or open use of
land which require additional off-street parking.



 

LAND USE TYPE
 
MINIMUM REQUIRED AUTO SPACES
 
MINIMUM REQUIRED BICYCLE PARKING SPACES




RESIDENTIAL:


Dwelling – Single-family & Two Family
 
1 per unit or 2 per unit if parking is provided in an enclosed garage
 
N/A


Dwelling – Multifamily
 
1.5 per unit
 
2 per 50 auto spaces


Dwelling – Accessory
 
1 per unit
 
N/A


Live-Work Units
 
1 per 700 sf
 
1 per 40 auto spaces


Residential Care Facilities
 
1 per 2 resident rooms
 
1 per 40 auto spaces


All other residential uses
 
No requirement
 
No requirement


LODGING AND ACCOMMODATIONS:


All uses
 
1 per room
 
1 per 50 auto spaces


OFFICE AND SERVICES:


Medical Clinic
 
1 per examination room
 
1 per 50 auto spaces


All other Office & Service Uses
 
1 per 700 sf
 
1 per 50 auto spaces


COMMERCIAL AND ENTERTAINMENT:


Restaurant
 
1 per 400 sf
 
2 per 50 auto spaces


Indoor Amusement
 
No requirement
 
2 per 50 auto spaces


Outdoor Amusement
 
No requirement
 
2 per 50 auto spaces


Theater (Indoor or Outdoor)
 
1 per 8 seats
 
2 per 50 auto spaces


All other Commercial and Entertainment Uses
 
1 per 500 sf
 
2 per 50 auto spaces


MANUFACTURING, INDUSTRIAL AND WHOLESALE TRADE:


All uses
 
No requirement
 
No requirement


EDUCATION & INSTITUTIONS:


Child/Adult Day Care Centers (more than 8 persons)
 
1 space per classroom
 
1 per 50 auto spaces


Religious Institutions
 
1 per 8 seats in main assembly hall
 
1 per 50 auto spaces


Schools (elementary & secondary)
 
1 per 8 seats in main assembly hall or gymnasium
 
2 per 50 auto spaces


Studio
 
1 per 400 sf
 
1 per 20 auto spaces


All other Education and Institution uses
 
No requirement
 
1 per 50 auto spaces


AGRICULTURAL AND FORESTRY:


All uses
 
No requirements
 
No requirements


COMMUNICATIONS, TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE:


All uses
 
No requirement
 
No requirements




 



   4.04.4    EXEMPTIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS



   A.   Exemptions.  Uses in the CB District are exempt from the
minimum parking requirements of this section.



   B.   Tree Preservation.  The minimum number of parking spaces
required may be adjusted by the Administrator when it has been determined
that the reductions are necessary to preserve a healthy tree or trees (with a
12 inch or greater diameter at breast height) from being damaged or removed,
and where the site plan provides for the retention of said tree or trees.



   4.04.5   SATELLITE PARKING



   A.   If the off-street parking spaces required by this section
cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is
located, such space may be provided on any land within 600 feet. Such
measurement shall be taken from the edge of the parking area on the lot to
the entryway of the remote parking area.



   B.   Shared Satellite Parking: Upon approval by the Administrator,
satellite parking facilities may be shared by two or more uses which do not
share normal operating hours.



   C.   Parking for Permitted Uses Only: If satellite parking is
utilized to fulfill parking requirements, the owner or authorized agent for
the land upon which such remote parking is located shall restrict the use of
such parking area for parking only in connection with the use(s) or
structure(s) for which such remote parking is provided. Such restriction
shall be recorded through an easements plat properly filed with the Register
of Deeds of Harnett County, which may be released only by written consent of
the town. Remote parking for a particular use shall not be established in any
district that does not allow that use.



   4.04.6   VEHICLE DESIGN STANDARDS



   A.   Parking Area General Design Standards



      1.   Parking areas shall be maintained to provide for vehicle
access and shall be kept free of litter, debris, outdoor display and sales
and material storage, including portable containers.



      2.   Parking for service vehicles shall be designated, located
and screened to minimize the view from adjacent properties and rights-of-way,
generally at the rear of buildings.



         Parking areas shall be located and designed to avoid undue
interference with the use of public rights-of-way, driveways or pedestrian
ways. Parking stalls shall not be located in areas that would require backing
into access driveways or streets except where allowed for residences.



      3.   Parking design and location shall be in accordance with
the Lillington Specifications Manual and at minimum shall the following
minimum dimensions:



 

Angle (Degree)
 
Stall Width
 
Curb Length per vehicle
 
Stall Depth





0

 

8'

 

23'

 

8'




20

 

8'

 

23.5'

 

14'




30

 

8'

 

16'

 

16.5'




45

 

8'

 

11.5'

 

19.5'




60

 

8'

 

9.5'

 

20.5'




70

 

8'

 

8.5'

 

20.5'




90

 

8'

 

8'

 

20'





 



      4.   Parking stalls shall be located a minimum of ten feet
from public rights-of-way and buildings to allow sufficient separation for
sidewalks, landscaping and other site features except along the backs of
buildings in areas designed for loading and unloading.



      5.   Parking shall not be located in landscaped, open space or
tree save areas.



      6.   Vehicle storage or display areas shall be identified on a
site plan distinct from customer and employee parking areas and shall comply
with parking access, location and design requirements, except that striping
of the display or storage area shall not be required. Vehicle storage or
display areas shall not be located in a manner that interferes with vehicle
or pedestrian access aisles or driveways.



      7.   Tractor trailers, cargo trucks, busses and other large
commercial vehicles or heavy equipment parking and storage shall comply with
parking access, location and design requirements except for stall size and
aisle size which shall be as appropriate for the vehicles to be stored and
shall be designated on a site plan.



   B.   Surfacing



   Off-street parking areas shall be properly graded, marked and located
on improved lots or within parking structures. The material for surface
parking spaces and corresponding access drives required by this section,
except for single-family detached and duplex residences, shall consist of
suitable material as set forth below.



      1.   Suitable Materials: Suitable paving materials for
required parking areas include, but are not limited to, asphalt, porous
asphalt, porous paving blocks, and concrete. Compacted stone (road bond) and
gravel are permitted as paving materials in the rear setback area for loading
and service areas.



      2.   Accessible Spaces: All accessible spaces and
corresponding access paths shall consist of concrete or asphalt.



      3.   Gravel: When gravel is used it must be maintained on site
with a concrete apron at the traveled way.



      4.   Pervious Surfaces: Porous paving blocks and pervious
paving materials are permitted and encouraged as material for parking lots.
The use of reinforced grass as a parking lot surface is permitted for
satellite parking areas.



      5.   Parking Space Marking: The individual parking spaces in a
lot shall be delineated in all parking lots except those utilizing road bond,
gravel, grass or other vegetative surfacing.



   C.   Connectivity



      1.   Adjoining parking lots serving (or potentially serving)
non-residential or multifamily uses shall be interconnected as follows:



         a.   The parking lot under development has a minimum of
24 parking spaces or equivalent parking area.



         b.   At least one connection is provided at all lot
lines that are coincident for at least 60 feet with another lot zoned for
non-residential use.



         c.   The connection is at least 20 feet wide.



         d.   If applicable, the connection aligns with a
connection that has been previously constructed on an adjacent property.



         e.   The connection has a slope of no greater than 15%.



         f.   The connection is not placed where a building on an
adjacent property is within 50 feet of the lot line which would hamper
traffic movements within the parking lot.



         g.   The connection is placed in an area which will not
require the removal of significant natural features such as wetlands or trees
with a caliper of six inches or more.



         h.   In the event these conditions cannot be met without
undue hardship, or if such connections would create undesirable traffic flow,
the Administrator may waive the connection requirement.



         i.   Where a parking lot connection is required an
easement for ingress and egress to adjacent lots shall be recorded by the
property owner with the Harnett County Register of Deeds in the form of an
easement plat.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 4.05  Signs



   4.05.1   PURPOSE AND INTENT



   Sign regulations are established to restrict private signs and lights
which overload the public's capacity to receive information, which violate
privacy, or which increase the probability of accidents by distracting
attention or obstructing vision. Such regulations are also designed to
encourage signing and lighting and other private communications which aid
orientation and identify activities, to protect and enhance the overall
appearance of the community, and to reduce conflict among private signs and
lighting and between the private and the public information systems.



   4.05.2   APPLICABILITY



   All signs within the town's jurisdiction shall be covered by these
regulations and be erected, constructed or maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this section.



   4.05.3   PERMITS REQUIRED



   A.   Except as provided otherwise in this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or replace any
sign without first obtaining a permit, in accordance with this ordinance,
from the Administrator to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance.



   B.   Additional permits may be necessary pursuant to the regulations
in the State Building Code or other sections of this ordinance.



   4.05.4   ALTERATION OF SIGN FACE



   Cleaning, electrical repair, resurfacing and other maintenance of a
sign shall not require a permit. The changing of tenant name panels on
multiple-tenant development signage and the change of copy on other signs
specifically designed for changeable copy shall not require a permit.



   4.05.5   COMPUTATION OF SIGN AREA







 



   A.   The area of a sign face shall be deemed to be the entire area
within the smallest polygon that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem or other display on the sign that can be
reasonably calculated.



   B.   The area shall also include any material or color forming an
integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the
sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed.



   C.   Frames or structural members not bearing informational or
representational matter shall not be included in computation of the area of a
sign face. Computations of sign area shall include only one side of a
double-faced sign structure. If a sign has two sides joined at an angle
greater than 60 degrees, the surface of both sides shall be included in the
computation of area.



   4.05.6   COMPUTATION OF HEIGHT



   A.   Attached signs. The sign height for attached signs shall be
computed as the distance from the finished grade at the base of the building
to which the sign is attached to the top of the highest component of the sign.



   B.   Ground (freestanding) signs. As illustrated below, the sign
height for ground signs shall be computed as the lesser of:



      1.   The distance from the base of the sign at the finished
grade to the top of the highest component of the sign; or



      2.   The distance from the nearest adjacent street grade to
which the sign is oriented, and on which the lot has frontage, to the top of
the highest component of the sign.







 



   4.05.7    LOCATION AND ENCRO ACHMENT



   A.   Permitted signs shall be located outside of the street
right-of-way, behind sidewalk areas and outside of required site triangles.



   B.   All attached signs shall be mounted and attached to buildings
in a secure manner, shall not include wire or turnbuckle guy and shall be
maintained in good repair for safety and appearance.



   C.   No non-governmental sign shall be attached to or painted on
power poles, light poles, telephone poles, traffic signs or other objects not
intended to support a sign.



   4.05.8   MATERIALS AND STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS



   A.   All attached signs and sign support frames shall be mounted and
attached to building or ground in a secure manner, shall not include wire or
turnbuckle guy and shall be maintained in good repair for safety and
appearance.



   B.   All permanently installed signs shall be able to resist normal
loads from positive and negative wind pressure, snow and other conditions as
required by the current edition of the North Carolina version of the
International Building Code.



   C.   The Administrator reserves the right to require sign load
calculations and attachment design from a state licensed structural engineer,
and to require same engineer to certify the sign installation in writing.



   4.05.9   NONCONFORMING SIGNS



   See Section 8.07.



   4.05.10   SIGNAGE TYPES



   Signage types illustrated below are approved for usage in the town:



 

Wall Signs
 



Awning/Canopy/Window/Door Signs
 



Projecting/Suspended Signs
 



Monument Signs
 



Pole Signs
 




 



   4.05.11      ATTACHED SIGNAGE STANDARDS



 

Sign Type
 
Zoning District
 
Square Footage
 
Height
 
Total Number


Wall Signs
 
CB, GB, NB, NMX, O/S, LI, HI
 
10% of the gross square footage on any one side of the building.
 
No sign shall extend above the roofline.
 
4 signs per building wall.


Awning / Canopy / Window / Door Signs
 
CB, GB, NB, NMX
 
25% of the gross glass area on any one side of the building (windows/doors),
50% of area for awnings/ canopies).
 
No sign shall extend above the roofline.
 
N/A


Projecting / Suspended Signs
 
CB, GB, NB, NMX
 
6 square feet
 
Shall be at least 7 feet from the ground measured from the bottom of the sign.
 
One per tenant.


Notes: Wall signs shall have a max. protrusion of 12 inches, may only be
placed on walls facing a public right-of-way.  No illumination for
awning/canopy/window/door signs or projecting/suspended signs is permitted.



 



   4.05.12      RESIDENTIAL GROUND SIGNAGE STANDARDS



 

Zoning District
 
Square Footage
 
Height
 
Total Number


RR, RS20, RS10, RMF, RMX
 
20 square feet
 
5 feet
 
1 per entrance


Notes:

1) Signs are permitted on decorative or retaining walls at entrances to
residential developments without limitations to the size of the wall. 

2) 5-foot minimum setback from all property lines is required for all ground
signs.



 



   4.05.13      NONRESIDENTIAL GROUND SIGNAGE STANDARDS



 

Zoning District
 
Square Footage
 
Height
 
Sign Base
 
Total Number of Signs


CB
 
20 square feet
 
5'
 
Monument
 
1 sign per site


O/S
 
20 square feet
 
5'
 
Monument
 
1 sign per site


NB
 
20 square feet
 
12'
 
Monument or pole
 
1 sign per street frontage


GB, LI, HI
 
40 square feet
 
12'
 
Monument or pole
 
1 sign per street frontage


Notes:

1) Pole may be single or double pole mounted and must have a diameter between
12 inches and 24 inches.

2) Monument signs must have a base that is at least 75% of the width of the
total sign.

3) Monument signs must have a base material of brick, stone or like imitation
material.

4) 5-foot min. setback from all property lines is require for all ground
signs.



 



   4.05.14      PERMITTED SIGNAGE ILLUMINATION BY DISTRICT



 

Zoning District
 
External Illumination
 
Internal Illumination


RR, RS10, RS20, O/S, NMX, RMX, RMF
 
 
Not Permitted.


NMX, CB, NC, GB, LI, HI
 
 


Notes:

1) Prohibited lighting: no flashing or intermittent illumination shall be
permitted on any adverting sign or structure.

2) Shielding required: any indirect lighting or spot lighting shall require
complete shielding of all light sources so as to illuminate only the face of
the sign and prevent off-site glare.

3) White light only is permitted.



 



   4.05.15      OTHER SIGNAGE REQUIRING PERMITS



   A.   Construction project signs:



      1.   Permitted districts: all districts.



      2.   Surface area: 32 square feet maximum.



      3.   Time limit: these signs are intended to be temporary and
must be removed after completion of construction.



   B.   Sales office signs:



      1.   Permitted districts: all residential districts, only on
model home lots used as sales offices for single-family residential
subdivisions.



      2.   Surface area: 32 square feet maximum.



      3.   Time limit: these signs are intended to be temporary and
must be removed after 50% of the lots in the current phase of the development
are sold.



   C.   Electronic message boards:



      1.   Permitted districts: NB, GB.



      2.   Surface area: electronic message boards may be
incorporated into a permitted ground sign only, and shall not comprise more
than 50% of the primary sign area.



      3.   Message variation: the electronic message shall not
change in increments of less than 30 seconds and shall not scroll. New
messages shall be timed to fade in and out slowly.



   D.   Drive-thru menu boards:



      1.   Permitted districts: GB, NB, CB.



      2.   Location/placement: menu boards shall be allowed only as
an accessory use to a restaurant having a drive-through window.



      3.   Surface area: 35 square feet maximum.



      4.   Height: six feet maximum.



   4.05.16.   GROUND SIGNAGE STANDARDS FOR SITES WITH MULTIPLE BUILDINGS



   All ground signage for developments with multiple buildings, including
large commercial centers, malls, business parks and industrial parks, are
subject to these provisions:



   A.   Ground signs may be a maximum of 12 feet in height and 100
square feet in sign area.



   B.   Planned developments may have one ground sign per road frontage.



   C.   Outparcels for planned developments may have one ground sign
that is a maximum of four feet in height and 35 square feet in sign area.



   4.05.17      SIGNS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS



   A.   Governmental signs.  Signs posted by various local, state and
federal agencies in the performance of their duties such as regulatory signs,
welcome signs and traffic signs. Signs installed under governmental authority
which note the donation of buildings, structures or streetscape materials
(such as, but not limited to benches, park facilities and the like).



   B.   Flags and the like. Flags or insignia of any nation,
organization of nations, state, county or municipality, any religious, civic
or fraternal organization, or any educational or cultural facility per lot
provided the height of any pole shall not exceed the maximum building height
for the district. Refer also to the United States Flag Code for usage of the
United States flag.



   C.   Temporary holiday decorations. Temporary decorations or
displays, when such are clearly incidental to and are customarily and
commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday/celebration.



   D.   Building marker signs. A sign cut or etched into masonry,
bronze or similar material on a building which denotes only the building
name, date of erection or street number.



   E.   Legal and warning signs. Signs erected to warn of danger or
hazardous conditions such as signs erected by public utility companies or
construction companies.



      1.   Signs required for or specifically authorized for a
public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance.



      2.   Signs that display information pertinent to the safety or
legal responsibilities of the general public with regard to a particular
piece of property shall be located on the premises to which the information
pertains. No advertising may be affixed to such a sign.



   F.   Occupant/street number signs. Signs not exceeding two square
feet and not illuminated, bearing property numbers, post office box numbers,
names of occupants or other identification of premises not having commercial
connotations.



      1.   All such signs must be placed in such a manner as to be
visible from the street.



      2.   Unit identification numbers shall be located on the front
wall within 18 inches of the entrance, or if not feasible architecturally,
prominently displayed on the building. Unit numbers for residential dwellings
only may, in lieu of being located on the front wall, be located on the mail
boxes or similar-sized surface attached thereto. Multi-family and other
residential facilities which are comprised of courts or units not fronting a
public street must be located on identification signs containing the name of
the court, street or way and the unit numbers on each private entrance.



   G.   Vending machine/automatic teller and gasoline pump signs. Signs
attached to and made an integral part of a vending machine, automatic teller
machine or gasoline pump if advertising or giving information about the
products or services dispensed or vended by that machine.



   H.   Directional signs on private property. Directional signs must
be located on the premises to which directions are indicated.



      1.   Such signs may not exceed three feet in height if
freestanding.



      2.   Directional signs may not exceed four square feet per
face.



      3.   Such signs may contain no copy (such as, company name or
logo) other than directional information.



      4.   Illumination of such signs shall be as permitted for
on-premises signs in the land development district where the sign is located.



      5.   No more than two signs per entrance or exit shall be
permitted.



   I.   Gas pump island signs. Portable signs associated with gasoline
stations, specifically those denoting gasoline prices, gas types and other
petroleum related signage. Such signs must be located at the pump island.



   J.   Incidental signs. Signs containing information necessary or
convenient for persons coming onto a premises shall be located on the
premises to which the information pertains.



      1.   No advertising may be affixed to such a sign.



      2.   Such signs must be single-faced only and wholly attached
to a building (may be located on windows or doors).



   K.   Real estate signs. Only one sign is allowed per street frontage.



      1.   Such signs may not be illuminated.



      2.   Such signs may be no greater than four square feet in
area (all types of signs) and four feet in height (if freestanding) when
located on a residential property less than two acres.



      3.   Such signs may be no greater than 16 square feet in area
(all types of signs) and eight feet in height (if freestanding) for
non-residential properties or residential properties exceeding two acres.



      4.   Real estate signs shall be removed within one day after
the closing of the sale, rental or lease of the property.



      5.   Such signs shall only be located on property for sale or
lease.



   L.   Political signs. Political signs shall not be located on any
trees, utility poles, publicly-owned property or within a public street
right-of-way, except within NCDOT right-of-way according to the standards of
G.S. § 136-32.



      1.   Such signs shall not be illuminated.



      2.   Such signs may not exceed four square feet in area and
four feet in height, if freestanding.



      3.   Political signs may be displayed during a period
beginning with the established filing date for an election and concluding 15
days after the election. In the event of a runoff election, political signs
for the candidates involved may remain on display until 15 days after the
runoff election.



   M.   Temporary signs; special event signs. Signs may be erected by
public or non-profit organizations such as schools and churches for promoting
special events as follows:



      1.   Signs for public events such as fund drives, fairs,
festivals, sporting events, and the like may be displayed for a period of 30
days and may be allowed on- or off-premises. Such signs shall be removed
within seven days of the end of the special event.



      2.   Such signs shall not be illuminated.



      3.   Such signs are limited to 32 square feet in area per
display surface and four feet in height.



   N.   Yard sale signs. Such signs may be located on-premises only and
may not be located within a public right-of-way nor placed on a tree, street
sign or utility pole.



      1.   Such signs may not be illuminated.



      2.   Yard sale signs are limited to four square feet in area
and four feet in height.



      3.   One yard sale sign is allowed per street frontage.



      4.   Such signs must be removed within seven days of erection.



   O.   New businesses and promotional signs. Temporary or portable
signs may be permitted in the NB, CB, GB and O/S Districts for a period of
not over 30 days per calendar year per business and to any person(s) or
corporation that has opened a new business. New business and promotional
signs includes pennants, ribbons, streamers, balloons and/or spinners.



   P.   One "open business" sign per business.



      1.   May have a neon light source.



      2.   Permitted districts: CB, NB & GB.



      3.   Not exceeding 15 watts and two square feet.



   4.05.18      PROHIBITED SIGNS



   A.   Off-premises signs. All off-premises signs unless specifically
allowed elsewhere in this ordinance are prohibited.



   B.   Animated/flashing signs or signs of illusion. Except for
otherwise approved time and temperature signs, signs displaying blinking,
flashing or intermittent lights, animation, and moving parts or signs giving
the illusion of movement are prohibited. Time and temperature signs that
rotate or move are not permitted.



   C.   Signs resembling official signs. Any sign that imitates an
official governmental sign, or violates the law of the state relating to
outdoor advertising, is prohibited.



   D.   Signs resembling traffic signals. Any sign which by color,
location or nature may be confused with official highway signs, warning
signs, traffic signals or other regulatory devices are prohibited.



      1.   Any sign that uses the word "stop", "slow", "caution",
"danger", or any other word which is likely to be confused with traffic
directional and regulatory signs is prohibited.



      2.   Any sign located in a manner or place which might
constitute a traffic hazard is prohibited.



   E.   Signs on roadside appurtenances. Signs attached to or painted
on utility poles, telephone poles, trees, parking meters, bridges and
overpasses, rocks, other signs, benches and refuse containers, and the like
are prohibited unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this ordinance.



   F.   Abandoned signs or sign structures. Signs that advertise an
activity or business no longer conducted on the property on which the sign is
located are prohibited. Conforming signs designed for changeable copy may be
covered instead of removed.



      1.   Sign structures on which no sign is erected are
prohibited.



      2.   Such signs or sign structures must be removed within 30
days of becoming an abandoned sign or sign structure.



   G.   Signs obstructing access. Any sign that obstructs free ingress
or egress from a driveway or a required window, door, fire escape, stairway,
ladder or other required opening is prohibited.



   H.   Signs with exposed electrical wiring. All wiring shall be
contained in conduit or enclosed in poles or raceways. In no case shall the
wiring be exposed to the public.



   I.   Signs on public property. Any sign installed or placed on
public property or within a public right-of-way, including any sign held by
or otherwise displayed upon a person. Such sign shall be forfeited to the
public and is subject to confiscation and disposal. In addition to other
remedies hereunder, the Administrator shall have the right to recover from
the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and
disposal of such sign.



   4.05.19      MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS



   Signs shall be kept in proper repair. The following maintenance
requirements must be observed for all signs visible from any public street or
highway within the jurisdiction of the town.



   A.   Surface appearance. No sign shall have more than 20% of its
surface area covered with disfigured, cracked, ripped or peeling paint or
poster paper for a period of more than 30 successive days.



   B.   Broken displays. No sign shall remain with a bent or broken
display area, broken supports, loose appendages or struts or stand more than
15 degrees from the perpendicular for a period of more than 30 successive
days.



   C.   Illuminated signs. No indirect or internally illuminated sign
shall have only partial illumination for a period of more than 30 successive
days.



   4.05.20      INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT



   All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection
by the town. A representative of the town shall be authorized to enter at all
reasonable times upon any property or premises to ascertain whether the
provisions of the code are being obeyed. The town may order the removal of
any sign that is not in accordance with the provisions of the code.



   4.05.21      SUBSTANDARD SIGNS



   A.   The owners of any sign judged substandard by the Administrator
shall be notified in writing and the said owner shall have 30 days in which
to make repairs. If the said order is not complied with within 30 days, the
Administrator shall remove such sign at the expense of the owner or lessee
thereof plus all legal and administrative fees.



   B.   Any sign installed or placed on public property or within a
public right-of-way shall be forfeited to the public and is subject to
confiscation and disposal. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the
Administrator shall have the right to recover from the owner or person
placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign.



   4.05.22      SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALLOWANCE, REMOVAL, RELOCATION,
RECONSTRUCTION OF NONCONFORMING OFF-PREMISE ADVERTISING SIGNS



   A.   New signs limited. No new outdoor advertising signs shall be
permitted in the town except for outdoor advertising signs that are removed,
relocated, or reconstructed pursuant to the requirements of this section.



   B.   Qualified signs. A sign with an existing valid permit from the
State Department of Transportation and the town. A sign may also qualify if
erected prior to applicable zoning regulations.



   C.   Removal/replacement/reconstruction. Any relocated and/or
reconstructed qualified sign shall comply with the following standards:



      1.   The total number of relocated and/or reconstructed signs
shall not exceed the number of qualified sign structures and sign faces that
are registered as qualified signs.



      2.   No outdoor advertising sign shall exhibit a face panel
size greater than 300 square feet per side or the size of the face panel
being relocated and/or reconstructed, whichever is smaller.



      3.   A relocated and/or reconstructed qualified sign shall be
set back no less than ten feet from the edge of the right-of-way.



      4.   A relocated and/or reconstructed qualified sign shall not
exceed 40 feet in height or the existing height, whichever is shorter.



      5.   A relocated and/or reconstructed qualified sign shall be
a monopole sign. Replaced signs shall not be attached to any building. A
relocated and/or reconstructed sign is limited to only have one face per side.



      6.   Light emitted from any reconstructed qualified sign shall
be confined to the sign area and in no case shall light emitted from a
billboard be allowed to shine directly onto or into a residentially zoned or
used property.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 4.06  Lighting



   The provisions contained in this section shall be known and may be
cited as the Lillington Lighting Code.



   4.06.1   PURPOSE



   The standards set forth in this section are designed to focus on the
actual physical effects of lighting, as well as the effect that lighting may
have on the surrounding neighborhood. It is the intent of this section to:



   A.   Minimize light pollution, such as glare and light trespass.



   B.   Conserve energy and resources.



   C.   Maintain night-time safety and utility.



   D.   Improve the night-time visual environment.



   4.06.2   APPLICABILITY



   All applications for site plan review, conditional use, subdivision
and/or building permits shall include lighting plans showing location, type,
height and lumen output of all proposed and existing fixtures. The applicant
shall provide enough information to verify that lighting conforms to the
provisions of this lighting code. The Administrator shall have the authority
to request additional information in order to achieve the purposes of this
Lighting Code.



   4.06.3   PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS



   A.   Prohibitions.  The following lighting types shall be
prohibited:



      1.   The use of laser source light or any similar high
intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment is prohibited.



      2.   The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is
prohibited.



      3.   Site lighting that may be confused with warning,
emergency, or traffic signals is prohibited.



      4.   Lights that flash, move, revolve, rotate, scintillate,
blink, flicker, vary in intensity or color, or use intermittent electrical
pulsation are prohibited.



      5.   Awnings and canopies used for building accents over
doors, windows, and etc. shall not be internally lit (i.e. from underneath or
behind) so as to visually turn a translucent material into an internally
illuminated material. Lighting may be installed under canopies that light the
sidewalk, or downlights onto the architectural features of a building.



   B.   Exemptions.  The following exemptions shall be granted from
the requirements of this section:



      1.   Luminaires used for public-roadway illumination may be
installed at a maximum height of 37 feet and may be positioned at that height
up to the edge of any bordering property.



      2.   All temporary emergency lighting needed by the Police or
Fire Departments or other emergency services, as well as all vehicular
luminaires, shall be exempt from the requirements of this ordinance.



      3.   All hazard warning luminaires required by federal
regulatory agencies are exempt from the requirements of this article, except
that all luminaires used must be red and must be shown to be as close as
possible to the federally required minimum lumen output requirement for the
specific task.



      4.   Individual residential lighting that is not part of a
site plan or subdivision plan for street or other common or public area
outdoor lighting.



      5.   Lighting associated with holiday, festival or other
temporary uses permitted in this ordinance.



      6.   Lighting of public art that has been permitted or
otherwise approved by the town.



      7.   Other municipal or state lighting installed for the
benefit of public health, safety, and welfare.



      8.   All fixtures installed or temporarily used by public
agencies, their agents, or contractors for the purpose of illuminating public
streets.



      9.   Lighting of US and North Carolina State Flags provided
the flag standard does not exceed the maximum permitted building height for
that district.



   4.06.4   GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS



   A.   Background spaces such as parking lots and driveways shall be
illuminated as unobtrusively as possible to meet the functional needs of safe
circulation and of protecting people and property.



   B.   Foreground spaces, such as building entrances and plaza seating
areas, shall utilize lighting that defines, highlights, or enhances the space
without glare.



   C.   The style of light standards and fixtures shall be consistent
with the style and character of architecture proposed on the site.



   D.   Light poles and fixtures shall be of a matte or low-gloss grey,
black, dark earthen, or bronze finish, unless permission is granted by the
Administrator for a special color scheme or theme.



   E.   Light sources must be compatible with the light produced by
surrounding uses and must produce an unobtrusive degree of brightness in both
illumination levels and color temperature.



   F.   Natural areas and natural features shall be protected from
light spillage from off-site sources.



   G.   All exterior lighting, on or off a building, shall be either
amber or white in color with the exception of low-light output (800 lumens or
lower) landscaping or other decorative lighting, signage lighting, or
customer entrance or service area lights aiming down and installed under a
canopy or similar roof structure.



   4.06.5   DISTRICT LIGHTING STANDARDS IN FOOTCANDLES



   A.   Maximum lighting levels shall adhere to the standards in the
chart below. All numerical values in the chart below represent measurements
in footcandles.



 

 
RR, RS20, RS10
 
RMF, RMX
 
NMX, O/S, CB, NB
 
GB, LI, HI


Light Trespass Off Property
 
0.1
 
0.3
 
0.8
 
1


Display/Canopy Area
 
8
 
12
 
20
 
20


Parking Areas
 
4
 
4
 
6
 
6


All other on-site Lighting
 
4
 
6
 
10
 
10



 



      1.   The values in the preceding chart for "All Other On-Site
Lighting" and "Display/Canopy Areas" shall represent the maximum point of
illuminance measured at grade in footcandles.



         a.   Exception: Outdoor display lots for vehicle sales
and leasing may exceed 20 foot-candles if outdoor white lighting is cut off,
leaving only security lighting that is amber in color (a temperature rating
equal to or less than 2,700 Kelvin), after closing or 11:00 p.m., whichever
comes earlier.



      2.   The values of the preceding chart for the "Light Trespass
Off Property" shall represent the maximum point of illuminance as measure at
the property line in footcandles.



         a.   Exception: In the case of buildings closer than ten
feet to the property line using only wall packs, light trespass may be
greater than one foot-candle as long as the wall packs are fully shielded to
direct the light downward, have a light output of 1,600 lumens or lower, and
the light source (lamp) is not visible from off-site.



      3.   The values of the preceding chart for "Parking Areas"
shall represent the average point of horizontal illuminance measured in
footcandles, provided that in all districts the maximum uniformity ratio
shall be 4:1 minimum to average.



   4.06.6   CONTROL OF GLARE



   A.   Pole light fixtures shall have a flat lens oriented
horizontally or have shields installed on each side of the fixture to hide
the lens.



   B.   Any luminaire shall be a full-cutoff type fixture.



   C.   Any luminaire shall be mounted at a height equal to or less
than 30 feet above finished grade.



   D.   The maximum mounting height of all outdoor lighting with a 90
or less degree cutoff fixture shall be 30 feet. The maximum mounting height
of all outdoor lighting without a full 90 degree or less cut-off fixture
shall be 16 feet. Poles may be mounted on a concrete pier of no more than
three feet in height.



   E.   Poles shall be matte or low-gloss finish to minimize glare from
the light source.



   F.   Other than floodlights, flood lamps, and spotlights all outdoor
lighting fixtures of more than 2,000 lumens shall be full-cutoff type
fixtures. Any fixture that is not full-cut off shall be a directional fixture
(such as flood lights) and may be used provided they shall be aimed and fully
shielded to prevent light spillage.



   G.   Exceptions.



      1.   Non-cutoff decorative post-mounted fixtures equipped with
a solid top and mounted 18 feet or less above ground and other non-cutoff
dusk to dawn utility type fixtures mounted 25 feet or less may be used. The
maximum initial lumens generated by each fixture shall not exceed 9,500
initial lamp lumens.



      2.   All metal halide, mercury vapor, fluorescent, and other
white-colored light source lamps used in non-cutoff fixtures (excluding flood
lights) shall be coated with an internal white frosting inside the outer lamp
envelope.



   4.06.7   SECURITY LIGHTING



   A.   Unshielded flood lights and spotlights, installed for security
and activated by motion sensor, are permitted. These unshielded lights must
be mounted and aimed in a manner that minimizes up-lighting and light
trespass.



   B.   All floodlights shall be installed such that the fixture shall
be aimed down at least 45 degrees from vertical. All flood or spot lamps
emitting 1,000 or more lumens shall be aimed at least 60 degrees down from
vertical or shielded such that the main beam from the light source is not
visible from adjacent properties or the public street right-of-way.



   C.   Flood lights and display lights shall be positioned such that
any such fixture located within 50 feet of a public street right-of-way is
mounted and aimed perpendicular to the right-of-way, with a side-to-side
horizontal aiming tolerance not to exceed 15 degrees from perpendicular to
the right-of-way.



   4.06.8   LANDSCAPE LIGHTING



   Landscape and decorative lighting using incandescent lighting with a
light output of 800 lumens or less is permitted, provided that the light is
installed and aimed to prevent lighting build up and light trespass and
shielded to prevent view from the public right- of-way.



   4.06.9   OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL LIGHTING



   Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility and their
limited hours of operation, ball fields, basketball courts, tennis courts,
outdoor performance areas and similar recreational uses are exempt from the
exterior lighting standards provided above. However, these uses shall adhere
to the requirements below.



   A.   Outdoor recreational lighting shall not exceed a maximum
permitted post height of 80 feet. The Administrator may set a shorter maximum
pole height if the specific recreational use does not require the taller pole.



   B.   Lights shall be shielded and positioned so as not to shine onto
adjacent roadways or properties.



   C.   All fixtures shall be fully shielded or be designed or provided
with Manufacturer's Glare Control Package, so as to minimize up-light,
spill-light, and glare.



   D.   Fixtures shall be designed and aimed so that their beams fall
within the primary playing area and the immediate surroundings, so that
off-site direct illumination is significantly restricted. The maximum
permitted illumination at the property or right-of-way line shall not exceed
two foot-candles and all lights, except for any amber color (a temperature
rating equal to or less than 2,700 Kelvin) security lights, shall be cut off
after use.



   4.06.10      STREET LIGHTING



   A.   Street lighting shall be placed on all streets to allow for the
safe use of streets by both cars and pedestrians. All street lighting shall
be placed in accordance with the policies of the Lillington Public Works
Department or the standards in the most recent edition of the Illumination
Engineering Society of North America, "Lighting Handbook."



   B.   Pedestrian scaled lighting (no taller than 18 feet) shall be
required in the NMX, CB, O/S, and NB Districts using decorative fixtures of a
similar character to those existing in these districts.



   C.   Pedestrian-scaled lighting (no taller than 18 feet) shall be
prioritized over automobile lighting in all districts. Lighting shall be
placed in a manner to limit the casting of shadows on sidewalks.



   D.   All street lights shall utilize a cutoff fixture. Where
buildings are close to the street (less than 15 feet from the right-of-way),
full cutoff fixtures are required to limit glare and light spillage on upper
levels.



   E.   Alleys are excluded from the spacing and lighting requirements
of this section.



   4.06.11      ADDITIONAL LIGHTING USE REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC
AREAS



   A.   Building Façade Lighting



      1.   Floodlights, spotlights, or any other similar lighting
shall not be used to illuminate buildings or other site features unless
approved as an integral architectural element on the development plan.



      2.   On-site lighting may be used to accent architectural
elements but not used to illuminate entire building(s).



      3.   Where accent lighting is used, the maximum illumination
on any vertical surface or angular roof surface shall not exceed 5.0 average
maintained footcandles.



      4.   Building façade and accent lighting will not be approved
unless the light fixtures are selected, located, aimed, and shielded so that
light is directed only onto the intended target and spillover light is
minimized.



      5.   Wall packs on buildings may be used at entrances to a
building to light unsafe areas, but must be fully shielded to direct the
light downward, must have a light output of 1,600 lumens or lower, and the
light source shall not be visible from off-site.



   B.   Outdoor Display Areas.  The mounting height of outdoor display
area fixtures shall not exceed 30 feet above finished grade.



   C.   Lighting for Vehicular Canopies.  Lighting under vehicular
canopies shall be designed so as not to create glare off-site. Acceptable
methods include one or more of the following:



      1.   Recessed fixture incorporating a lens cover that is
either recessed or flush with the bottom surface of the vehicular canopy.



      2.   Surface mounted fixture incorporating a flat lens that
provides a cutoff or shielded light distribution.



      3.   Other methods approved by the Administrator.



   4.06.12      COMPLIANCE



   A.   Lighting plans required as part of a site construction plan
shall include, at a minimum, the following information:



      1.   Point-by-point footcandle arrays in a printout format
indicating the location and aiming of illuminating devices. The printout
shall indicate compliance with the maximum maintained footcandles required by
this ordinance.



      2.   Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps,
supports, reflectors, poles, raised foundations and other devices (including
but not limited to manufacturers or electric utility catalog specification
sheets and/or drawings, and photometric report indicating fixture
classification [cutoff fixture, wall pack, flood light, etc.]).



      3.   After installation of on-site lighting, a certification
of compliance statement must be submitted to the Administrator prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



   B.   Subsequent phases of an entire development shall have a uniform
design plan for lighting and fixtures. New phases must meet all requirements
in effect at the time of obtaining a permit, but lighting plans must consider
preexisting lighting in earlier phases, both in design and intensity of light.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 4.07  Open Space Standards



   This section shall be referred to as the Lillington Open Space
Standards or open space standards.



   4.07.1   USABLE OPEN SPACE (PARK SPACE) REQUIRED



   A.   Except as provided in paragraph (G) of this section, every
residential development shall be developed so that at least 3% of the total
area of the development remains permanently as usable open space.



   B.   For purposes of this section, usable open space means an area
that:



      1.   Is not encumbered with any substantial structure;



      2.   Is not devoted to use as a roadway, parking area, or
sidewalk, provided, however that multi-use trails may be counted towards
required open space;



      3.   Reflects the character of the land as of the date
development began. Wooded areas shall be left in their natural or undisturbed
state except for the cutting of trails for walking, bicycling or jogging.
Areas not wooded shall be landscaped for open play fields, picnic areas or
similar facilities, or be properly vegetated and landscaped with the
objective of creating a wooded area or other area that is consistent with the
objectives of this section;



      4.   Is capable of being used and enjoyed for purposes of
informal and unstructured recreation and relaxation;



      5.   Is part of an independent lot shown on the plan as being
reserved for open space; and



      6.   Is legally and practicably accessible to the residents of
the development from which the required open space subdivided or to the
public if the open space is dedicated to the town.



   C.   Usable Open Space shall include:



 

Greenways: A natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. Its
landscape shall consist of paths and trails, meadows, waterbodies, woodland
and open shelters, all naturalistically disposed. Parks may be linear,
following the trajectories of natural corridors (greenways). The minimum size
shall be 2 acres (except greenways where there is no minimum).
 



Parks & Greens: An open space available for unstructured recreation. A green
may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. Its
landscape shall consist of lawn and trees, naturalistically disposed. For the
purposes of this section, standalone dog parks shall be considered a
variation of the green park type. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre.
 



Squares: An open space available for unstructured recreation and civic
purposes. A square is spatially defined by building frontages. Its landscape
shall consist of paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be
located at intersections. The minimum size shall be 1/4 acre and the maximum
shall be 2 acres.
 



Playgrounds: An open space designed and equipped for the recreation of
children. A playground may include an open shelter. Playgrounds shall be
interspersed within residential areas and may be placed within a block.
Playgrounds may be included within parks and greens. There shall be no
minimum or maximum size.
 




 



   D.   Credit for Proximity to Existing Park Space. Developments that
are proximate to an existing town-owned, publicly-accessible park space may
count all such lands in their park space dedication requirement up to 25% of
the required total, subject to the provisions below.



      1.   The existing park or parks must be within ½ mile of the
development, as measured along a road or pedestrian path, to be considered
proximate.



      2.   Adequate pedestrian access from the development to the
existing park space must be provided as determined by the Administrator.



   E.   Credit for Neighborhood Amenities. Developments that provide
neighborhood amenity facilities will receive a credit of 25% of the required
total, subject to the provisions below.



      1.   The facilities are open to all residents of the
neighborhood and are not subject to a private membership separate from any
related POA dues.



      2.   Such facilities shall, at a minimum, include a clubhouse
a minimum of 800 square feet and either tennis courts (minimum of 2 courts)
or a pool (a minimum of 2,000 square feet in water surface area).



   F.   The following areas shall not count toward common open space
set-aside requirements:



      1.   Private lots, yards, balconies and patios dedicated for
use by a specific dwelling unit;



      2.   Electric or gas transmission line rights-of-way;



      3.   Public right-of-way or private streets and drives;



      4.   Open parking areas and driveways for dwellings;



      5.   Land covered by structures except for ancillary
structures associated with the use of the open space such as gazebos and
picnic shelters;



      6.   Designated outdoor storage areas;



      7.   Land areas between buildings of less than 40 feet;



      8.   Land areas between buildings and parking lots or
driveways of less than 40 feet in width;



      9.   Required setbacks; and



      10.   Detention/retention facilities except as permitted by
the Administrator.



   G.   Subdivided residential developments of less than 25 dwelling
units are exempt from the requirements of this section unless the town agrees
that it will accept an offer of dedication of such open space and in that
case the offer of dedication shall be made.



   4.07.2   OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF RECREATIONAL AREAS AND
REQUIRED OPEN SPACE:



   A.   Open space required to be provided by the applicant in
accordance with these open space standards shall not be dedicated to the
public but shall remain under the ownership and control of the developer (or
his successor) or a property owner's association or similar organization that
satisfies the criteria established in Article V. Open space shall be
designated as an independent lot on the plat and shall be noted as being
reserved for their intended purposes.



   B.   The person or entity identified in paragraph A. as having the
right of ownership and control over such recreational facilities and open
space shall be responsible for the continuing upkeep and proper maintenance
of the same.



   C.   Open space may be dedicated to a registered land trust, if
approved by the Board of Commissioners.



   4.07.3   DEDICATION OF OPEN SPACE



   A.   If any portion of any lot proposed for development lies within
an area designated on the officially adopted Comprehensive Parks Master Plan
as a public park or part of the public greenway system, the area so
designated (not exceeding 3% of the total lot area) shall be included as part
of the area set aside to satisfy the requirement of this section.  This area
shall be dedicated to public use.



   B.   If more than 3% of a lot proposed for development lies within
an area designated as provided in paragraph A., the town may attempt to
acquire the additional land in the following manner:



      1.   The applicant may voluntarily dedicate the additional
land to the town;



      2.   The applicant may be encouraged to develop an integrated
subdivision, cluster subdivision or some other applicable development pattern
and to dedicate the common open space created thereby; or



      3.   The town may purchase or condemn the land.



   4.07.4    FLEXIBILITY IN ADMINISTRATION AUTHORIZED



   A.   The requirements set forth in this article concerning the
amount, size, location and nature of open space to be provided in connection
with residential developments are established by the Board of Commissioners
as standards that presumptively will result in the provision of that amount
of open space that is consistent with officially adopted town plans. The
Board of Commissioners recognizes, however, that due to the particular nature
of a tract of land, or the nature of the facilities proposed for
installation, or other factors, the underlying objectives of this article may
be achieved even though the standards are not adhered to with mathematical
precision. Therefore, the permit issuing authority is authorized to permit
minor deviations from these standards whenever it determines that:



      1.   The objectives underlying these standards can be met
without strict adherence to them; and



      2.   Because of peculiarities in the applicant's tract of land
or the facilities proposed it would be unreasonable to require strict
adherence to these standards.



   B.   Whenever the permit issuing authority approves a deviation from
these open space standards pursuant to paragraph A., the official record of
action taken on the development application shall contain a statement of the
reasons for allowing the deviation.



   4.07.5   OPEN SPACE LINKAGES



   Where a trail, natural area or public park is dedicated to or acquired
by the town, such area may be credited toward the minimum amount of usable
open space required.



   4.07.6   NATURAL OPEN SPACE REQUIRED



   A.   Every residential development shall be developed so that at
least 5% of the total area of the development remains as natural open
space.  Public accessibility is not required or expected but is permitted.



   B.   See Section 5.13.3 for regulations related to cluster
subdivisions and developments.



   4.07.7   NATURAL OPEN SPACE DESIGN CRITERIA



   All required open space shall meet the following design criteria, as
applicable:



   A.   Water bodies, retention areas, detention basins and wetlands
basins, may constitute up to 40% of required open space, provided that
retention facilities are designed to provide safe access to water. Unless
otherwise approved by the Board of Commissioners, side slopes to retention
facilities shall provide at least six feet of horizontal run for each foot of
vertical rise.



   B.   At least 30% of required open space must be dry land with a
slope of less than 10% unless otherwise approved the Board of Commissioners.



   C.   Unless otherwise approved by the Board of Commissioners, open
space shall be continuous, contiguous with open space on abutting properties
and accessible to the public.



   4.07.8   CONNECTIVITY REQUIRED



   To the maximum extent practicable, common open space shall be organized
to create integrated systems of open space that connect with the following
types of lands located within or adjacent to the development:



   A.   Dedicated public park or greenway lands;



   B.   Dedicated school sites;



   C.   Other dedicated open spaces;



   D.   Common open space located adjacent to the development;



   E.   Portions of the regional trail and open space system.



   4.07.9   OWNERSHIP & MAINTENANCE



   The designated common open space and common facilities are outlined in
Section 5.16 of this ordinance.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 4.08  Landscaping and Buffering



   This section shall be known as the Town of Lillington Landscaping Code
or Landscaping Code.



   4.08.1   FINDINGS AND PURPOSE



   The standards established in this ordinance are intended to preserve,
protect, restore and enhance the aesthetic appeal and scenic beauty of this
town; provide adequate buffering between land uses; reduce noise and air
pollution; reduce stormwater run-off; filter and reduce glare from artificial
light sources; provide shaded areas along streets, sidewalks and in parking
lots; provide a continuity of vegetation throughout the town; encourage the
preservation of existing trees and vegetation; safeguard and enhance property
values; and protect the public health, safety and general welfare.



   4.08.2   APPLICABILITY



   The landscaping and buffering standards of this section shall apply to
the following:



   A.   All new developments (except for infill single-family detached)
shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of this article.



   B.   See Section 8.02.1 for all other non-conforming standards.



   4.08.3   STREET TREES



   A.   Street trees are an essential part of the town streetscape. The
town seeks to maintain existing trees where possible and to encourage the
planting and continuance of the established street tree patterns.



   B.   To accomplish this objective, the following shall apply:



      1.   All subdivisions and developments subject to site plan
approval shall provide street trees along their frontage with adjacent public
streets.



      2.   Street trees shall be selected from the list of large
trees, or, where power lines are located, small trees included in Appendix A.



      3.   Planting strips shall be a minimum of six feet wide.



      4.   Planting location shall take into consideration planned
roadway widening, public safety, standard drainage requirements and
maintenance of sight distances for traffic safety. Street trees may be
planted within the right-of-way, within planting strip abutting the
right-of-way or other location approved by the permit issuing authority.



   C.   Street trees, unless subject to overhead power lines, shall be
planted at the rate of one three-inch caliper tree per 30 feet of property
line abutting a public street, excluding driveways and traffic visibility
zones. This rate may be varied based upon existing trees and the crowns of
planted trees.



   D.   Trees used to meet buffer and vehicle use area requirements,
may be used to meet the street requirements to the extent that the trees are
located within 25 feet of a street.



   4.08.4   BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS



   Buffers provide compatible transitions between differing land uses,
reduce the visual impacts of development and retain existing plant materials.



   A.   Buffers are required along the common property lines between
developments in different zoning districts or between developments of
different uses as established in this section.



   B.   Buffer requirements shall not apply when a public street or
railroad right-of-way separates applicable zoning districts or uses.



   C.   The chart below establishes the minimum buffer widths for
proposed development.



 

 
Adjacent Zoning District


District of Proposed Development
 
RR, RS20, RS10
 
RMX, RMF
 
O/S, NB
 
NMX, CB
 
GB
 
LI, HI




RR, RS20, RS10
 
None
 
None
 
B
 
None
 
A
 
A


RMX, RMF
 
C
 
None
 
None
 
None
 
A
 
A


O/S, NB
 
B
 
C
 
None
 
None
 
None
 
None


NMX, CB
 
C
 
C
 
None
 
None
 
None
 
None


GB
 
A
 
A
 
B
 
C
 
None
 
None


LI, HI
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
B
 
None


   A = Type A Buffer    B = Type B Buffer    C = Type C Buffer




 



   4.08.5   BUFFER YARD COMPOSITION



   The required buffer yard types may be established using a combination
yard widths, evergreen trees, canopy trees, understory trees, shrubs, fences,
walls, and berms. The following tables illustrate the required elements for
each buffer yard type.



   A.   Type A Buffer: The intent of the Type A Buffer is to create a
completely opaque buffer, having no horizontal openings from the ground to a
height of eight feet within two years of planting.  Type A buffers can be
achieved in three ways:



 

Type A Buffer Yard Options
 
Min. Depth
 
Min. Plantings per 100 feet
 
Required Barrier


Option 1
 
40'
 
4 Evergreen Trees

4 Canopy Trees

4 Understory Trees

48 Shrubs
 
Not Required


Option 2
 
30'
 
2 Evergreen Trees

1 Canopy Tree

2 Understory Trees

12 Shrubs
 
Berm


Option 3
 
20'
 
1 Evergreen Tree

1 Canopy Tree

3 Understory Trees

12 Shrubs
 
Fence or Wall



 



   B.   Type B Buffer: The intent of the Type B Buffer is to create a
semi-opaque buffer, having only seasonal horizontal openings, not to exceed
10% of the total width, from the ground to a height of eight feet within two
years of planting. A Type B Buffer can be achieved in two ways as specified
below.



 

Type B Buffer Yard Options
 
Min. Depth
 
Min. Plantings per 100 feet
 
Required Barrier


Option 1
 
20'
 
2 Evergreen Trees

1 Canopy Tree

2 Understory Trees

12 Shrubs
 
Not Required


Option 2
 
10'
 
1 Evergreen Tree

1 Canopy Tree

3 Understory Trees

24 Shrubs
 
Berm



 



   C.   Type C Buffer: The intent of the Type C Buffer is to create a
semi-opaque buffer, having only seasonal horizontal openings, not to exceed
25% of the total width, from the ground to a height of six feet within two
years of planting. A Type C Buffer can be achieved in two ways as specified
below.



 

Type C Buffer Yard Options
 
Min. Depth
 
Min. Plantings per 100 feet
 
Required Barrier


Option 1
 
20'
 
1 Canopy Tree

2 Understory Trees

8 Shrubs
 
Not Required


Option 2
 
10'
 
2 Canopy Trees

2 Understory Trees

12 Shrubs
 
Not Required



 



   4.08.6   ADDITIONS TO BUFFERS AND SCREENING



   When it is determined that the conflict of land use is so great that
the public safety is not served adequately by the minimum buffer and
screening requirements, or where there is a need to prevent a high degree of
visual, audio, or physical disorders, then the Administrator may require the
installation of fencing or earthen berms in addition to the minimum required
buffers and screening, according to the standards below.



   A.   Fencing or Walls. Where required as part of a buffer yard,
fencing or walls must adhere to the provisions below. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit the owner of a single-family dwelling from constructing a
separate fence along the borders of such property, provided that all required
buffer plantings are maintained.



      1.   In all cases, the finished side of the fence must face
the use with the lower intensity.



      2.   Permitted fence or wall materials include: masonry,
stone, architectural block, stucco on masonry, wood or other similar of solid
appearance.



      3.   The design of fencing or walls shall be sufficient to
meet the extent of physical screening required by the Administrator.



      4.   The height of the fence shall be determined by the
Administrator based on the following variables: site conditions; topography;
use; and/or building height. The minimum height of a fence or wall required
by this section shall be six feet.



   B.   Berms. Earthen berms may be required in combination with plant
material and fencing for the purposes of screening. Berms shall be tapered
appropriately to allow for practical maintenance.



      1.   The slope of all berms shall not exceed a 2:1 ratio
(horizontal to vertical), shall have a top width at least one-half the berm
height, and a maximum height of six feet above the toe of the berm.



      2.   All berms regardless of size, shall be stabilized.
Topsoils brought in for mounds are to be mixed with native soil to avoid
interfacing problems.



      3.   Berms shall be constructed as to provide adequate sight
distances at intersections and along all roads.



      4.   Berms proposed to satisfy the screening requirements of
this section shall be vegetated as required by this section. Use of berms as
a substitute for existing healthy vegetation is strongly discouraged.



   4.08.7   VEHICULAR USE AREA SCREENING & LANDSCAPING



   A.   All off-street parking, loading areas, and service areas
adjacent to and/or visible from a public right-of-way and adjacent properties
shall be screened from view by use of one or more of the following:



      •   A building or buildings;



      •   A change in topography;



      •   A planting area a minimum of eight feet wide planted
with evergreen shrubbery placed a maximum of five feet on center. All shrubs
shall achieve a height of four feet within three years.



      •   Fencing, walls, or berms.



   B.   In addition to screening requirements, canopy trees shall be
installed in planting areas within parking lots to provide shade coverage for
all parking spaces within vehicle service areas. Such planting areas shall
meet the following requirements:



      1.   Planting Area Size: The minimum size of a planting area
is dependent upon the number of canopy trees planted within it, as described
below:



 

Number of Canopy Trees in Planting Area
 
Minimum Size of Planting Area


1
 
400 square feet


2
 
700 square feet


3 or more
 
300 square feet per tree



 



      2.   Planting Area Width: A minimum horizontal dimension of
nine feet measured from back of curb, pavement, sidewalk or other separating
structure is required for all planting areas.



      3.   Planting Strip Location: A continuous linear planting
strip shall be provided between each two parking bays.



      4.   Minimum Spacing: All parking spaces, or portions thereof,
shall be within 60 feet of a planted canopy tree trunk.



      5.   Groundcover: Each planting area shall be landscaped with
mulch, groundcover, or shrubs to protect against soil erosion.



      6.   Barriers or Wheel Stops: Barriers, such as wheel stops or
six-inch standard curbs, must be provided between vehicular use areas and
landscaped areas.



      7.   Conflict with Parking Lot Lighting: Trees shall be
located and planted so as not to diminish the effectiveness of required
parking lot lighting, and in no instance shall lighting be located closer
than 15 feet to canopy trees and eight feet to understory trees.



   4.08.8   DUMPSTERS AND MECHANICAL UTILITIES SCREENING



   A.   All dumpsters, loading docks, outdoor storage areas and utility
structures, which are visible from a public street or adjacent property line,
shall be screened unless already screened by an intervening buffer yard. Such
equipment shall be considered out of view if it is within the 45 degree
angles projected from the building edges.



   B.   Screening shall consist of evergreen shrubs, fencing, walls or
berms, and shall comply with all other standards of this section.



   C.   All screening of utilities shall comply with the requirements
of the utility provider.



   D.   Where possible, enclosures for dumpsters are encouraged to be
constructed with materials that are compatible with the design and materials
of the principal building. Screening may be created through the use of:



      1.   Solid-wood fence, or fabricated metal fence, each with
shrub plantings placed around the enclosure (they do not need to completely
screen the enclosure) that grow as high, or nearly as high, as the fence to
provide an attractive separation, or



      2.   Brick fence, brick/split face block, or decorative block
(plantings not required).



   4.08.9   GENERAL INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS



   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s) or assigned
caretakers to ensure that all regulated landscaped areas, buffers, fencing,
and tree save areas are installed, preserved, and maintained in good growing
conditions, appearance, and usefulness. Damage and disturbances to these
areas shall result in vegetation replacement and/or fines and other
penalties. Preservation and maintenance shall include:



   A.   Any dead, unhealthy, or missing vegetation, shall be replaced
with vegetation that conforms to the standards of this section and the
approved site and/or subdivision plan.



   B.   All required buffers, streetyards, vehicular use areas, tree
save areas and other landscaped areas shall be free of refuse and debris,
shall be treated for pest/diseases in accordance with the approved site
and/or subdivision plan, and shall be maintained as to prevent mulch, straw,
dirt, or other materials from washing onto streets and sidewalks.



   C.   The owner(s) shall take actions to protect all plant material
from damage during all facility and site maintenance operations. All plant
material must be maintained in a way that does not obstruct sight distances
at roadways and intersections, obstruct traffic signs or devices, and
interfere with the use of sidewalks or pedestrian trails. Plant material,
whether located within buffers, tree save areas, or within planted areas
(required by the site and/or subdivision plan) shall not be removed, damaged,
cut or severely pruned so that their intended form is impaired. Shrubs within
vehicular use areas, streetyards, and street fronts may be pruned, but must
maintain at least three feet in height.



   D.   In the event that existing required vegetation located within
any buffers, tree save areas, streetyards, vehicular use or other landscape
areas poses an immediate or imminent threat to improved structures on private
property or public property, excessive pruning or removal of the vegetation
may be allowable provided authorization is obtained from the Administrator,
and the performance standard of the landscape area is maintained consistent
with this section. Replacement vegetation may be required as a condition of
the permit.



   E.   In the event that any vegetation or physical element
functioning to meet the standards of this section is severely damaged due to
an unusual weather occurrence or natural catastrophe, or other natural
occurrence, the owner may be required to replant if the requirements of the
section are not being met. Replacement vegetation shall conform to the
standards of this section and the approved site and/or subdivision plan.



   4.08.10      RECOMMENDED PLANT LIST



   See Appendix A for the town's official plant list.  It contains some
plant species that are native to the town area or are known to be suitable
for the climate of the town area. Applicants seeking landscape approval shall
not be required to select materials from the following list, but shall be
required to select plant species that are known to be suitable for the
climate of the town area.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 4.09  Building Design Standards



   4.09.1   PURPOSE



   The purpose of this article is to ensure architectural compatibility,
permanence and style; the preservation and enhancement of the town's
aesthetic integrity and architectural character; support tourism and
stimulate local economic development, preserve private property values; and
maintain a high quality of life throughout the town. The town desires that
all development be treated as a lasting contributor to the community and as a
good neighbor to its surroundings and the town believes that well-designed
and well-maintained developments is in the best interests of all residents
and businesses.



   4.09.2   APPLICABILITY



   A.   While this section provides specific standards for development,
it cannot, and is not intended to, cover all circumstances.  Rather the
structure and content of the manual are meant to give developers and
reviewers the perspective to address the unique conditions of each project,
while giving builders the flexibility to develop their own designs that meet
the intent, principles and spirit of the guidelines.



   B.   The building design review process as outline in Section 7.05.3
of this ordinance shall apply to the following:



      1.   New development.  All new construction shall conform to
the requirements of this section.



      2.   Renovation and expansions to existing development. If the
total repairs and/or renovations to an existing building within a five-year
period enlarge the footprint 50% or more or collectively cost more than 50%
of the tax value as recorded in the county tax record at the date of
application, such development shall be required to meet the minimum
requirements set forth to the fullest extent technically feasible.



      3.   Maintenance and changes. Maintenance and changes to
exterior existing building elements and façades for development less than
50% of tax value will apply only to the specific change. Approved site plans
may not be further modified before or after construction, installation or
occupancy without review and approval of the Administrator. The passage of
time shall not remove this requirement for review and approval if changes in
design, including color, are proposed for any building, built prior to or
after the adoption of this chapter, within the town which is subject to these
provisions.



      4.   Multi-family & residential facilities.  All multi-family
developments and other residential facilities are subject to these
regulations.  Single- family dwellings (attached & detached) and duplexes
subject to regulation under the North Carolina Residential Code for One and
Two Family Dwellings shall be exempt from these regulations.  Voluntary
building design standards may be applied to single-family dwellings (attached
& detached) and duplexes structures upon consent by the owner at the time of
zoning, subdivision, or sit plan approval.



      5.   Overlay Districts.  For properties located within an
overlay district – see Section 2.06 for additional specific development and
building design standards.



   4.09.3    GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS



   A.   Frontage. The primary entrance shall be architecturally and
functionally designed on the front façade facing a public street.
(Exception: buildings that are interior to a site that has buildings that
otherwise meet the frontage requirement as approved by the Administrator.)



   B.   Underground wiring. To reduce the visual impact of overhead
wiring, utility services shall be located underground. Wooden poles and/or
flood lights are prohibited.



   C.   Wall materials



      1.   Generally. The front façade should be divided into a
base, middle and top. When two or more materials are used on a façade, the
heavier material (e.g., brick) should be placed below the lighter material
(e.g., siding) to give a sense of support and grounding. Manufactured, mobile
and metal units are prohibited, except for a temporary construction, sales
trailers or storage uses during construction projects. Front façades and
exterior walls visible from the public right(s)-of-way shall be at least 60%
brick, stucco, stone, wood clapboard siding, cementitious fiber board or
other materials similar in appearance and durability. Vinyl siding, painted
concrete block, cast concrete and metal may be used on building walls as
minority elements or accent materials on walls that are visible from the
public right-of-way provided that they do not compose greater than 40% of the
façade. At least 25% of walls not visible from the public right(s)-of-way
shall meet the same requirements for front façades and exterior walls
visible from the public right(s)-of-way. Brick, stone or wood façades shall
not be covered or replaced with artificial siding or panels. Pitched roofs
shall be clad in wood shingles, standing seam metal, corrugated metal, slate
or asphalt shingles. All accessory buildings shall be clad in materials
similar in appearance to the principal structure.



      2.   Wall material maintenance. All exterior surfaces, which
require paint or sealing in order to protect the underlying surface from
deterioration shall be so painted or sealed. All exterior surfaces, which
have or have not been painted, shall be maintained free of peeling and
flaking paint or stucco. Rotten or weakened portions shall be removed and/or
replaced to match as closely as possible the original patterns. Where 33% or
more of the aggregate of any painted or stuccoed wall shall have peeling or
flaking paint or stucco worn away, the entire wall shall be scraped and
repainted or recovered with stucco.



   D.   Façade colors. Color is an integral element of the overall
design. Façade colors shall be of low reflectance earth tone, muted, subtle
or neutral colors. Limit the number of color choices. Generally, there is a
wall color, trim color, accent color and roof color. Use natural tints of
materials such as reds, browns, tans, grays and greens as primary colors.
Brick, concrete and stone will have an inherent color, created by nature or
during the manufacturing process. Building trim may feature brighter colors,
but neon tubing is not allowed as an accent material. The use of
high-intensity, metallic, fluorescent or neon colors shall be prohibited.



   E.   Roof pitch. Roofs with pitches less than 3:12 and flat roofs
will require a parapet wall on all sides visible from a public right-of-way.
A pitched roof shall be profiled by eaves a minimum of six inches from the
building face or with a gutter. Parapet walls shall have decorative
cornices/caps. Roof lines shall be varied to reduce the scale of structures
and visual interest and shall be articulated every 30 to 60 feet depending on
the type of building (see illustration to left). The parapet shall be
constructed so as to conceal all roofing material and equipment such as
rooftop venting systems from any adjoining public right-of-way.







 



   F.   Public art. Public art, such as statues, fountains and other
works of art are encouraged and may be placed in any required front setback
are as well in other appropriate areas.



   G.   Compatibility. Adjacent buildings should relate in similarity
of scale, height, architectural style and/or configuration. Relate setbacks
of new construction to setbacks of existing buildings or developments. Limit
setback variation to 20% of average setback of existing appropriate
development on a street for both residential and nonresidential development.



   H.   Human scale.







 



      1.   Historically, buildings were built small and pedestrian
scaled.



      2.   Newer, more recent developments are more massive with
large box stores and expansive parking areas.



      3.   These developments have lost the human, intimate scale.



      4.   While the footprint of new commercial development may
remain large, massing and organization of building forms can help to retain
the human scale.



      5.   Windows, doors, columns, eaves, parapets and other
building components shall be proportional to the overall scale of the
building. Windows shall be vertically proportioned wherever possible.



      6.   The primary entrance shall be both architecturally and
functionally designed on the front façade of the building facing the primary
street. Such entrances shall be designed to convey their prominence on the
fronting façade.



   I.   Windows. Except for civic and industrial buildings, at least
40% of the length of the first floor on primary street fronting façades
shall be in windows or doorways. Street level windows should be visually
permeable. For buildings on a corner, the first floor secondary street
façade shall be at least 10% windows. A window or functional general access
doorway shall be located along the length of the façade at least every 20
feet. A window shall be measured as follows:



 

Max. sill height (first floor)
 
42 inches


Min. area
 
16 square feet


Min. height
 
4 feet


Min. width
 
3 feet



 



   J.   Window maintenance. All windows must be tight fitting and have
sashes of proper size and design. Sashes with rotten wood, broken joints or
broken or loose mullions shall be replaced. All broken and missing windows
shall be replaced with glass or plexi-glass. All exposed wood shall be
repaire d. All openings originally designe d as windows shall be maintained
as windows, complete with sills, lintels, frame and glass, unless
specifically approved by the Fire Chief for enclosure. Where the Fire Chief
approves the enclosure of a window, it must be so enclosed by either bricking
the opening, blocking the opening with concrete blocks and stuccoing the
exterior to prevent water intrusion and painted or stained to properly
conform with the other exterior portions of the building.







 



   K.   Recesses and projections. Façades greater than 100 feet in
length, measured horizontally, must incorporate recesses, arcades, awnings
and projections along at least 20% of the length of the façade. When used,
awnings and canopies shall be placed at the top of window or doorway
openings, and shall not extend beyond such openings, unless otherwise
approved by the Administrator. No awning shall extend more than the width of
the sidewalk or ten feet, whichever is less. Awnings must be self-supporting
from the wall. No supports shall rest on or interfere with the use of
pedestrian walkways or streets. In no case shall any awning extend beyond the
street curb or interfere with street trees or public utilities. Awnings and
canopies shall complement the color and material of the building which they
are affixed.







 



   L.   Awning or marquee maintenance. In the event such awnings or
marquee are made of cloth, plastic or of a similar material, such awnings or
marquee shall be maintained so as not to show evidence of tearing, ripping or
other holes which diminish their function and cause unsightly conditions.
Whenever an awning is removed, all supporting members shall be removed within
two years of adoption of this code and thereafter, immediately upon removal
of any awning.







 



   M.   Compatibility.



      1.    Compatible designs can integrate diverse land uses and
help make the community have a cohesive atmosphere. Compatible does not have
to mean "the same." In fact, the blandness that would result would be
undesirable in its own way. The focus should be on maintaining a human-scale
and mitigating any features that might be offensive to neighbors. Establish a
design theme: to give a distinctive character to a specific activity center
such as business parks and shopping center that: have a palette of materials,
forms and features; create a coordinated but inviting mix of buildings and
spaces; and establish a unique identity for each activity center: give
importance to maintaining similar quality of construction and materials,
scale, height, width, roof form, setback and layout (not exactly the same
style). A coordinated palette of colors should be created for each
development. This palette should be compatible with adjacent developments.



      2.   The theme for this development includes decorative
shingles on steeply pitched roofs with wall dormers and brick with cast stone
details.







 



   N.   Accessory buildings and devices. Building and devices that are
ancillary to the primary building such as loading, trash containment,
maintenance, storage and mechanical/electrical areas and the devices and
equipment associated with these areas shall be incorporated in the overall
design, architecture and landscape so that the visual and acoustic impacts of
these functions and devices are fully contained and out of view from adjacent
properties and public areas. All accessory structures shall be constructed of
the same materials and colors as used for the main building.



   O.   Connectivity.



      1.   Generally. A community is made up of both social and
physical connections. Connecting uses means making clear pedestrian and
vehicular pathways between developments. It also means intermingling
compatible uses. A strong sense of community, the highly valued "small town
atmosphere," depends on having such convenient and easy access to a variety
of activities and uses. This connection of uses is very important to the
function of a livable, pedestrian-oriented community such as the town
desires. Because many policies of recent decades have resulted in or even
required the separation of projects and uses, this all-important design
principle perhaps will require the greatest adjustment in how development
occurs.



      2.   Connectivity requirements.



         a.   Individual developments shall be joined together
with roads and continuous sidewalks and paths versus a collection of separate
development pods. Within a development, easy-to-use internal circulation is
provided not only for cars but for pedestrians and bicyclists between all
buildings and spaces.



         b.   Buildings shall be oriented to roads and sidewalks
with orientation to parking areas being secondary. Buildings and whole
developments are not isolated from one another with extensive buffers.



         c.   Pedestrian and vehicular links shall be linked to
parks, schools and other public destinations whenever possible.



         d.   Sidewalks shall be continuous along public streets.
Sidewalks shall connect buildings to the public sidewalk and to each other.
Safe and frequent crossings shall be provided for pedestrians. Pedestrian
connections shall be made to large office developments from a nearby hotel.
Design sidewalks appropriately for the site and the expected amount of foot
traffic. In commercial areas where foot traffic is expected, sidewalks should
be a minimum of ten feet. Sidewalks in residential areas can be four feet.
All pathways including but not limited to sidewalks and crosswalks shall meet
the minimum American with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.



   P.   Reducing parking impacts.



      1.   Generally. A key principle of the town's design vision is
to reduce the visual impact of parking. This goal includes reducing the image
of the "sea of parking" one finds along corridors at retail centers and the
"garage-scape" in neighborhoods. Parking is necessary at work, at home, and
at destinations throughout the town. However, there is no reason why it needs
to dominate the view.



      2.   Parking lot standards.



         a.   A minimum of 20 to 40% of the required parking is
placed to the side or rear of development projects, reducing large expanses
of parking in front of developments. This parking is essentially overflow
parking for peak usage during the year. Buildings shall be more prominent
than parking lots:







 



         b.   Parking areas including drives and accessways shall
be surfaced with either asphalt or concrete.



         c.   Drive-through windows shall be accessed at the
building façade facing the rear property line away from the pedestrian
street/right-of-way.



         d.   On-street parking is provided when feasible to
reduce the area of parking lots.



   Q.   Use of alternate plan, material or methods.



      1.   Alternate design plans, building materials or
construction techniques may be used when unreasonable or impractical
situations would result from the application of architectural design
standards. Such situations may result from unique site conditions, innovative
design applications and/or unified development design. The application for
alternate design shall include which specific standards cannot be met and how
the alternative methods will achieve the intent of the standards. The
performance building design alternatives shall be evaluated by the Board of
Commissioners to determine if the alternate design meets the intent and
purpose of this article.



      2.   This determination shall take into account the land use
of adjacent property, the orientation of the building to public streets, the
building typology, the intended use of the structure, attention to
architectural detail, scale and mass.



   4.09.4   SINGLE-FAMILY, DUPLEX & MANUFACTURED HOME DESIGN STANDARDS



   The following voluntary building design standards may be applied to
single-family dwellings (attached & detached) and duplexes structures upon
consent by the owner at the time of zoning, subdivision, or sit plan approval.



   A.   Exterior materials. Exterior materials shall be durable and
residential in character. Exterior wall materials shall be wood, brick,
stone, stucco, vinyl or similar materials. Façade colors should be of low
reflectance earth tone, muted, subtle or neutral colors, also for repainting
of an existing building. The use of high-intensity, metallic, fluorescent or
neon colors shall be prohibited.







 



   B.   Manufactured home requirements. All manufactured homes shall
meet the following requirements.



      1.   The home has a length not exceeding four times its width.



      2.   The pitch of the home's roof has a minimum vertical rise
of one foot for each five feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished
with a type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential
construction.



      3.   The exterior siding consists of wood, hardboard or
aluminum (vinyl covered or painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity
of gloss white paint) comparable in composition, appearance and durability to
the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction.



      4.   Façade colors should be of low reflectance earth tone,
muted, subtle or neutral colors, also for repainting of an existing building.
The use of high-intensity, metallic, fluorescent or neon colors shall be
prohibited.



      5.   A continuous, permanent masonry foundation, un-pierced
except for required ventilation and access, is installed under the home.



      6.   Every manufactured home shall be tied down to ground
anchors. Ground anchors and tie downs shall be installed in accordance with
the North Carolina Regulations for Mobile Homes.



      7.   Each manufactured home stand and space shall be graded to
provide adequate storm drainage away from the manufactured home and such that
there will exist no more than three feet difference between the chassis of
the manufactured home and the finished grade of the stand along the entire
perimeter of the manufactured home proper.



   4.09.5   LARGE COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GREATER THAN 25,000 SF)



   A.   Purposes



      1.   To ensure that large commercial buildings are compatible
with surrounding development;



      2.   To ensure that buildings are design for sustainable
economic uses; and



      3.   To facilitate future redevelopment if such buildings are
abandoned.



   B.   Applicability



   In addition to the other applicable standards in this article, the
standards in this section shall apply to any new commercial building
occupying 25,000 square feet or more of floor area and any new commercial
building serving 25,000 square feet or more of gross floor area to one or
more businesses from a common entry or interior space.



   C.   Design Requirements



   In addition to complying with the use, site and building design
standards of this UDO, the following provisions shall apply:



      1.   Utility Design. Utilities shall be designed to
accommodate future subdivision of the space into retail spaces no larger than
20,000 square feet with independent exterior entrances.



      2.   Entries. Building façades shall be designed with entries
that are no further than 150 feet apart. Building entries should be clearly
defined, visible entrances, providing access from the front of the building
to the pedestrian zone, and featuring no less than three of the following:



         a.   Canopies or porticos;



         b.   Awnings;



         c.   Overhangs;



         d.   Recesses/projections;



         e.   Arcades;



         f.   Raised corniced parapets over the door;



         g.   Peaked roof forms or arches;



         h.   Outdoor patios; or



         i.   Display windows.



   D.   Building Materials. Predominant wall materials shall have the
appearance of brick. Predominant wall materials shall cover at least 80% of
walls, exclusive of windows and doors. Stucco, stone and cementitious lap
siding may be used as accent materials. Materials with the appearance of
concrete block, smooth concrete, corrugated or standing seam metal are
prohibited.



   E.   Building Articulation. Front and street-facing side façades
greater than 100 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall:



      1.   Incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a
depth of at least 3% of the length of the façade and extending at least 20%
of the length of the façade.



      2.   Have a change in at least three of the following elements
every 100 feet along all walls facing a public street or internal street:
color change; texture change; material change; or architectural feature, such
as an offset, projection, columns, canopies, arcades, or reveal with at least
12 inches in depth.



   F.   Rooflines



      1.   Rooflines shall be varied in height, or at least every
100 feet along any side of a building facing a street. Hips, gables or
changes in parapet elevation shall be used to provide relief in height.







 



      2.   Gable and hip roofs are allowe d; parapets shall be used
to concea l flat roofs and rooftop mechanical equip ment from public view.



      3.   The parapet design shall be a minimum of three feet in
height and shall incorporate a three-d imensional cornice treatment.



   4.09.6   MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



   A.   Applicability



   The following development standards shall apply to all multi-gamily
developments of three or more dwelling units in any zoning district in which
such dwelling units are allowed.  Building setbacks in Section 4.09.6.B may
vary based overlay district standards and properties zoned RMX, NMX or CB.



   B.   Building Setbacks, Orientation and Lot Standards



      1.   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet and a
maximum of 15 feet from sidewalks public walkways or street right-of-way.
Setbacks may be greater than 15 feet if the intervening distance consists of
common open space.



      2.   The minimum spacing between the sides of multi-family
residential structures shall be 20 feet.



      3.   Where practical, dwellings should be located to face each
other across common landscaped space with buildings no closer than 30 feet.



   C.   Building Design. Multi-family developments shall:



      1.   Include variations in heights, color, setback, rooflines,
trim, and building sizes to create visual diversity between structures;



      2.   Group buildings in clusters;



      3.   Articulate façades by including projections of at least
five feet at least once every 50 feet along the façade,



      4.   Locate windows to provide easy surveillance of open
spaces and walkways, without placing such windows within direct alignment
with windows of adjacent structures;



      5.   Units above grade level should have access to private
balconies of usable dimensions no smaller than ten feet by six feet;



      6.   Create areas for foundation planting by keeping hard
surfaces away from front façades;



      7.   Design entrances to:



         a.   Provide private entrances at grade level and
adjacent to private open space to the greatest extent possible. Unless
otherwise approved by the Board of Commissioners, no more than four dwelling
units shall share a common entrance.



         b.   Avoid aligning doors to separate dwelling units
with each other unless screening is provided. However, entrances should be
visible from the sidewalk or public walkway and other dwelling units, when
practical.



         c.   Provide porches or roofed overhangs over building
entrances.



         d.   Set back buildings or entries so that the entry
paths extend at least ten feet from sidewalk or public circulation walkway.
These entry areas should be designed to provide semi-public gardens around
the front entryways. Do not provide access to apartments via long-shared
access galleries.



      8.   Provide a private garden, yard, patio or balcony for
every dwelling unit.



      9.   The private open space of all dwelling units shall be
visually and functionally accessible from inside the dwelling.



      10.   Provide screening for yards where private activities are
likely to occur and to delimit private from common open space.



   D.   Pedestrian Improvements



      1.   Provide continuous walkways through the project and
connecting dwellings to and through common open space.



      2.   Minimize walkways that provide direct opportunities to
cut through the project by strategically locating fences, low walls and
planting areas within the site and near site entry points.



      3.   Provide storage space for strollers, bicycles, and so
forth, close to the main entries of dwellings or groups of dwellings.



   E.   Parking



      1.   Provide parking in small Lots that are designed and
located to ensure that most parked vehicles are visible from one or more
dwellings.



      2.   To the greatest extent practicable, parking shall not
separate dwelling units from common open space.



   4.09.7   DESIGN ALTERNATIVES



   Alternative design plans, building materials, landscaping, and/or
construction techniques may be used when unreasonable or impractical
situations would result from the strict application of the building design
standards of this section. Such situations may result from unique site
conditions, innovative design applications, and/or unified development
design. The review and approval of such design alternatives shall be reviewed
and decided by the Board of Commissioners. The following criteria shall be
used in determining whether a design alternative can be accepted by the Board
of Commissioners:



   A.   The proposal includes a clear and concise explanation of the
specific standards that cannot be met and how the alternative methods
proposed will achieve the intent of this section;



   B.   The proposal represents the use of alternative methods and/or
materials (including but not limited to: building materials, massing,
materials, and scale; orientation in relation to the public right(s)-of-way;
façade treatment; landscaping; lighting; and open space) which will result
in a development pattern which is equivalent to or greater than that required
by this ordinance;



   C.   The proposed use and design alternative is compatible with
adjacent land uses;



   D.   The proposal is compatible with and will enhance the use or
value of adjacent and area properties;



   E.   The proposal is consistent with the intent of adopted town
plans; and



   F.   The proposed development standards are, in all other aspects,
consistent with the intent and purpose of this ordinance. All findings
specified above for the granting of such a request shall be provided in
writing and signed by the Administrator. One copy shall be provided to the
applicant and another shall be retained as a part of the permanent record of
the determination of the Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Article V.
SUBDIVISIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE




Section 5.01  Purpose and Intent



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish criteria for the
development and subdivision of real property within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Lillington. These standards are set forth to:



   ∙   Provide for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare; and



   ∙   Promote the orderly growth and development of the town; and



   ∙   Provide for suitable residential and nonresidential
development with adequate streets, utilities and appropriate building sites;
and



   ∙   Coordinate streets within proposed subdivisions with existing
or planned streets and with other public facilities.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.02  Scope and Applicability



   5.02.1   SCOPE



   According to the provisions of G.S. § 160A-371, the Town of Lillington
has the authority to regulate the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction.



   5.02.2   SITE PLAN & SUBDIVISION APPLICABILITY



   A.   Subdivision Defined



   All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, or building
development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of
land involving the dedications of a new street or a change in existing
streets.



   B.   Statutory Exemptions



   The following are not included within the definition above, nor are
they subject to the regulations of this ordinance, provided however, that any
document or plat to be recorded pursuant to any such exclusion shall bear the
notation: "Exempt pursuant to the Town of Lillington Unified Development
Ordinance," and the signature of the Administrator before being presented for
recordation.



      1.   The combination or recombination of portions of
previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not
increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the Unified
Development Ordinance requirements of the town.



      2.   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres
in size where no street right-of-way dedication is involved.



      3.   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for
the widening or opening of streets.



      4.   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire
area is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved, and where the resultant lots are
equal to or exceed the Unified Development Ordinance requirements of the Town
of Lillington.



   C.   Site Plans Defined



   A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of
land as required by the regulations involved. It includes lot lines, streets,
building sites, reserved open space, buildings, major landscape features,
both natural and human-made, and, depending on requirements, the location of
proposed utility lines.



   D.   Conformity Required



   From and after the adoption of this ordinance, no real property lying
within the jurisdiction of the Town of Lillington shall be developed or
subdivided except in conformance with all applicable provisions of this
ordinance. In addition, after the effective date of this ordinance, no plat
for subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of this ordinance shall be
certified for recording by the Administrator until it has been submitted and
approved in accordance with the provisions of this article.



   E.   Permits Subsequent to Plat Approval and Recording



      1.   Building Permits



         The Administrator shall not issue permits for any structure
on a lot in a subdivision for which a plat has not been approved and recorded
in the manner prescribed herein.



      2.   Well and Septic Tank Permits



         The Administrator shall not issue a permit for the
installation of wells and septic tanks upon any lot in a subdivision for
which a plat has not been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed
herein.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.03  Required Improvements for All Development



   All development which shall be required to install or construct the
improvements specified in the table below. The developer shall be responsible
for the installation and construction of required improvements according to
the provisions of this ordinance and the Lillington Specifications Manual,
except as may otherwise be specifically provided herein or by town policy or
agreement.



 

Required Improvement
 
RR
 
RS20
 
RS10
 
RMF
 
RMX
 
NM X
 
O/S
 
CB
 
NB
 
GB
 
LI
 
HI
 
FRO




Underground Drainage*
 


 


 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 




Curb & Gutter*
 


 


 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



Public Water & Hydrants
 


 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



Public Sewer
 


 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



Street Lights
 


 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



Paved Streets
 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



Street Trees
 


 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



Street Signs
 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



Underground Wiring
 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



Park/Open Space
 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 


 


 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 




Sidewalks**
 


 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 


 


 






 



*The Administrator may waive or alter requirements for underground drainage
and curb and gutter according to the watershed standards in Article VI.



**See Section 5.11.6



   5.03.1   CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS



   A developer shall connect all lots shown on the proposed development
with the public water supply and sanitary sewage systems according to the
requirements of the Town of Lillington Code of Ordinances Chapter 51.



   5.03.2   STREET TREES



   The location and specification of trees to use in the public
right-of-way or public street tree easement is provided in Article IV.



   5.03.3   STREET NAMES & SIGNAGE



   A.   Appropriate street name signs which meet standard municipal
specifications shall be placed at all street intersections. The developer
shall bear the expense.



   B.   Proposed street names shall be submitted and subject to the
approval of the Town of Lillington and/or Harnett County as appropriate. New
names shall not duplicate or be similar to existing street names. Existing
street names, however, shall be extended where appropriate.



   5.03.4   WASTE MANAGEMENT



   The developer shall provide for adequate waste collection and disposal
as outlined in the Town of Lillington Code of Ordinances.



   5.03.5   CLUSTER MAIL BOX UNITS



   Cluster mail box units shall be provided in accordance with the United
States Postal Service regulations. Units may not encroach into the public
right-of-way and shall be placed in an easement on private property.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.04  Land Suitability



   Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, and/or erosion; land that
has been used for the disposal of solid waste and not adequately mitigated;
and any other land deemed by the Administrator to be uninhabitable shall not
be platted for residential or commercial occupancy, nor for such other uses
as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate the flood
hazard. Such land shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered
by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory
living conditions.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.05  Required Conformance to Lillington Specification Manual



   The Town of Lillington Specifications Manual (LSM) is herein
incorporated by reference. Conformance to the SM is required in addition to
the standards in this ordinance.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.06  Other relevant standards for Site Plans and Subdivisions



   In addition to the standards found in this article, standards in the
following may also apply:



   ∙   Article IV - Parks and Open Space



   ∙   Article IV - Landscaping and Buffers



   ∙   Article IV - Parking, Driveways & Loading



   ∙   Article IV - Lighting



   ∙   Article VI - Signs



   ∙   Article VI - Flood Damage Prevention, Stormwater and Watershed
Standards



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.07  Placement of Monuments



   The Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, as
adopted by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers and Land Surveyors, shall apply when installing permanent monuments.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.08  Site for Public Use



   In subdividing property, due consideration shall be given by the
subdivider to the reservation of suitable sites for schools and other public
uses in accordance with G.S. § 160 A-372.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.09  Property Owner's Association



   A.   CREATION



      An owners' association shall be established to fulfill
requirements of the NC Condominium Act, NC Planned Community Act, or to
accept conveyance and maintenance of all common elements (common areas)
within a development. The owners' association shall be in legal existence
prior to the conveyance, lease-option, or other long-term transfer of control
of any unit or lot in the development.



   B.   CONVEYANCE



      Where developments have common elements serving more than one
dwelling unit, these areas shall be conveyed to the owners' association, in
which all owners of lots in the development shall be members. All areas other
than public street rights-of-way, other areas dedicated to the town, and lots
shall be designated as common elements. In a condominium development the
common elements shall be platted in accordance with the NC Condominium Act.
In other developments, the fee-simple title shall be conveyed by the
subdivider or developer to the owners' association prior to the sale of the
first lot.



   C.   SUBDIVISION OR CONVEYANCE OF COMMON ELEMENTS



      Common elements shall not subsequently be subdivided or conveyed
by the property owners' association unless a revised final plat showing such
subdivision or conveyance have been submitted and approved.



   D.   MINIMIZE NUMBER OF ASSOCIATIONS



      Developments, whether including different land uses, different
types of housing, or simply different sections, shall hold the number of
owners' associations to a minimum. An association may establish different
categories of membership, different budgets for the categories, and different
rates of assessment when different kinds of services are provided to
different categories. Smaller associations under an umbrella (master)
association are permitted.



   E.   EXEMPTION FROM OWNERS' ASSOCIATION REQUIREMENT



      A development involving only two units attached by a party wall
(or two separate walls back-to-back) shall not be required to have common
elements or an owners' association. Such developments without an owners'
association shall establish a binding agreement between owners to govern any
party walls and to ensure reciprocal easement rights needed for maintenance.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.10  Lot Standards



   The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the proposed development or subdivision and for the type of
development contemplated and shall conform to the following:



   5.10.1   CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS



   Every lot shall have sufficient area, dimensions, and street access to
permit a principal building to be erected thereon in compliance with all
zoning and other requirements of this ordinance.



   5.10.2   SIDE LOT LINE CONFIGURATION



   Side lines of lots should be at or near right angles or radial to
street lines.



   5.10.3   LOT LINES AND DRAINAGE



   Lot boundaries shall coincide with natural and pre-existing manmade
drainageways to the extent practicable to avoid lots that can be built upon
only by altering such drainageways.



   5.10.4   LOTS ON ARTERIAL OR MAJOR STREETS



   Major subdivisions shall not be approved that permit individual
residential lots to directly access on to arterial or major streets.



   5.10.5   STREET ACCESS



   All lots shall front upon, and have access to, a public street built in
accordance with town and/or NCDOT standards.



   5.10.6   FLAG LOTS PROHIBITED



   Flag lots shall be prohibited except where required due to extreme
topographic circumstances or site conditions.  A flag lot shall contain only
one single-family dwelling with a flagpole maximum length of 300 feet.  The
minimum width of the flagpole shall be 25 feet.



   5.10.7   BUFFERS AND ENVIRONMENTAL FEATURES



   A.   Buffer yards and environmental buffer areas (such as stream
buffers, drainageways, special flood hazard areas, wetlands, etc.) may be
included within residential lots only when all of the following conditions
are met:



      1.   The subdivision is limited in size and has no property
owners' association; and



      2.   There is no reason for the formation of a property
owner's association other than to retain ownership and maintenance
responsibilities for the buffer area; and



      3.   The buffer is placed within a permanent conservation
easement.



   B.   Any required buffer yard, including those required as a zoning
condition, for a residential development shall not be credited toward meeting
the minimum lot size requirements.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.11  Streets and Connectivity



   5.11.1   GENERAL



   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned
streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and
in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by
such streets.



   The proposed street system shall be designed to provide vehicular
interconnections in order to facilitate internal and external traffic
movements in the area, improve access/egress for city neighborhoods, provide
faster response time for emergency vehicles, and improve the connections
between neighborhoods.



   Street arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to the owner
of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient
access to it.







 



   5.11.2   DEDICATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY



   Right-of-way for public streets shall be dedicated to the town pursuant
to G.S. Ch. 160A, Article 19, Part 2 and other applicable NC State laws. When
dedication cannot be required, any future street right-of-way indicated on
adopted transportation plan shall be shown on the plat.



   5.11.3   CONFORMANCE WITH TRANSPORTATION PLAN



   The location and design of streets shall be in conformance with any
adopted transportation plan(s). Where conditions warrant, right-of-way widths
and pavement widths in excess of the minimum street standards may be required
to ensure conformance with these plans.



   5.11.4   CONFORMANCE WITH ADJOINING STREET SYSTEMS



   The planned street layout of a proposed development or subdivision
shall be compatible with existing or proposed streets and their
classifications on adjoining or nearby tracts.



   5.11.5   INTERNAL STREET NETWORK CONNECTIVITY



   A.   An interconnected street system is necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare in order to ensure that streets
will function in an interdependent  manner, to provide adequate access for
emergency and service vehicles, to enhance non-vehicular travel such as
pedestrians and bicycles, and to provide continuous and comprehensible
traffic routes.



   B.   All proposed streets shall be continuous and connect to
existing or streets without offset with the exception of cul-de-sacs as
permitted and except as provided below. Whenever practicable, provisions
shall be made for the continuation of planned streets and utilities into
adjoining areas.



   C.   The street network for any subdivision shall achieve a
connectivity ratio of not less than 1.40 (see example in figure to right).







 



      1.   The phrase connectivity ratio means the number of street
links divided by the number of nodes or link ends, including cul-de-sac heads.



      2.   A link means and refers to that portion of a street
defined by a node at each end or at one end. Approved stubs to adjacent
property shall be considered links. However, alleys shall not be considered
links.



      3.   A node refers to the terminus of a street or the
intersection of two or more streets, except that intersections that use a
traffic circle shall not be counted as a node.



   D.   For the purposes of this section, an intersection shall be
defined as:



      1.   Any curve or bend of a street that fails to meet the
minimum curve radius as established in the current town or NCDOT design
standards; or



      2.   Any location where street names change (as reviewed and
approved by the Administrator).



   E.   For the purposes of this section, the street links and nodes
within the collector or arterial/major streets providing access to a proposed
subdivision shall not be considered in computing the connectivity ratio.



   F.   Streets in residential subdivisions shall be designed so as to
minimize the length of local streets, to provide safe access to residences
with minimal need for steep driveways and to maintain connectivity between
and through residential neighborhoods for autos and pedestrians.



   G.   Where necessary to provide access or to permit the reasonable
future subdivision of adjacent land, rights-of-way and improvements shall be
extended to the boundary of the development.



   H.   A turnaround is required on any dead end 500 feet or greater in
length.



   I.   The platting of partial width rights-of-way shall be prohibited
except where the remainder of the necessary right-of-way has already been
platted, dedicated or established by other means.



   J.   Exemptions



   New subdivisions that intend to provide one new cul-de-sac street shall
be exempt from the connectivity ratio standard as set forth in this section,
provided the Administrator determines that there is:



      1.   No options for providing stub streets due to topographic
conditions, adjacent developed sites or other limiting factors; and



      2.   Interconnectivity (use of a looped road) within the
development cannot be achieved or is unreasonable based on the constraints of
the property to be developed.



   5.11.6   MINIMUM NUMBER OF ACCESS POINTS TO EXTERNAL STREET NETWORK



   The minimum number of points of external street access shall be based
on the number of dwelling units in the proposed development as set forth
below.



   A.   Residential developments with 50 or more lots or dwelling units
shall have at least two separate points of public road access.



   B.   Residential developments with 100 or more lots or dwelling
units shall have at least three separate points of public road access.



   5.11.7   RESERVE STRIPS



   Reserve strips adjoining street rights-of-way for the purpose of
preventing access to adjacent property shall not be permitted under any
condition.



   5.11.8   STREET DESIGN CRITERIA



   All streets shall be constructed in accordance with any local standards
or the st andards contained in the most recent version of the NCDOT Roadway
Design Manual or NCDOT Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards as
appropriate.  The illustration to the right is a sample cross-section of a
local or minor street.







 



   A.    Right-of-way widths. Right-of-way widths shall not be less th
an the following:



 

Street Type
 
Right-of-Way Width


Arterial or Major
 
80-100 feet


Collector
 
66-80 feet


Local or Minor
 
60 feet


Cul-de-sac
 
50 feet (100 feet diameter turnaround)


Marginal Access
 
66 feet


Alley
 
20 feet



 



   B.   Pavement widths.  Pavement widths or graded widths shall be as
follows:



 

Street Type
 
Streets with Curb & Gutter (measured face to face of curb)
 
Streets without Curb and Gutter


Arterial or Major
 
48 feet
 
44 feet


Collector
 
40 feet
 
36 feet


Local or Minor
 
26 feet
 
24 feet


Cul-de-sac
 
26 feet
 
24 feet


Marginal Access
 
26 feet
 
24 feet


Alley
 
18 feet
 
16 feet



 



   C.   Roads and street surfaces. All public and private streets and
roads shall be constructed and paved to meet all town or NCDOT standards
(where appropriate) for maintenance.



   D.   Street intersections. Street intersections shall be laid out as
follows:



      1.   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles and no street shall intersect at less than 60 degrees;



      2.   Intersections with an arterial or major street shall not
be less than 600 feet apart, measured from centerline to centerline;



      3.   Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded
with a minimum radius of 20 feet.



      4.   At an angle of intersection of less than 90 degrees, a
greater radius may be required by the Administrator; and



      5.   No planting, fence or other obstruction to visibility of
vehicles shall be erected, planted, maintained or allowed to exist in any
district within the range of three feet to ten feet above the centerline
grades of the intersecting streets in the triangular area bounded by the
street right-of-way lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along
these street lines 25 feet from the point of intersection.



   E.   Horizontal curves.



      1.   Where a centerline deflection angle of more than ten
degrees occurs, a circular curve shall be introduced having a centerline
radius of not less than the following:



 

Arterial or Major Street
 
300 feet


Collector Street
 
200 feet


Local or Minor Street
 
100 feet



 



      2.   Proper super-elevation shall be provided for curves on
arterial or major streets to comply with town and/or NCDOT design standards.



   F.   Vertical curves. All vertical curves shall have such length as
necessary to provide safe sight distance to comply with town and/or NCDOT
design standards.



   G.   Cul-de-sac.



   1.   The maximum distance from an intersecting street to the end of
a cul-de-sac shall be 500 feet. In cases where extreme topography or other
unique site features necessitate a longer street, a cul-de-sac with a maximum
length of 800 feet may be approved by the Board of Commissioners.



   2.   In general, streets with one end permanently closed shall be
avoided unless the design of the subdivision and the existing or proposed
street system in the surrounding area clearly indicates that a through street
is not essential at the location of the proposed cul-de-sac.



   3.   Cul-de-sacs should only be permitted with center islands larger
enough to contain landscaping as illustrated in the image on the left.







 



   H.   Blocks.  The maximum and minimum length and width of blocks
shall be as follows:



      1.   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,000 feet nor be less
than 400 feet.  Where deemed necessary by the Administrator, a pedestrian
crosswalk of at least five feet minimum in width shall be provided.



      2.   Blocks shall have a sufficient width to allow two tiers
of lots of minimum depth.  Blocks may consist of single tier lots where such
are required to separate residential development from through vehicular
traffic or nonresidential uses.



      3.   Subject to the approval of the Administrator, block
lengths may be varied when, in the opinion of the Administrator, such
alternative is necessary due to extreme topography or other unique site
features.



   I.   Minimum sight distances. Shall comply with current town and/or
NCDOT design standards.



   J.   Design speeds. Shall comply with current town and/or NCDOT
design standards.



   5.11.9   STREETS CROSSING NATURAL AREAS



   A.   All streets crossing natural areas, wetlands, or streams shall
cross at or as near to 90 degrees as possible within topographic limits.



   B.   Where a required street stub necessitates the crossing of a
stream or designated drainageway at the property line to make the required
connection to an adjacent parcel, the owner or applicant shall provide a
payment in lieu of building the stream crossing equal to half the total cost
of the construction based on an engineer certified estimate. Such payment
shall be set aside to offset the cost of constructing the stream crossing for
future development.



   5.11.10      SPACING BETWEEN INTERSECTIONS



   A minimum spacing of 150 feet between intersections of collector or
local/minor streets shall be maintained. In no case shall a pair of
intersecting streets be approved with an offset that does not meet this
minimum distance standard.



   5.11.11      CURB AND GUTTER



   A.   Except as permitted in Article VI , concrete curb and gutter
shall be installed along all newly created streets within and adjoining
subdivisions.



   B.   Where improvements, such as widening or turn lanes are required
on town maintained streets adjoining subdivisions, concrete curb and gutter
shall be installed in conjunction with the related improvements.



   5.11.12      TEMPORARY TURNAROUNDS AND STUBS



   A.   Streets stubbed to  adjoining property or to phase lines shall
be required to have temporary turnarounds at the end of the street which are
of a sufficient size to permit sanitation and emergency vehicles to turn
around.



   B.   Stub streets and streets intended for extension during future
phases shall be designed and constructed to the property line or as close to
the line, vertically and horizontally, as practical. It shall be the
responsibility of the second development to construct the connection to an
existing stub street.



   C.   Stub streets shall not exceed 150 feet in length without a
paved turnaround (permanent or temporary).



   D.   A clearly visible street sign shall be erected at the end of
the stub street stating that the street is planned to connect to a future
street.







 



   5.11.13      GRADES AT INTERSECTIONS



   The grade on stop streets approaching an intersection shall not exceed
5% for a distance of 100 feet from the centerline of the intersection.



   5.11.14      STREET NAMES



   Street names, prefixes, suffixes and addresses shall conform to the
guidelines and policies set forth by the Harnett County street naming and
addressing standards.



   5.11.15      STREET AND TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS



   A.   Street Signs.  At each intersection, the developer shall be
required to install street name signage in accordance with town standards for
the design of such signage.



   B.   Traffic Control Signs.  The developer/subdivider shall provide
traffic control signs that meet the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD) standards in locations designated by the town and/or NCDOT.



   C.   Maintenance. Maintenance of signs on private streets or drives
shall be the responsibility of the owner or property owners' association, as
appropriate.



   5.11.16      SIDEWALKS



   Sidewalks shall be installed along in accordance with the following
standards:



   A.   Required Locations.  Sidewalks shall be installed along both
sides of all streets located within the proposed subdivision and along all
existing streets located within the proposed subdivision.



   B.   Alternative Compliance. Alternative provisions for pedestrian
movement meeting the intent of this ordinance may be used where unreasonable
or impractical situations would result from application of these
requirements. Such situations may result from significant street trees,
impending road widening, topography, utility easements, lot configuration or
other unusual site conditions. In such instances, the Administrator may
approve an alternate plan that proposes different pedestrian amenities
provided that the intent of this section is fulfilled.



   C.   Payments in Lieu.  In lieu of alternative compliance in B.
above, the Administrator may approve a payment in lieu (in accordance with an
adopted annual fee schedule) where any one or a combination of factors render
compliance impractical:



      1.   Steep slopes;



      2.   Absence of existing sidewalks along the corridor and in
the general neighborhood;



      3.   Where sidewalks are not shown on applicable town plans.



   D.   Construction Standards.  All sidewalks, whether required by
this ordinance or installed voluntarily, shall be constructed to town and/or
NCDOT standard specifications for sidewalks and have a minimum width of five
feet and a minimum thickness of six inches of concrete.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.12  Utilities and Easements



   5.12.1   PUBLIC WATER AND SEWER CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS



   Water and sewer lines, connections, and equipment shall be constructed
in accordance with the standard specifications for utility line construction
as set forth by the utility provider for the proposed development.



   5.12.2   WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS



   Connection of each lot to public water and sewer utilities shall be in
accordance with the Town of Lillington Code of Ordinances Chapter 51.



   5.12.3   UNDERGROUND UTILITIES



   Electrical, telecommunication, cable television and other utility lines
installed within and along streets abutting major subdivisions shall be
underground unless the approving body determines underground installation is
inappropriate.



   5.12.4   EASEMENTS



   A.   Widths. To provide for electric, telecommunication,
television/internet, gas service conduits, greenways and water and sewer
lines within a subdivision, adequately sized utility easements shall be a
minimum of 30 feet in width. The location of such easements shall be reviewed
and approved by the approving body, with advice from utility providers,
before final plat approval.  The Administrator or utility provider may
require wider easements and shall be determined on a case-by-case basis.



   B.   Restrictions on Improvements.  Utility easements shall be kept
free and clear of any buildings or other improvements that would interfere
with the proper maintenance or replacement of utilities. The town shall not
be liable for damages to any improvement located within the utility easement
area caused by maintenance or replacement of utilities located therein.



   5.12.5   STREET LIGHTS



   Street lights shall be required to be installed along all public
streets within the town's corporate limits in accordance with this
ordinance.  The Board of Commissioners of the town hereby establishes the
following:



   A.   The owner, developer or subdivider of a site plan or
subdivision shall be required to install street lighting via underground
distribution along all proposed streets and along all adjoining existing
streets and thoroughfares in accordance with this section. The developer
shall be responsible for all installation cost and any utility pole fees.



   B.   Through the site plan and subdivision plan approval process,
the Administrator may approve street lighting which exceeds the standard town
requirements for residential streets so as to reduce the length of sag
vertical curves provided the street lights are operational prior to the
issuance of any certificates of occupancy on such street. In any case, the
minimum allowable length of sag vertical curves shall be 15A for cul-de-sacs
and loop roads and 20A for residential streets.



   C.   All underground electrical distribution systems for street
lighting within the corporate limits of the town and its extraterritorial
planning jurisdiction shall be installed according to the following standards.



      1.   Underground service for light fixtures shall be installed
by the developer in conformance with town standards at the developer's
expense.



      2.   The placement of street lighting fixtures in residential
areas shall be at 400-foot intervals unless:



         a.   The roadway length is less than 400 feet but more
than 200 feet in which case a street light will be provided at the end of the
street;



         b.   Where the roadway length is less than 200 feet and
a street light is placed at the intersection and no natural features create a
problem, no street light will be placed at the end of the roadway; or



         c.   The vertical and horizontal street alignment or
natural features necessitate shorter spacing intervals.



      3.   The placement of street lighting along thoroughfares,
marginal access streets and collector streets and in nonresidential areas
shall be in accordance with the latest revision of the Illuminating
Engineering Society's American National Standards for Roadway Lighting.



      4.   A street light shall be provided at all street
intersections.



   D.   Street light fixtures shall conform to the following:



      1.   All fixtures in residential areas shall be either 7,000
or 9,500 lumen enclosed high pressure sodium lamps on standard poles 25 feet
in height. The 7,000 lumen fixture shall be placed only at the "neck" of
cul-de-sacs.



      2.   All fixtures along thoroughfares shall be 28,500 lumen
enclosed high pressure sodium lamps on standard fiberglass poles 30 feet in
height or 50,000 lumen enclosed high pressure sodium lamps on standard
fiberglass poles 35 feet in height. The 28,500 lumen fixtures shall be placed
in residential areas when spillover from the 50,000 lumen fixtures would be
excessive.



   E.   Authorization for street light installations shall occur at
such time as:



      1.   A developer, through the town, requests the installation
of streetlights prior to the issuance of any certificates of occupancy. The
developer shall incur a monthly electrical expense billed equal to the
monthly electrical expense incurred by the town, for each street light
installed. The developer will be billed for the period beginning with
installation of the street light and ending with notification to the town, by
the developer, of issuance of a certificate of occupancy in the immediate
area of each street light location;



      2.   A certificate of occupancy is issued in the immediate
area of the proposed street light location; or



      3.   An arterial/major street, marginal access street or
collector street is constructed or widened as a part of development. 
Arterial/major streets, marginal access streets and collector streets that
are constructed or widened by the town shall be lighted immediately after
construction, dependent on the availability of funds.



   F.   Street lighting facilities and street lights shall be installed
by the developer on any roadway, portion of roadway or widening prior to the
town's acceptance of that roadway for routine maintenance unless otherwise
approved by the Administrator.



   G.   Residents along a street may request the relocation of a street
light provided that the proposed street light location meets town standards
and the relocation is approved by the Administrator. Residents living at the
cul-de-sac end of a street may request the replacement of an existing 9,500
lumen semi-enclosed light fixture with a 7,000 lumen semi-enclosed light
fixture. A petition, signed by all persons owning property fronting on the
street within the boundaries of the next closest installed or proposed street
lights, shall be required. Also, the relocation or replacement cost and all
facilities abandonment costs must be paid in full in advance by the
resident(s) requesting the relocation or replacement.



   H.   A developer may request to use decorative or "private" street
lighting within a development provided:



      1.   Street light fixture types and locations must meet the
minimum criteria set forth in this policy and must be approved by the
Administrator;



      2.   The developer and/or property owner's association shall
be responsible for all installation costs and monthly operating costs
associated with the private streetlights;



      3.   The developer and/or property owner's association shall
be responsible for any costs associated with deletion of the private street
lights and any costs associated with installing the town's standard street
lights prior to the expiration of the ten-year contract; and



      4.   The developer shall include all responsibilities of the
homeowner's association pertaining to the street lighting in the development
covenants. The developer shall inform all purchasers of property in the
development of these same responsibilities.



   5.12.6   FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT



   Fire protection equipment shall be installed at locations determined by
the Lillington Fire Department or other fire service agency which will have
primary response responsibility within the proposed development.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.13  Cluster Subdivision Provisions



   5.13.1   PURPOSE



   The purpose of this section is to provide greater flexibility in the
design and creation of residential subdivisions while preserving significant
amounts of open space and environmentally sensitive areas. This is achieved
by allowing the clustering of residential lots, with reduced area, frontage
and setback standards in relation to the underlying district, on areas of the
proposed site which are best suited for development and leaving the remaining
land as permanently protected open space.



   5.13.2   MINIMUM AREA FOR A CLUSTER SUBDIVISION



   The minimum area for a cluster subdivision is 25 acres.



   5.13.3   MINIMUM OPEN SPACE DEDICATION



   The minimum amount of preserved open space that must be dedicated and
permanently protected within a cluster subdivision is 20% of the gross
acreage of the proposed subdivision.



   5.13.4   MAXIMUM NUMBER OF LOTS & LOT SIZES



   A.   The maximum number of lots shall not exceed that of the base
zoning and/or the maximum density for properties located in the critical area
of the Cape Fear Water Supply Watershed as outlined in Article VI , Section
6.03.6 of this ordinance.



   B.   Minimum lot sizes are not applicable to single- family cluster
subdivision projects.



   5.13.5   MINIMUM LOT FRONTAGE AND BUILDING SETBACKS



   The minimum lot frontage and building setback requirements of the
underlying zoning district may be reduced by up to 25% within a cluster
subdivision. In exchange for the dedication of additional land for natural
open space preservation, the lot width and building setback requirements may
be reduced by an additional 1% for each additional 2% of the gross acreage of
the project that is dedicated for natural open space preservation. In no case
shall the lot width or building setback requirements be reduced below 40% of
the requirements of the underlying zoning district.



   5.13.6    OPEN SPACE STANDARDS



   Section 4.07 for Open Space Standards.



   5.13.7    PHASED DEVELOPMENTS



   A cluster subdivision may be developed in phases provided that all
required open space for the entire project be recorded and deeded to the
designated receiving entity with to the development of the first phase.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.14  Transportation Impact Analysis



   A transportation impact analysis (TIA) is a specialized study that
evaluates the effects of a development's traffic on the surrounding
transportation infrastructure. It is an essential part of the development
review process to assist developers and government agencies in making land
use decisions involving various development reviews. The TIA helps identify
where the development may have a significant impact on safety, traffic and
transportation operations, and provides a means for the developer and
government agencies to mitigate these impacts. Ultimately, the TIA can be
used to evaluate whether the scale of development is appropriate for a
particular site and what improvements may be necessary, on and off the site,
to provide safe and efficient access and traffic flow.



   5.14.1   APPLICABILITY



   The following table identified the level of analysis required, if any,
for different types of development proposals:



 


Level of Study Required by Development Type:

 

Residential

 

Office

 

Hotel

 

Industrial

 

Commercial Center

 

Other



None
 
Under 100 units
 
Under 50,000 sf
 
Under 100 room
 
Under 150 employees
 
N/A
 
Under 100 peak hour trips


Standard TIA
 
100-500 units
 
50,000 – 350,000 sf
 
100-500 rooms
 
150-1,000 employees
 
Under 100,000 total sf
 
100-500 peak hour trips


Enhanced TIA
 
Over 500 units
 
Over 350,000 sf
 
Over 500 rooms
 
Over 1,000 employees
 
Over 100,000 total sf
 
Over 500 peak hour trips



 



   5.14.2   STANDARD TIA REQUIREMENTS



   A standard TIA includes the following elements:



   A.   Abstract or Summary: Summarize description of proposed
development, location, traffic generation, existing and future conditions
(level of service), and recommended improvements. The report should not
exceed two pages and preferably limited to one page.



   B.   Description of Development: Describe acreage included in
development, existing and proposed land use, existing and proposed zoning,
proposed density (number of houses, square feet of development, etc.)



   C.   Study Area: Generally, ¼ mile to ½ mile from each proposed
site access along roads accessed by the site. This area may, in a few cases,
be greater if the site is on a road with no intersections within that
distance.



   D.   Site Location: Include location map showing site in relation to
major streets and at least one-mile radius from site.



   E.   Traffic Generation: Indicate number of trips generated by site
daily, AM peak hour, PM peak hour (AM peak hour may be omitted for retail
uses which are not expected to generate significant traffic volumes during
this period). Indicate internal or pass-by traffic generation if appropriate.
For rezoning, indicate traffic generation under existing zoning as well as
proposed zoning. Indicate source of trip generation rate, land use code, and
units used to derive generation.



   F.   Trip Distribution: Indicate percentage distribution of trips,
by direction, within study area and method used to obtain.



   G.   Access Location(s): Location of planned streets or driveways
and access to existing streets. Indicate other streets or driveways within
study area, including those across the street. Indicate coordination with
NCDOT where appropriate.



   H.   Existing Road and Traffic Conditions: Street laneage and
classification, traffic control devices, existing daily traffic volumes
within study area. Show traffic volumes and level of service of signalized
intersections and proposed site access points within study area during AM and
PM peak hour (PM only for retail). Include work sheets or computer printouts
showing counted traffic volumes and level-of-service. Illustrate in figure(s)
showing peak hour volumes, lanes, and level of service. For unsignalized
intersections, show level-of-service for individual movements. Discuss
transit service if applicable. Discuss accident history, if appropriate.



   I.   Planned Improvements: Discuss and describe any planned road
improvements in the study area which could affect future traffic. Note
whether project is shown on any applicable transportation plan, or NCDOT TIP.



   J.   Future Conditions: Same as for existing conditions, plus site
traffic assigned to driveways or access points, for condition with full
build-out of project, at build-out year. Include growth in background traffic
due to other approved developments or to general growth in area. May show
more than one phase, if project is to be phased. Discuss any conflict with
other driveways or streets, queuing problems, potential safety problems.



   K.   Pedestrian Facilities: Indicate location of existing and
proposed sidewalks and crosswalks, internal pedestrian paths.



   L.   Recommended Improvements: Indicate improvements required for
access points and signalized intersections within study area to operate at
acceptable level of service (D or better). These may include site access,
internal site circulation, signalization, signal modification (retiming,
additional phases), lane modifications or additions, or street widening. A
signal warrant study is not required but may be included as supporting
documentation where a traffic signal is requested. Note: showing recommended
improvements does not necessarily indicate responsibility for improvement.
Report may indicate which improvements are due to development and which are
due to existing problems or other growth in traffic, and may suggest
responsibility of developer or of other parties for improvements. Proposed
improvements should be shown schematically on figure.



   M.   Engineer's Seal: All TIAs are to be prepared and sealed by an
engineer registered in the State of North Carolina and specializing in
traffic or transportation, with experience in preparing TIAs.



   5.14.3    ENHANCED TIA REQUIREMENTS



   An enhanced TIA includes all of the elements of a standard TIA plus the
following:



   A.   Study Area: Generally, from one to three miles from each
proposed site access along roads accessed by the site. The extent of the
study area should be discussed with town staff prior to initiating the TIA.



   B.   Internal Circulation: Review internal circulation patterns and
note recommended changes.



   C.   Trip Distribution: Use of a computer model for distribution may
be desirable for major projects.



   D.   Future Conditions: Projects in this category, other than
perhaps shopping centers, are likely to be phased. It is desirable to show
conditions at end of planning period (generally 20-year or horizon used in
transportation plan).



   E.   Recommended Improvements: For major projects, these may involve
changes to the transportation plan. The project may include the construction
of portions of streets within or adjacent to the site.



   5.14.4   IMPROVEMENTS MAY BE REQUIRED



   Based on the findings of the analysis, if a proposed development does
not meet the applicable service level standards, the applicant shall be
required to upgrade the facilities in accordance with the adopted level of
service program. Mitigation measures may involve strategies other than
roadway construction or other physical improvements such as changes to
traffic signal timing or phasing, and transportation management strategies.



   5.14.5   PAYMENTS-IN-LIEU OF IMPROVEMENTS



   The town may, at its discretion, accept either mitigation measures to
be completed by the developer or a fee paid to the town in lieu of
mitigation. The fee shall be equal to the costs of the required mitigation
measures, as determined by the Administrator. A combination of mitigation
measures and payments-in-lieu of dedication may be permitted.
Payments-in-lieu of dedication shall be approved as part of the subdivision
or site plan.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.15  Improvements Guarantees & Performance Securities



   5.15.1   IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES



   A.   Applicability: In lieu of construction of the permanent
improvements required by this ordinance, the developer shall guarantee that
such improvements will be carried out according to the Town of Lillington
specifications at his/her expense. At minimum, improvements such as public
utilities and initial surface of street right-of-way shall be installed and
inspected by the Administrator for compliance. The remaining improvements
shall be built or bonded prior to the recording of the final plat.



   B.   Amount of Improvement Guarantees: Such guarantees shall be in
an amount of not less than 125% of the estimated cost of the construction of
the required improvements. The amount of guarantee shall be approved by the
Administrator based on a professional engineers certified cost estimate and
shall be provided in the manner outlined in Section 5.15.2.



   C.   Release of Improvement Guarantees: The Administrator shall
authorize the release of all or a portion of any guarantee posted as the
improvements are completed. Such funds shall be released within 30 days after
submittal of an improvements completion certification from a professional
engineer and approval of applicable improvements by the Administrator.



   D.   Warranty Against Defects



      1.   Upon completion of construction of new streets,
stormwater controls or other required utilities, the developer shall request
a warranty inspection. Once all the improvements are deemed acceptable by the
Administrator and pass the warranty inspection, the developer shall submit
the following to the Administrator:



         a.   A set of acceptable as-built drawings;



         b.   A written warranty against defects which shall
guarantee the material and workmanship of required improvements for a period
of not less than one year from the date of such acceptance;



         c.   A financial guarantee payable to the town equal to
at least 25% of the cost of the installation of such improvements as
determined by the Administrator. Such financial guarantee shall be in a form
as provided for in Section 5.15.2.



      2.   Upon approval of these materials and acceptance of the
improvements by the town, a one-year warranty period shall commence. During
the one-year warranty period, the developer shall repair any latent defects
that occur. For the purposes of this section, the term "defects" refers to
any condition in publicly dedicated facilities, utilities or streets that
requires the town to make repairs to such improvements over and above the
normal amount of maintenance that they would require. If such defects appear,
the warranty may be enforced regardless of whether the facilities, utilities
or streets were constructed in accordance with the requirements of this
ordinance. At the end of the one-year warranty period, the developer shall
request a final inspection. Upon successful completion of all warranty items,
the developer shall be released from maintenance responsibilities for the
warranted construction.



      3.   Warranty repairs shall be corrected in accordance with
the recommendations of the Administrator.



      4.   If a developer fails to complete warranty items, future
projects of the developer may not be reviewed by the town. In addition, the
town shall take appropriate legal action against the developer.



   5.15.2   TYPES OF GUARANTEES/SECURITIES



   Improvements guarantees and performance securities shall be made in one
or more of the following forms:



   A.   The deposit of a certified check;



   B.   A letter of credit duly executed by a local bank and payable to
the town; or



   C.   A surety bond made by a surety company licensed to do business
in North Carolina.



   5.15.3   FORFEITURE AND DEFAULT



   A.   Forfeiture Provisions: All improvement guarantees and
performance securities shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure, after
proper notice, to complete work within the time specified, or to initiate or
maintain any actions which may be required of the applicant or owner in
accordance with this ordinance, approvals issued pursuant to this ordinance,
or an operation and maintenance agreement established pursuant to this
ordinance.



   B.   Default by Developer:



      1.   Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the
developer or surety to make timely completion of the required improvements,
or to maintain privately owned improvements in accordance with an approved
operations and maintenance agreement, the town may require the developer, the
surety, or the financial institution holding the escrow account to pay all or
any portion of the bond or escrow account fund to the town.



      2.   Upon payment, the town, at its discretion, may expend
such portion of the funds as it deems necessary to complete all or any
portion of the required improvements.



      3.   Such expenditure of funds shall only be made after
requesting the owner to comply with the permit or maintenance agreement.



   5.15.4   PROVISION OF SERVICES AND ACCEPTANCE BY TOWN



   The following shall not occur upon any land for which a plat is
required to be approved, unless and until the requirements set forth in this
ordinance have been complied with and the final plat has been approved and
recorded with the Harnett County Register of Deeds:



   A.   No street shall be maintained or accepted by the town, and



   B.   No water or sewer shall be extended to or connected with any
subdivision of land, and



   C.   No permit shall be issued by the Town of Lillington for the
construction of any building or other improvement requiring a permit.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 5.16  Ownership & Maintenance of Common Areas



   All developments containing land, amenities or other facilities under
private common ownership shall provide for the ownership & maintenance of
such areas. Multi-family developments that are subject to fee-simple lot/unit
ownership shall convey all such common areas to a non-profit corporate
property owner's association with a membership of 100% of the lots/units in
the development. The developer shall file with the Harnett County Register of
Deeds a "dedication of covenants" and must meet the following criteria:



   A.   The property owners' association must be established before the
units are sold;



   B.   The property owners' association is established as the
responsible entity for the liability insurance, pertinent local taxes, and
maintenance of all recreation and other facilities;



   C.   Sums levied by the property owners' association that remain
unpaid shall become a lien on the delinquent property;



   D.   For condominium development, documents must meet the
requirements of G.S. Ch. 47A Unit Ownership;



   E.   All easements over common areas for access, ingress, egress and
parking shall be shown and recorded on a final plat with the Harnett County
Register of Deeds.



   *See Article IV for ownership & maintenance requirements specific to
open space.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Article VI.
ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION



Section 6.01  Flood Damage Prevention



   6.01.1   STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, &
OBJECTIVES



   A.   Statutory authorization



   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in G.S. Ch. 143,
Article 21, Part 6; G.S. Ch. 153A, Article 18, Parts 3 and 4; and G.S. Ch.
153A, Art. 6, Part 121, delegated the responsibility to local governmental
units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of
Lillington, North Carolina does ordain as follows:



   B.   Findings of Fact



      1.   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of
Lillington are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life,
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.



      2.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous.



   6.01.2   STATEMENT OF PURPOSE



   It is the purpose of this article is to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:



   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;



   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development that
may increase erosion or flood damage; and,



   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



   6.01.3   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   A.   Land Applicability



   This article shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Lillington.



   B.   Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard



   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North
Carolina and FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), for the Town of Lillington dated October 3,
2006, which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
article.



   C.   Warning & Disclaimer of Liability



   The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that
land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not
create liability on the part of the Town of Lillington or by any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



   6.01.4   ADMINISTRATION



   A.   Designation of Local Administrator



   The Administrator, herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator,
is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this
article.



   B.   Certification Requirements



      1.   Elevation Certificates:



         a.   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) or
floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) is required after the reference
level is established. Within 21 calendar days of establishment of the
reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of
the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Elevation certification
shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a Professional
North Carolina Land Surveyor or Engineer and certified by same. Any work done
within the 21-day calendar period and prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately
and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue
a stop-work order for the project.



         b.   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form
81-31) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate
of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. Elevation certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct
supervision of, a Professional North Carolina Land Surveyor or Engineer and
certified by same. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted.  Deficiencies deted by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/cccupancy
issuance.  In some instances, another certification may be required to
certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification
or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the
issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.



      2.   If nonresidential floodproofing is used to meet the
regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) is required prior to the actual start of any
new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea
level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a Professional North Carolina Engineer or Architect licensed
by the North Carolina Board of Architecture and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification
or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified
design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.



      3.   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE,
or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height
above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required per
"Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction" of this article.



      4.   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a
description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an
engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to property is
located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the
permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit.



      5.   Certification Exemptions:



         The following structures, if located within Zone A, AO, AE
or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification
requirements specified in items 1. and 2. above:



         a.   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of
"Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction" of this article;



         b.   Temporary structures meeting requirements of
"Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction" of this article; and



         c.   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet
meeting requirements of "Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction" of this
article.



   C.   Duties & Responsibilities of the Local Administrator



   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:



      1.   Review all floodplain development applications and issue
permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied.



      2.   Advise applicant that additional federal or state permits
(wetlands, endangered species, erosion and sedimentation control, riparian
and stream buffers, mining, etc.) may be required, and require that copies of
such permits be provided and maintained on file with the zoning permit.



      3.   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina
Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



      4.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished.



      5.   Prevent encroachments within floodways unless the
certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of "Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction" of this article, subsection "Standards for Riverine
Floodplains with BFE but without Established Floodways or Non-encroachment
Areas" are met.



      6.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the reference level (including basement) and all utilities of all new or
substantially improved structures, in accordance with subsection
"Certification Requirements", above.



      7.   Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the new or substantially improved structures and all
utilities have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection
"Certification Requirements", above.



      8.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of all public utilities in accordance with subsection "Certification
Requirements", above.



      9.   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
structure, obtain certifications from a Professional North Carolina Engineer
or Architect licensed by the North Carolina Board of Architecture and
certified by same in accordance with "Floodplain Permit" of Article VII.



      10.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location
of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal
the interpretation as provided in this article.



      11.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data or floodway data
has not been provided in accordance with subsection "Basis for Establishing
the Areas of Special Flood Hazard" of subsection "General Provisions",
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE) data,
along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a
federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to item
B.2. of subsection "Standards for Floodplains without Established Base Flood
Elevations" of this article, in order to administer the provisions of this
article.



      12.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no
floodway nor non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with
subsection "Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard" of
subsection "General Provisions" (above), obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a
federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this
article.



      13.   When the exact location of boundaries of the special
flood hazard areas conflict with the current, natural topography information
at the site, the property owner may apply and be approved for a Letter of Map
Amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. Maintain a copy of the Letter of Map Amendment
(LOMA) issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.



      14.   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this article and make these records available for public
inspection.



      15.   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the
work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain
Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary
to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of this
article and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain
Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter
on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable
hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.



      16.   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building
or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in
violation of this article, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to
be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed
to the person doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific
work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.



      17.   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The
Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the
reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for
refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any
floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable
state or local law may also be revoked.



      18.   Make periodic inspections throughout all special flood
hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain
Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour
for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.



      19.   Follow through with corrective procedures of Article
XIII "Enforcement & Penalties."



      20.   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for
variance requests.



      21.   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not
limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and/or other official flood maps/studies
adopted under subsection "Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood
Hazard" of subsection "General Provisions" of this article, including any
revisions thereto including letters of map change, issued by state and/or
FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs.



      22.   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including
Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) and Letters of Map Revision
(LOMR).



   D.   PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



      1.   General Standards:



         In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions
are required:



         a.   All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure;



         b.   All new construction and substantial improvements
below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;



         c.   All new construction or substantial improvements
shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages;



         d.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding. These include, but are not limited
to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork,
electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, appliances (washers,
dryers, refrigerators, freezers, etc.), hot water heaters, and electric
outlets/switches.



         e.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;



         f.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;



         g.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding; and,



         h.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or
improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of
this article, shall meet the requirements for new construction as contained
in this article.



         i.   Nothing in this article shall prevent the repair,
reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on or
prior to September 18, 2006 and located totally or partially within the
floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided that the bulk of
the building or structure below the regulatory flood protection elevation in
the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback is not increased and
provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the
other requirements of this ordinance.



         j.   New solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous
waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities
shall not be permitted in special flood hazard areas, except by variance as
specified in subsection "Flood Damage Prevention Variance Procedures" of
Article VII of this ordinance. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel
storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment
plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood
hazard area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed
to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified according
to subsection "Certification Requirements", above, of this article.



         k.   All subdivision proposals and other development
proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



         l.   All subdivision proposals and other development
proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood
damage.



         m.   All subdivision proposals and other development
proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.



         n.   All subdivision proposals and other development
proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental
agencies for which approval is required by federal or state law, including
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. 1334.



      2.   Specific Standards:



         In all special flood hazard areas where base flood
elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth by the provisions of
this article, in addition to subsection "General Standards", are required:



         a.   Residential Construction:



         New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the reference
level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in Article X "Definitions & Interpretations"
of this ordinance.



         b.   Nonresidential Construction:



         New construction or substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial, or nonresidential structure shall have the reference
level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in Article X "Definitions & Interpretations"
of this ordinance. Structures located in A, AO, AE, and A1-30 Zones may be
floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of
elevation provided that all areas of the structure below the required
elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A Professional
North Carolina Engineer or Architect licensed by the North Carolina Board of
Architecture and certified by same shall certify that the standards of this
subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator as set forth in subsection "Certification
Requirements", above, of this article, along with the operational and
maintenance plans.



         c.   Manufactured Homes:



            i.   New or replacement manufactured homes shall
be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower
than the regulatory flood protection elevation.



            ii.   Manufactured homes shall be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement in accordance with the State of North Carolina
Regulations for Manufactured/Mobile Homes, 1995 Edition, and any revision
thereto adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. §
143-143.15 or a certified engineered foundation. Additionally, when the
elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above
the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or
engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches
in height, an engineering certification is required 3. All foundation
enclosures or skirting shall be in accordance with subsection "Elevated
Buildings."



            iii.   An evacuation plan shall be developed for
evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or
substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within
flood prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the
Floodplain Administrator and the Emergency Service Director.



         d.   Elevated Buildings:



            Enclosed areas, of new construction or substantially
improved structures, which are below the regulatory flood protection
elevation:



            i.   Shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access,
or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or
elevator). The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;



            ii.   Shall be constructed entirely of flood
resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection elevation;



            iii.   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and
A1-30, measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement,
the openings shall either be certified by a Professional North Carolina
Engineer or Architect licensed by the North Carolina Board of Architecture
and certified by same or meet the following minimum design criteria;



               a)   Provide a minimum of two openings on
different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding;



               b)   The total net area of all openings
shall be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;



               c)   If a building has more than one
enclosed area, each area shall have openings to allow floodwaters to
automatically enter and exit;



               d)   The bottom of all required openings
shall be no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade;



               e)   Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the
automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and



               f)   Foundation enclosures made of flexible
skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and,
therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless
of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as
outlined above.



            iv.   Additions & Improvements:



               a)   Additions and/or improvements to
pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with
any interior modifications to the existing structure are:



                  I.   Not a substantial improvement,
the addition and/or improvements shall be designed to minimize flood damages
and shall not be any more nonconforming than the existing structure.



                  II.   A substantial improvement, both
the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements shall comply with
the standards for new construction.



               b)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with
no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in the
common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for
new construction.



               c)   Additions and/or improvements to
post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination
with any interior modifications to the existing structure are:



                  I.   Not a substantial improvement,
the addition and/or improvements only shall comply with the standards for new
construction.



                  II.   A substantial improvement, both
the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements shall comply with
the standards for new construction.



               d)   Where a fire wall or independent
perimeter load-bearing wall is provided between the addition and the existing
building, the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building and only
the addition shall comply with the standards for new construction.



         e.   Recreational Vehicles



            Recreation vehicles placed on sites within a special
flood hazard area shall either:



            i.   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



            ii.   Meet all the requirements for new
construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection
"Certification Requirements" of "Administration" of this article and
subsection "General Standards" and "Manufactured Homes."



         f.   Temporary Nonresidential Structures:



            Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development
permit, for a temporary structure, applicants shall submit to the Floodplain
Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a
hurricane, flash flood, or other type of flood warning notification. The
following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator for review and written approval



            i.   A specified time period for which the
temporary use will be permitted. Time specified should be minimal with total
time on site not to exceed 12 months;



            ii.   The name, address, and phone number of the
individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;



            iii.   The time frame prior to the event at which
a structure will be removed (i.e. minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a
hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification);



            iv.   A copy of the contract or other suitable
instrument with a trucking company to ensure the availability of removal
equipment when needed; and



            v.   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of
a location outside the floodplain to which the temporary structure will be
moved.



         g.   Accessory Structures:



            When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages,
etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following
criteria shall be met:



            i.   Accessory structures shall be used for human
habitation (including work, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);



            ii.   Accessory structures shall not be
temperature-controlled;



            iii.   Accessory structures shall be designed to
have low flood damage potential;



            iv.   Accessory structures shall be constructed
and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the
flow of floodwaters;



            v.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored
in accordance with Subsection "General Standard";



            vi.   All service facilities such as electrical
shall be installed in accordance with Subsection "General Standards"; and



            vii.   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure
during a flood shall be provided below flood protection elevation in
conformance with "Elevated Buildings", item d., above.



            viii.   An accessory structure with a footprint
less than 150 square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not
require an elevation or floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing
certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance
with subsection "Certification Requirements" of this article.



   E.   STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD
ELEVATIONS



      Within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection
"Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard" of subsection
"General Provisions" of this article, where no base flood elevation (BFE)
data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to
subsection "Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction", subsection "General
Standards", shall apply:



      1.   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a
distance of 20 feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the
stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical
data by a Professional North Carolina Engineer is provided demonstrating that
such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



      2.   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be determined based on one of the following
criteria set in priority order:



         a.   If base flood elevation (BFE) data is available
from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within
such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance
and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in
Subsection "Administration", Subsection "Duties & Responsibilities of the
Local Administrator".



         b.   All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other
development proposals located within special flood hazard areas shall provide
base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is greater than five acres or
has more than 50 lots or manufactured home sites. Such base flood elevation
(BFE) data shall be adopted by reference per subsection "Basis for
Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard" of subsection "General
Provisions" of this article.



         c.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not
available from a federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the
reference level shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade as
required in the regulatory flood protection elevation definition.



   F.   STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BFE BUT WITHOUT
ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS



   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided but neither
floodway nor non-encroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard
area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply
to all development within such areas:



      1.   Standards outlined in subsection "Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction", subsections "General Standards" and "Specific Standards";
and



      2.   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless
certification with supporting technical data by a Professional North Carolina
Engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.



   G.   FLOODWAYS & NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS



   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located
within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection "Basis for
Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard" of subsection "General
Provisions" of this article. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are
extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have
erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following
provisions, in addition to standards outlined in subsection "Provisions for
Flood Hazard Reduction", subsections "General Standards" and "Specific
Standards", shall apply to all development within such areas:



      1.   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless it
has been demonstrated that:



         a.   The proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood, based
on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice and presented to the Administrator prior to issuance of
floodplain development permit, or



         b.   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has
been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) shall also be obtained
upon completion of the proposed encroachment.



      2.   If item a., above, is satisfied, all development shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article.



      3.   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except
replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, provided the following provisions are met:



         a.   The anchoring and the elevation standards of
subsection "Manufactured Homes" of subsection "Specific Standards"; and



         b.   The no encroachment standards above, are met.



   H.   STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO)



   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection
"Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard" of subsection
"General Provisions" of this article, are areas designated as shallow
flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base
flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In
addition to subsection "Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction", subsection
"General Standards", all new construction and substantial improvements shall
meet the following requirements:



      1.   The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as
the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet,
plus a freeboard of two feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least
two feet above the highest adjacent grade plus a freeboard of two feet if no
depth number is specified.



      2.   Nonresidential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be
floodproofed to the same level as required in item 1. of subsection "Specific
Standards," subsection "Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction" of this part
so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. Certification is required as per subsection "Floodplain Permit" of
Article III "Development & Subdivision Review, Permitting, & Approval
Requirements" and subsection "Nonresidential Construction" of subsection
"Specific Standards", above.



      3.   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 6.02   Drainage and Stormwater Management



   6.02.1   PURPOSE



   The purpose of these requirements is to provide criteria in addition to
other ordinances, rules, regulation, and law to control and minimize the
adverse impacts of drainage systems, stormwater runoff and erosion control
from new development and redevelopment.



   6.02.2   APPLICABILITY



   A.   GENERAL



      Beginning with and subsequent to its effective date, this
ordinance shall be applicable to all development and redevelopment,
including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision
applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to the
"Exemption" subsection of this article.



   B.   EXEMPTIONS



      1.   Thresholds



         a.   Residential development that cumulatively disturbs
less than one acre and is not part of a larger common plan of development or
sale, and non-residential development that cumulatively disturbs less than
one-half acre and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale
is exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.



         b.   Redevelopment outside the floodplain that results
in no net increase in built-upon area and provides equal or greater
stormwater control than the previous development is exempt from the
provisions of this ordinance.



         c.   Redevelopment of residential structures that
results in no net increase in built-upon area and provides equal or greater
stormwater control than the previous development is exempt from the
provisions of this ordinance whether or not within the floodplain.



         d.   Redevelopment of non-residential structures that
disturbs less than one-half acre, that is not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale, that is within the floodplain, and that results in no
net increase in built-upon area and provides equal or greater stormwater
control than the previous development is exempt from the provisions of this
ordinance.



         e.   Development and redevelopment that disturb less
than a stated area threshold are not exempt if such activities are part of a
larger common plan of development or sale that exceeds the area threshold,
even though multiple, separate or distinct activities take place at different
times on different schedules.



      2.   General exemption



      Activities that are exempt from permit requirements of Section
404 of the federal Clean Water Act as specified in 40 CFR 232 (primarily,
ongoing farming and forestry activities) are exempt from the provisions of
this ordinance.



   6.02.3   NATURAL DRAINAGE SYSTEM UTILIZED TO EXTENT FEASIBLE



   A.   To the extent practicable, all development shall conform to the
natural contours of the land and natural and pre-existing man-made drainage
ways shall remain undisturbed.



   B.   To the extent practicable, lot boundaries shall be made to
coincide with natural and preexisting man-made drainage ways within
subdivisions to avoid the creation of lots that can be built upon only by
altering such drainage ways.



   6.02.4   DEVELOPMENTS MUST DRAIN PROPERLY



   A.   All developments shall be provided with a drainage system that
is adequate to prevent the undue retention of surface water on the
development site. Surface water shall not be regarded as unduly retained if:



      1.   The retention results from a technique, practice or
device deliberately installed as part of an approved sedimentation or storm
water runoff control plan; or



      2.   The retention is not substantially different in location
or degree than that experienced by the development site in its predevelopment
stage, unless such retention presents a danger to health or safety.



   B.   No surface water may be channeled or directed into a sanitary
sewer.



   C.   Whenever practicable, the drainage system of a development
shall coordinate with and connect to the drainage systems or drainage ways on
surrounding properties or streets.



   6.02.5   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



   All developments shall be constructed and maintained so that adjacent
properties are not unreasonably burdened with surface waters as a result of
such developments. More specifically:



   A.   No development may be constructed or maintained so that such
development unreasonably impedes the natural flow of water from higher
adjacent properties across such development, thereby unreasonably causing
substantial damage to such higher adjacent properties;



   B.   No development may be constructed or maintained so that surface
waters from such development are unreasonably collected and channeled onto
lower adjacent properties at such locations or at such volumes as to cause
substantial damage to such lower adjacent properties; and



   C.   The post-development runoff rate shall be equal to or less than
the pre-development rate from the design storm or a ten year storm event.



   D.   All developments shall contain an adequate drainage system for
the property drainage of all surface water. No new construction and no
substantial improvements of a structure may take place unless the design of a
drainage system is reviewed by the administrator to assure that:



      1.   No surface water shall be channeled or directed into a
sanitary sewer.



      2.   Where feasible, the subdivider shall connect to an
existing storm drainage system.



      3.   Where an existing storm drainage system cannot feasibly
be extended to the subdivision, a surface drainage system shall be designed
to protect the proposed development from water damage.



      4.   Surface drainage courses shall have side slopes of not
less than the natural angle of repose for the soil but not steeper than a
three to one slope in which the course is constructed and courses shall be of
sufficient size to accommodate the drainage area without flooding the
adjacent properties.



   6.02.6   STORMWATER CONTROL STRUCTURES



   All structural stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) shall meet
the minimum design requirements of this article, as well as those established
in the most current edition of the North Carolina Department of Environment
and Natural Resources, Division of Water Quality's Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The use of environmentally friendly water quality controls,
such as storm drain trays and pervious tree surrounds, are encouraged.



   A.   All stormwater control structures shall be designed by a state
registered professional with qualifications appropriate for the type of
system required. These registered professionals are defined as professional
engineers, landscape architects (to the extent that the G.S. Ch. 89A allow)
and land surveyors, to the extent that the design represents incidental
drainage within a development, as provided in the G.S. § 89C-3(7).



   B.   All stormwater controls shall use wet detention as a primary
treatment system unless alternate stormwater management measures, as outlined
in below are used. Wet detention ponds shall be designed for specific
pollutant removal according to modeling techniques approved by the North
Carolina Division of Environment and Natural Resources. Specific requirements
for these systems shall be in accordance with the following design criteria.



      1.   Wet detention ponds shall be designed to remove 85% of
total suspended solids in the permanent pool and storage runoff from a one
inch rainfall from the site above the permanent pool.



      2.   The designed runoff storage volume shall be above the
permanent pool.



      3.   The discharge rate from these systems following the one
inch rainfall design storm shall be such that the runoff does not draw down
to the permanent pool level in less than two days and that the pond is drawn
down to the permanent pool level within at least five days.



      4.   The mean permanent pool depth shall be a minimum of three
feet.



      5.   The inlet structure shall be designed to minimize
turbulence using baffles or other appropriate design features.



      6.   Vegetative filters shall be constructed for the overflow
and discharge of all stormwater wet detention ponds and shall be at least 30
feet in length. The slope and width of the vegetative filter shall be
determined so as to provide a non-erosive velocity flow-through filter for a
ten-year, 24-hour storm with a ten-year, one-hour intensity with a slope of
5% or less. Vegetation in the filter shall be natural vegetation, grasses or
artificially planted wetland vegetation appropriate for the site
characteristics.



   C.   Alternative stormwater management systems, consisting of one
treatment option or a combination of treatment options, may be used. The
design criteria for approval shall be 85% average annual removal of total
suspended solids. Also, the discharge rate shall meet one of the following
criteria:



      1.   The discharge rate following the one-inch design storm
shall be such that the runoff draws down to the pre-storm design stage within
five days, but not less than two days; or



      2.   The post development peak discharge rate shall equal the
predevelopment rate for the one-year, 24-hour storm.



      3.   In addition to the vegetative filters required above, all
land areas outside of the pond shall be provided with a ground cover
sufficient to restrain erosion within 30 days after any land disturbance.
Upon completion of the stormwater control structure, a permanent ground cover
shall be established and maintained as part of the maintenance agreement
described in the article.



      4.   A description of the area containing the stormwater
control structure shall be prepared and filed consistent with subsection
"Inspection and Release of the Performance Bond" of this article, as a
separate deed with the Harnett County Register of Deeds along with any
easements necessary for general access to the stormwater control structure.
The deeded area shall include the stormwater control structure, vegetative
filters, all pipes and water control structures, berms, dikes and the like,
and sufficient area to perform inspections, maintenance, repairs and
reconstruction.



      5.   Qualifying areas of the stormwater control structure may
be considered pervious when computing total built-upon area. However, if the
structure is used to compute the percentage built-upon area for one site, it
shall not be used to compute built-upon area for any other site or area.



   6.02.7   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER CONTROL STRUCTURES



   A.   Posting of Financial Security



      1.   All new stormwater control structures shall be
conditioned on the posting of adequate financial assurance for the purpose of
maintenance, repairs or reconstruction necessary for adequate performance of
the stormwater control structures.



      2.   The Town of Lillington may, at its discretion, require
the submittal of a performance security or bond with surety, cash escrow,
letter of credit or other acceptable legal arrangement prior to issuance of a
permit in order to ensure that the structural BMPs are installed by the
permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan, and/or
maintained by the owner as required by the operation and maintenance
agreement.



      3.   The amount of an installation performance security shall
be the total estimated construction cost of the BMPs approved under the
permit, plus 25%.



      4.   The amount of a maintenance performance security shall be
the present value of an annuity of perpetual duration based on a reasonable
estimate of the annual cost of inspection, operation and maintenance of the
BMPs approved under the permit, at a discount rate that reflects the
jurisdiction's cost of borrowing minus a reasonable estimate of long-term
inflation.



   B.   Uses of Performance Security



      1.   The performance security shall contain forfeiture
provisions for failure, after proper notice, to complete work within the time
specified, or to initiate or maintain any actions which may be required of
the applicant or owner in accordance with this ordinance, approvals issued
pursuant to this ordinance, or an operation and maintenance agreement
established pursuant to this ordinance.



      2.   Upon default of the owner to construct, maintain, repair
and, if necessary, reconstruct any structural BMP in accordance with the
applicable permit or operation and maintenance agreement, the Administrator
shall obtain and use all or any portion of the security to make necessary
improvements based on an engineering estimate. Such expenditure of funds
shall only be made after requesting the owner to comply with the permit or
maintenance agreement. In the event of a default triggering the use of
installation performance security, the Town of Lillington shall not return
any of the unused deposited cash funds or other security, which shall be
retained for maintenance.



   C.   Costs in Excess of Performance Security



      If the Town of Lillington takes action upon such failure by the
applicant or owner, the Town of Lillington may collect from the applicant or
owner the difference between the amount of the reasonable cost of such action
and the amount of the security held, in addition to any other penalties or
damages due.



   D.   Refund



      Within 60 days of the final approval, the installation
performance security shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated, except
any amount attributable to the cost (plus 25%) of landscaping installation
and ongoing maintenance associated with the BMPs covered by the security. Any
such landscaping shall be inspected one year after installation with
replacement for compliance with the approved plans and specifications and, if
in compliance, the portion of the financial security attributable to
landscaping shall be released.



   E.   Maintenance and Upkeep



      1.   An operation and maintenance plan or manual shall be
provided by the owner(s) for each stormwater control structure, indicating
what operation and maintenance actions are needed, what specific quantitative
criteria will be used for determining when those actions are to be taken and,
consistent with the operations maintenance agreement, who is responsible for
those actions. The plan shall clearly indicate the steps that will be taken
for restoring a stormwater control structure to design specifications if a
failure occurs. The agreement shall be filed with the Harnett County Register
of Deeds.



      2.   Landscaping and grounds management shall be the
responsibility of the owning entity. However, vegetation shall not be
established or allowed to mature to the extent that the integrity of the
control structure is diminished or threatened, or to the extent of
interfering with any easement or access to the stormwater control structure.



      3.   Except for general landscaping and grounds management,
the owning entity shall notify the Administrator prior to any repair or
reconstruction of the stormwater control structure. All improvements shall be
made consistent with the approved plans and specifications of the stormwater
control structure and the operation and maintenance plan or manual. After
notification by the owning entity, the Administrator shall inspect the
completed improvements and shall inform the owning entity of any required
additions, changes or modifications and of the time period to complete said
improvements.



   F.   Minor Amendments to Plans and Specifications



      1.   Amendments to the plans and specifications of the
stormwater control structure and/or the operation and maintenance plan or
manual shall be approved by the Administrator, provided that the changes do
not involve a change in the size or location of the structure.



      2.   Proposed changes shall be prepared by a state registered
professional engineer or landscape architect (to the extent that the G.S. Ch.
89A, allow) and submitted to and reviewed by the Administrator.



         a.   If the Administrator approves the proposed changes,
the owning entity of the stormwater control structure shall file sealed
copies of the revisions with the Administrator.



         b.   If the Administrator disapproves the changes, the
proposal may be revised and resubmitted to the Administrator as a new
proposal. If the proposal has not been revised and is essentially the same
plan that was already reviewed, it shall be returned to the applicant.



   G.   Major Amendments to Plans and Specifications



      1.   Amendments to the plans and specifications of the
stormwater control structure and/or the operation and maintenance plan or
manual that involve a change in the size or location may be approved by the
Board of Commissioners after receiving a recommendation from the
Administrator. Proposed changes shall be prepared by a state registered
professional engineer or landscape architect (to the extent that the G.S. Ch.
89A, allow) and submitted to, and reviewed by the Administrator.



      2.   Proposed changes shall be prepared by a Professional
North Carolina Engineer or landscape architect (to the extent that the G.S.
Ch. 89A allows) and submitted to, and reviewed by the Administrator and
NCDENR. Amendments to the plans and specifications of the stormwater control
structure and/or the operation and maintenance plan or manual that involve a
change in the size or location shall be approved by the Administrator and
NCDENR.



   H.   Revision of Plan Required if Found to be Inadequate



      1.   If the town finds that the operation and maintenance plan
or manual is inadequate for any reason, the Board of Commissioners shall
notify the owning entity of any required changes and shall prepare and file
copies of the revised agreement with the Harnett County Register of Deeds,
the Administrator and the owning entity.



      2.   If the Administrator finds that the operation and
maintenance plan or manual is inadequate for any reason, the Administrator
shall notify the owner(s) of any required changes. Once the revised plan or
manual has been deemed adequate, the owner(s) shall prepare and file copies
of the revised agreement with the Harnett County Register of Deeds and the
Administrator of this ordinance.



   I.   Inspection and Release of the Performance Bond



      1.   The stormwater control structure shall be inspected by
the Administrator, after the owning entity notifies the Administrator that
all work has been completed. At this inspection, the owning entity shall
provide:



         a.   The signed deed, related easements and survey plat
for the stormwater control structure ready for filing with the Harnett County
Register of Deeds; and



         b.   A certification sealed by an engineer or landscape
architect (to the extent that G.S. Ch. 89A, allow) stating that the
stormwater control structure is complete and consistent with the approved
plans and specifications.



      2.   The Administrator shall obtain the materials submitted by
the developer and the inspection report.



         a.   If the Administrator approves the inspection report
and accepts the certification, deed and easements, the Administrator shall
file the deed and easements with the Harnett County Register of Deeds,
release up to 75% of the value of the performance bond or other surety and
issue a zoning permit for the stormwater control structure.



         b.   If deficiencies are found, the Administrator shall
direct that improvements and inspections be made and/or documents corrected
and resubmitted to the Administrator.



      3.   No sooner than one year after the filing date of the
deed, easements and maintenance agreement, the developer may petition the
Board of Commissioners to release the remaining value of the performance bond
or other security. Upon receipt of said petition, the Administrator shall
inspect the stormwater control structure to determine whether the controls
are performing as designed and intended. The Administrator shall present the
petition, inspection report and recommendations to the Board of Commissioners.



         a.   If the Board of Commissioners approve the report
and accept the petition, the developer shall deposit with the town a cash
amount equal to that described above, after which, the Board shall release
the performance bond or other security.



         b.   If the Board of Commissioners do not accept the
report and rejects the petition, the Board shall provide the developer with
instructions to correct any deficiencies and all steps necessary for the
release of the performance bond or other surety.



   J.   Annual inspection required



      1.   All stormwater control structures shall be inspected at
least once on an annual basis to determine whether the controls are
performing as designed and intended. It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner(s) to ensure such inspection is performed. Records of
inspections shall be maintained on forms approved or supplied by the North
Carolina Division of Environment and Natural Resources. Annual inspections
shall begin within one (1) year of the filing date of the deed for the
stormwater control structure.



      2.   In the event that the Administrator discovers the need
for corrective action or improvements, he/she shall notify the Administrator
who shall notify the owner(s) of the needed improvements and the date by
which the corrective action is to be completed. All improvements shall be
made consistent with the plans and specifications of the stormwater control
structure and the operation plan or manual. After notification by the
owner(s), the Administrator shall inspect and approve the completed
improvements.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 6.03  Water Supply Watershed Protection



   6.03.1   GENERAL



   Pursuant to requirements of G.S. § 143-214.5, two Watershed Protection
Overlay Districts, as described in Article II, have been established for
lands within the watersheds of existing drinking water rivers. These
districts overlay other zoning districts established in Article II and
delineated on the Official Zoning Map. Wherever standards of the underlying
zoning district differ from the watershed overlay standards, the more
restrictive provisions shall apply.



   6.03.2   EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY



   A.   Nothing contained herein shall repeal, modify, or amend any
federal or state law or regulation, or any ordinance or regulation pertaining
thereto except any ordinance which these regulations specifically replace;
nor shall any provision of this ordinance amend, modify, or restrict any
provision of the Lillington Unified Development Ordinance; however, the
adoption of this section shall and does amend any and all ordinances,
resolutions, and regulations in effect in Lillington at the time of the
adoption of this ordinance that may be construed to impair or reduce the
effectiveness of this ordinance or to conflict with any of its provisions.



   B.   It is not intended that these regulations interfere with any
easement, covenants or other agreements between parties. However, if the
provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions or higher
standards for the use of a building or land, then the provisions of these
regulations shall control.



   C.   Existing development, as defined in this ordinance, is not
subject to the requirements of this ordinance. Expansions to structures
classified as existing development shall meet the requirements of this
ordinance, however, the built upon area of the existing development is not
required to be included in the density calculations.



   D.   If a nonconforming lot of record is not contiguous to any other
lot owned by the same party, then that lot of record shall not be subject to
the development restrictions of this ordinance if it is developed for
single-family residential purposes.



   6.03.3   PURPOSE AND INTENT



   A.   The purpose of the Watershed Protection Overlay Districts is to
prevent significant future water quality deterioration in existing or
potential future drinking water reservoirs and rivers that receive stormwater
runoff from land within the town. Protection of all water supplies within the
state, in accordance with minimum standards, was mandated by the Water Supply
Watershed Protection Act passed by the General Assembly in 1989. The quality
of water in drinking water reservoirs and rivers can be affected by human
activities including farming, obstruction of highways and roads, subdivision
development, industrial development and other land disturbing activities.
Types of water pollutants resulting from these activities include sediment,
bacterial contamination, heavy metals, synthetic organic compounds and
low-level radioactivity.



   B.   The intent of the Watershed Protection Overlay Districts is to
apply a set of regulations involving land use and, in some cases, structural
best management practices (BMPs) that protect the watersheds by reducing the
pollution from future development that enters the drinking water supplies.
Land use management practices involve minimum lot sizes, maximum allowed
density and built-upon area restrictions, since built-upon areas such as
roads, rooftops and driveways are a major source of pollution. Structural
best management practices allow for more intensive land uses by providing for
temporary detention of stormwater runoff so that pollutants may settle.



   6.03.4   ESTABLISHMENT OF AREA



   A.   The Watershed Protection Overlay Districts as hereby
established overlay other zoning districts established in this chapter. The
new use of any land or new structure within any Watershed Protection Overlay
District shall comply with the use regulations applicable to the underlying
zoning district as well as the requirements of the applicable Watershed
Protection Overlay District.



   B.   A Watershed Protection Overlay District will be applied to the
town portion of watersheds that have been classified as WS-IV watersheds by
the NC DEQ Environmental Management Commission in its implementation of G.S.
§ 143-214.5, the Water Supply Watershed Protection Act of 1989. In
accordance with the state mandate, two Watershed Protection Overlay
Districts, as listed below, are hereby established:



      1.   Cape Fear River Water Supply Watershed – Critical Area
(WS-IV-CA)



      2.   Cape Fear River Water Supply Watershed – Protected Area
(WS-IV-PA)



   6.03.5   DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



   A.   Watershed Areas Described



      1.   Cape Fear River Water Supply Watershed – Critical Area
(WS-IV-CA)



         Only new development activities that require an
erosion/sedimentation control plan under state law or approved local program
are required to meet the provisions of this subsection when located in the
WS-IV watershed. New residual waste sites and landfills are specifically
prohibited.  The uses allowed in this area are as follows:



         a.   Agriculture subject to the provisions of the Food
Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of
1990.



         b.   Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the
Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC II.6101-.0209).



         c.   Residential development.



         d.   Nonresidential development, excluding:



            i.   Landfills; and



            ii.   Sites for land application of
sludge/residuals or petroleum contaminated soils.



      2.   Cape Fear River Water Supply Watershed – Protected Area
(WS-IV-PA)



         Only new development activities that require an
erosion/sedimentation control plan under state law or approved local
government program are required to meet the provisions of this article when
located in a WS-IV Watershed. The uses allowed in this area are as follows:



         a.   Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food
Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agricultural, Conservation and Trade Act
of 1990.



         b.   Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the
Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC II.6101-.0209).



         c.   Residential development.



         d.   Nonresidential development.



   B.   Cluster Developments



   Clustering of development is allowed in all watershed areas under the
following conditions:



      1.   Minimum lot sizes are not applicable to single-family
cluster development projects; however, the total number of lots shall not
exceed the number of lots allowed for single-family detached developments in
the built-upon area requirements in the "Density and Built-Upon Area
Requirements" subsection of this article.



      2.   All built-upon areas shall be designed and located to
minimize stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize
concentrated stormwater flow.



      3.   The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or
natural state. Title to the open space area shall be conveyed to:



         a.   An incorporated homeowners' association for
management. Where a property association is not incorporated, a maintenance
agreement shall be filed with the property deeds; or



         b.   A local government for preservation as a park or
open space; or



         c.   A conservation organization for preservation in a
permanent easement.



   C.   Stream Buffers Required



      1.   A minimum 100-foot vegetative stream buffer is required
for all new development activities that exceed the low density option;
otherwise, a minimum 30-foot vegetative stream buffer for development
activities is required along all perennial waters indicated on the most
recent versions of USGS 1: 24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as
determined by local government studies. Desirable artificial stream bank or
shoreline stabilization approved by the Administrator is permitted.



      2.   No new development is allowed in stream buffers, except
for water dependent structures, other structures such as flag poles, signs
and security lights which result in only diminutive increases in impervious
area and public projects such as road crossings and greenways where no
practical alternative exists. These activities should minimize built-upon
surface area, direct runoff away from the surface waters, and maximize the
utilization of stormwater best management practices.



   D.   Application of Regulations



      1.   No building or land shall hereafter be used, and no
development shall take place, except in conformity with the regulations
herein specified for the watershed area in which it is located.



      2.   No area required for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this article shall be included in the area required for another
building.



      3.   If a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as
being allowed in a watershed area, such use or class of use is prohibited.



   E.   Existing Development



      1.   Any existing development as defined in this article, may
be continued and maintained subject to the provisions provided herein.
Expansions to structures classified as existing development shall meet the
requirements of this article; however, the built-upon area of the existing
development is not required to be included in the density calculations.



      2.   Reconstruction of buildings or built-upon areas.



      3.   Any existing building or built-upon area not in
conformance with the restrictions of this article that has been damaged or
removed may be repaired and/or reconstructed, except that there are no
restrictions on single-family residential development, provided:



         a.   Repair or reconstruction is initiated within three
months and completed within one year of such damage; and



         b.   The total amount of space devoted to built-upon
area may not be increased.



   6.03.6   Density and Built-upon Area Requirements



   Maximum residential and nonresidential density and built-upon area
limits shall be as indicated in the table below, or as required by the base
zoning district, whichever is less.



 

A. Cape Fear Water Supply Watershed (Class WS-IV)


Development Type
 
Classification
 
Max. Built-Upon Area
 
Max. Density




Single-Family Residential Development
 
Critical Area
 
24% (Low Density Option) or
 
2 units/1 acre


*50% (High Density Option)
 
Follow Base Zoning


Protection Area
 
24% (Low Density Option) – Requires Curb & Gutter or
 
Follow Base Zoning


36% (Low Density Option) – Without Curb & Gutter or
 
Follow Base Zoning


*70% (High Density Option) – Requires Curb & Gutter
 
Follow Base Zoning


All Other Residential & Non-residential Development
 
Critical Area
 
24% (Low Density Option) or
 
Follow Base Zoning


*50% (High Density Option)
 
Follow Base Zoning


Protection Area
 
24% (Low Density Option) – Requires Curb & Gutter or
 
Follow Base Zoning


36% (Low Density Option) – Without Curb & Gutter or
 
Follow Base Zoning


*70% (High Density Option) – Requires Curb & Gutter
 
Follow Base Zoning


Note: For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project area
shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be
developed.

*On-site infiltration of the first inch of storm water runoff & 100' stream
buffers along perennial streams required.




 



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Article VII.
ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT PROCESSES



Section 7.01  Administrative Agencies



   7.01.1   GENERAL MEETING PROCEDURES



   A.   Open Meetings



   All meetings of elected or appointed bodies under this ordinance shall
be open to the public in accordance with G.S. § 143-318 and shall be
conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in these regulations
and rules of procedure adopted by the respective bodies and approved by the
Board of Commissioners.



   B.   Rules of Procedure



   All boards shall adopt formal rules of procedure consistent with the
level of decision-making vested with that board/commission (e.g., advisory
review, quasi-judicial). Any adopted rules of procedure shall be kept on file
at Town Hall and shall be made available to the public.



   C.   Minutes



   Accurate minutes of each meeting shall be maintained by each board set
out in this article, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. Each board set out in this
article shall keep records of its examinations and official actions. All of
these minutes and records shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for
the public record.



   D.   Meetings



      1.   All bodies authorized under this ordinance shall meet at
regularly scheduled times and at such other times as determined by the
chairman as provided for in the rules of procedure.



      2.   Special meetings may be called at any time by the
chairperson or by request of a majority of members of the Board.



   7.01.2   ADMINISTRATOR



   The Town Manager is appointed as the Administrator and has the primary
responsibility for administrating and enforcing this ordinance. Other town
staff members may be appointed by the Town Manager to assist him or her in
these duties.



   A.   Powers and Duties



      The Administrator shall have the following powers and duties, to
be carried out in accordance with the terms of this ordinance:



      1.   Make all final decisions as to the interpretation and
definitions of this UDO;



      2.   Determine the amount and applicability of administrative
and consulting fees;



      3.   Monitor and determine the adequacy of security
instruments and escrow deposits and issuance of ministerial development
approvals;



      4.   Serve as staff for the Board of Commissioners, Planning
Board and Board of Adjustment;



      5.   Review and render interpretations of this UDO and the
Official Zoning Map;



      6.   Make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners,
Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment;



      7.   Accept applications for development approval; certify the
completeness of submitted applications with the requirements of these
regulations;



      8.   Review and prepare staff reports recommending approval,
approval with conditions or denial of applications for amendments to the text
of this UDO and all legislative and quasi-judicial applications;



      9.   Accept applications for, review, and approve, approve
with conditions or deny, applications for all ministerial development
approvals;



      10.   Monitor development projects to ensure compliance with
conditions of a development approval;



      11.   Monitor and assist in the enforcement of this UDO;



      12.   Review development applications to ensure that all
necessary permits, licenses, franchises and approvals have been obtained from
federal, state, local governmental districts, public and private utilities
and other public agencies.



      13.   Serve as the chair of the Technical Review Committee;



      14.   Maintain a record of all permits, appeals, variances,
certificates, reviews and such other transactions and correspondence
pertaining to the administration of this UDO;



      15.   Oversee code enforcement and responsibilities related to
ensuring compliance with the UDO, notification of violations, ordering
actions on violations and keeping records of related activities;



      16.   To administer the flood damage prevention portion of
this ordinance as follows:



         a.   Review all floodplain development applications and
issue permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas
and future conditions flood hazard areas to assure that the requirements of
this ordinance have been satisfied.



         b.   Advise permittee that additional federal or state
permits (wetlands, endangered species, erosion and sedimentation control,
riparian buffers, mining, etc.) may be required, and require that copies of
such permits be provided and maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit.



         c.   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina
Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency
Management, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Assure that
maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.



         d.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.



         e.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities
have been floodproofed, in accordance with Article VI – Environmental and
Natural Resource Protection.



         f.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of all public utilities in accordance with Article VI –
Environmental and Natural Resource Protection.



         g.   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or
architect in accordance with Article VI – Environmental and Natural
Resource Protection.



         h.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas or future conditions
flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary
interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
this ordinance.



         i.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been
provided, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
(BFE) data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data available
from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions
of this ordinance.



         j.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided
but no floodway nor non-encroachment area data has been provided, obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-encroachment area
data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer
the provisions of this ordinance.



         k.   When the lowest ground elevation of a parcel or
structure located within Zone AE is above the base flood elevation (BFE),
advise the property owner of the option to apply for a Letter of Map
Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA.



         l.   Maintain a copy of the Letter of Map Amendment
(LOMA) issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.



         m.   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to
the administration of this ordinance and make these records available for
public inspection.



         n.   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As
the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the
floodplain administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be
necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions
of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power,
the floodplain administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.



         o.   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a
building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or
repaired in violation of this ordinance, the floodplain administrator may
order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in
writing and directed to the person doing the work. The stop-work order shall
state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the
stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation
of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.



         p.   Revoke floodplain development permits as required.
The floodplain administrator may revoke and require the return of the
floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing
stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any
substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or
specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of
state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in
securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in
violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked.



         q.   Make periodic inspections throughout all special
flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain
Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour
for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.



         r.   Follow through with corrective procedures of
Article IX – Enforcement and Penalties.



         s.   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for
variance requests.



         t.   Maintain a current map repository to include, but
not limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and
studies adopted in accordance with Article VI – Environmental and Natural
Resource Protection, including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map
Change, issued by FEMA, and to notify the state and FEMA of mapping needs.



         u.   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs,
including Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) and Letters of Map
Revision (LOMR). Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for
the Administrator elsewhere in this ordinance and other laws and regulations
of the town.



   7.01.3   TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE



   A.   Powers and Duties



      1.   There is hereby established a Technical Review Committee
(TRC).



      2.   The TRC shall serve as a review and recommending body,
assisting the Administrator, Board of Commissioners, Planning Board and other
boards where appropriate, with the review of applications for development
approval. The TRC shall provide advice and recommendations on environmental,
planning, fiscal, design, engineering, transportation, utility,
geo-hydrological, water availability, sustainability, environmental and
technical issues, and to assess the comments and reports of reviewing town
departments, regional, state and federal agencies and officials,
owner/applicants and other interested parties with standing.



      3.   The TRC shall meet at the request of the Administrator.
An owner/applicant may be invited to attend meetings of the TRC only at the
discretion of the Administrator.



      4.   The TRC shall make recommendations to the Administrator,
Board of Commissioners, Planning Board and other bodies for approval,
conditional approval or denial of applications for development approval.



   B.   Membership



      1.   The TRC shall be chaired by the Administrator (or their
designee) and shall consist of technical staff and representatives of various
town departments on a project by project basis.



      2.   Members are appointed by the Administrator, and shall
include (but not be limited to) representatives from Fire, Police, Public
Services, Planning, Code Enforcement and Utilities. In addition, and as
appropriate, the TRC may include, for a specific development approval
application, representatives of other jurisdictions or service providers,
including but not limited to representatives from the Sheriff, fire
districts, school districts, other municipalities, county, public and private
utilities, assessment or public improvement districts and regional, state or
federal agencies.



   C.   UDO Review



      The Technical Review Committee shall serve as the reviewing
entity only for the following:



      1.   Minor site plans;



      2.   Minor subdivisions;



      3.   Major subdivision preliminary plats;



      4.   Final plats.



   D.   UDO Decisions



      The Technical Review Committee shall render final decisions
regarding the following:



      1.   Site construction plans;



      2.   Subdivision construction plans.



   7.01.4   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



   A.   Powers and Duties



      The Town of Lillington Board of Commissioners shall have the
following powers and duties to be carried out in accordance with the terms of
this ordinance.



      1.   To conduct any and all business in accordance with their
charter and the North Carolina General Statutes.



      2.   To amend the land use plan and other plans as necessary.



   B.   UDO Decisions



      The Board of Commissioners shall render final decisions regarding
the following:



      1.   Major site plans;



      2.   Major subdivision preliminary plats;



      3.   Conditional use permits;



      4.   Text amendments;



      5.   Map amendments and rezonings;



      6.   Conditional district rezonings;



      7.   Vested rights.



   7.01.5   PLANNING BOARD



   A.   Powers and Duties



   The Town of Lillington Planning Board shall have the following powers
and duties to be carried out in accordance with the terms of this ordinance.



      1.   To perform studies and surveys of the present conditions
and probable future development of the town and its environs, including but
not limited to, studies and surveys of land uses, population, traffic,
parking, annexation, expansions of extraterritorial jurisdiction, etc.



      2.   To formulate and recommend to the Board of Commissioners
the adoption and amendment of a land use plan and other plans as necessary.



      3.   To initiate proposals for amendments to the Unified
Development Ordinance based upon the findings and recommendations delivered
in such studies and adopted plans.



      4.   To determine whether specific proposed developments
conform to the principles and requirements of the adopted land use plan for
growth and improvement of the town.



      5.   Perform any other related duties that the Council may
direct per G.S. § 160A-361.



   B.   Membership and Quorum



      1.   Per Chapter 32 of the Town's Code of Ordinances, the
Planning Board shall consist of six members, three from the corporate limits
of the town and three from the one-mile territorial jurisdiction, who shall
be appointed by the Board of Commissioners.



      2.   Three members shall be appointed for a term of two years
and three members shall be appointed for a term of one year. As the terms of
these six members expire, new appointments for terms of two years shall be
made.



      3.   The appointment of members shall be made as vacancies
occur by expiration of the term of office or at such other time as vacancies
occur.



      4.   A quorum of three members shall be necessary to transact
regular business and recommendations.



   C.   UDO Review and Recommendation



      The Planning Board shall review and make recommendations
regarding the following:



      1.   Major site plans;



      2.   Major subdivision preliminary plats;



      3.   Conditional use permits;



      4.   Text amendments;



      5.   Map amendments and rezonings;



      6.   Conditional district rezonings.



   7.01.6   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT



   A.   Powers and Duties



      The Town of Lillington Board of Adjustment shall have the
following powers and duties to be carried out in accordance with the terms of
this ordinance.



      1.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision,
determination, or refusal made by the Administrator in the carrying out or
enforcement of any provision of this ordinance. A concurring vote of
four-fifths of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse, wholly
or partly any order, requirement, decision, permit, determination or refusal.



      2.   To authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such
variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to the special conditions, the following written
findings are made:



         a.   Carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance
would result in an unnecessary hardship. It shall not be necessary to
demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be
made of the property.



         b.   The hardship results from conditions that are
peculiar to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships
resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from
conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not
be the basis for granting a variance.



         c.   The hardship did not result from actions taken by
the applicant of the property owner. The act of purchasing property with
knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a
variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship.



         d.   The requested variance is consistent with the
spirit, purpose, and intent of this ordinance, such that the public safety is
secured, and substantial justice is achieved.



   B.   Membership and Quorum



      1.   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five voting
members from within the town corporate limits and two voting members from the
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the town. The five voting members of
the Town Board of Commissioners shall serve ex officio as the five in-town
representatives on the Board of Adjustment.



      2.   The two out-of-town members shall serve three-year terms
and shall be appointed by the County Board of Commissioners or as otherwise
provided by the North Carolina General Statutes.



      3.   ETJ members shall have the right to vote upon matters
arising within the corporate limits. In addition, there shall be one in-town
alternate and one ETJ alternate. The in-town alternate shall be the Mayor
ex-officio as described below.



      4.   ETJ members of the Board may be removed for cause by the
Board of Commissioners upon written charges and after public hearing.



      5.   The Mayor of the town shall serve as the Chairperson of
the Board of Adjustment.



      6.   The Chairperson may not vote on matters before the Board
of Adjustment unless fewer than six members are present and the Chairperson's
participation would create a quorum.



      7.   The Mayor pro-tem shall serve as Vice Chairperson but
retains the right to vote on all matters before the Board.



      8.   The Administrator shall appoint, shall serve as Clerk to
the Board of Adjustment.



      9.   Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson or at such other times as the Board may determine.



      10.   The Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Vice
Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.



      11.   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member or his or her absence or failure to vote and of its other official
actions.



      12.   A quorum of five members shall be necessary to transact
business (four in-town members and one ETJ member).



   C.   UDO Decisions



      The Board of Adjustment shall render final decisions regarding
the following:



      1.   Appeal of administrative decisions;



      2.   Variances.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 7.02  Development Processes and Permits



   7.02.1   PURPOSE AND INTENT



   In order to establish an orderly process to develop land within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Lillington consistent with standard development
practices and terminology it is the purpose of this section to provide a
clear and comprehensible development process.



   7.02.2   PROVISIONS AND APPLICABILITY



   The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all development
activity under the jurisdiction of the Town of Lillington.



   A.   Permit to Start Construction Required



      No land shall be used or occupied and no structures shall be
erected, moved, extended, or enlarged, nor shall any timbering, clearing and
grubbing, or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be
initiated until the Administrator has issued an appropriate permit which will
certify that the proposed work is in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance.



   B.   Fees and Inspections



      1.   The Town of Lillington is authorized to establish fees to
be charged by the town for the administration of the regulations in this
ordinance.  Based on the town's official fee schedule, fees shall be paid to
the town to cover the cost of processing, advertising and other
administrative expenses regarding each application and/or plan as specified
in this ordinance.



      2.   Agents and officials of the town are authorized to
inspect land development activities to ensure compliance with this ordinance,
or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this ordinance, and to
determine whether the measures required in approved development plans are
being appropriately followed. Notice of the right to inspect shall be
included in the certificate of approval of each plan.



      3.   No person shall willfully resist, delay or obstruct an
authorized representative, employee or agent of the town while that person is
inspecting or attempting to inspect a land development activity.



      4.   The town shall also have the power to require written
statements or filing reports under oath, with respect to pertinent questions
relating to the land development activity.



   C.   Permit/Process Table:



 


Development Permit/Process

 

Process Type

 

Review/
Recommendation

 

Final  Action

 

Appeal Process

 

Public Notice Level





Appeal of Administrative Decision
 

Quasi-Judicial

 

Administrator

 

Board of Adjustment

 

Superior Court

 

1, 2 & 3



Certificate of Compliance
 

Administrative

 

Administrator

 

Administrator

 

Board of Adjustment

 

N/A



Conditional Districts
 

Legislative

 

Planning Board

 

Board of Commissione rs

 

Superior Court

 

1, 2, 3 & 4



Conditional Use Permit
 

Quasi-Judicial

 

Planning Board

 

Board of Commissione rs

 

Superior Court

 

1, 2, 3 & 4



Design Review
 

Administrative

 

Administrator

 

Administrator

 

Board of Adjustment

 

N/A



Final Plat
 

Administrative

 

Administrator/T RC

 

Administrator /



TRC

 

Board of Adjustment

 

N/A



Floodplain Development Permit
 

Administrative

 

Administrator

 

Administrator

 

Board of Adjustment

 

N/A



Major Site Plan
 

Quasi-Judicial

 

Administrator/T RC/Planning Board

 

Board of Commissione rs

 

Superior Court

 

1, 2, 3 & 4



Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat
 

Quasi-Judicial

 

Administrator/T RC/Planning Board

 

Board of Commissione rs

 

Superior Court

 

1, 2, 3 & 4



Minor Subdivision
 

Administrative

 

Administrator/T RC

 

Administrator /



TRC

 

Board of Adjustment

 

N/A



Rezoning (Map Amendment)
 

Legislative

 

Planning Board

 

Board of Commissione rs

 

Superior Court

 

1, 2, 3 & 4



Site Construction Plan
 

Administrative

 

Administrator/T RC

 

Administrator /



TRC

 

Board of Adjustment

 

N/A



Subdivision Construction Plan
 

Administrative

 

Administrator/T RC

 

Administrator /



TRC

 

Board of Adjustment

 

N/A



Temporary Use/Special Event Permit
 

*Administrativ e

 

*Administrator

 

*Administrat or

 

Board of Adjustment

 

N/A



Text Amendment
 

Legislative

 

Planning Board

 

Board of Commissione rs

 

Superior Court

 

1, 2 & 3



Variance
 

Quasi-Judicial

 

Board of Adjustment

 

Board of Adjustment

 

Superior Court

 

1, 2 & 3



Vested Right
 

Legislative

 

Planning Board

 

Board of Commissione rs

 

Superior Court

 

3



Zoning Permit
 

Administrative

 

Administrator

 

Administrator

 

Board of Adjustment

 

N/A





 



*Requires Board of Commissioners approval if street closure is involved.



   7.02.3   APPLICATION COMPLETENESS



   A.   Applications to Be Complete



      1.   No application is complete unless all of the information
required herein is included and all filing fees have been paid. An
application that includes such information is deemed complete.



      2.   Additional information may be required by the
Administrator to decide whether or not the development, if completed as
proposed, will comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance. Failure
to provide additional required information may result in application denial.
The presumption established by this UDO is that all required application
information is necessary.



      3.   Review for completeness of application forms is solely
for the purpose of determining whether preliminary information required for
submission constitute a decision as to whether application complies with the
provisions of the UDO.



      4.   The Administrator may agree to process an application
without all required information at the risk to the applicant that the
decision-making body may later require the information prior to acting on the
application.



   B.   Evidence of Authority



      The Administrator may require an applicant to present evidence of
authority to submit the application.



   7.02.4   PUBLIC NOTICE



      The following procedures have been established for development
processes/permits that require notification of the public prior to
consideration and/or approval.



   A.   Level 1: Published Notice - General



   A notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the town once a week for two successive weeks. The first publication shall
appear no less than ten days or more than 25 days prior to the date fixed for
the public hearing. The notice shall include the time, place and date of the
hearing/meeting and include a description of the property and the nature of
the proposal.



   B.   Level 2: Mailed Notice / Full Community Notice



      1.   The owners of property within 100 feet on all sides of
the subject property shall be notified of the hearing/meeting by first class
mail. Such notification shall be postmarked at least ten but not more 25 days
prior to the date of the meeting at which the matter is to be heard.



      2.   As an alternative, to the mailed notice requirements in
Section 7.02.4.B.1. above and per G.S. § 160A-384(b), the town may elect to
serve notice through a full community notification for pending actions that
affect at least 50 properties with at least 50 different property owners. The
town shall publish notice of the hearing/meeting in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town. Two advertisements shall be published in separate
calendar weeks. Each advertisement shall not be less than one-half of a
newspaper page in size. The advertisement shall only be effective for
property owners who reside in the area of general circulation of the
newspaper which publishes the notice. Property owners who reside outside of
the newspaper circulation area, according to the address listed on the most
recent property tax listing for the affected property, shall be notified by
first class mail.



   C.   Level 3: Posted Notice



   In addition to providing published or mailed notice, as required in
above, a sign shall be placed in a prominent location on the subject
property(ies) or on an adjacent public street or highway right-of-way with a
notice of the pending action and a phone number to contact for additional
information.



   D.   Level 4: Community Meeting



      1.   Prior to a public hearing before the Board of
Commissioners, the applicant shall conduct a community meeting.  This
meeting will allow the applicant to explain the proposed project and to be
informed of the concerns of the neighborhood. The applicant shall prepare a
summary of the meeting in the form of meeting notes or minutes along with a
list and contact information for all attendees shall be submitted to the
approving board for their review at all subsequent approvals hearings.



      2.   Community meeting notices shall be sent to adjacent
property owners within 200 feet of the subject property.



   7.02.5   APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS



   A.   The following general standards for various applications have
been identified as a means to create a hierarchy of submissions for
permits/processes.



   B.   The town's official application checklists are intended to
provide further guidance to applicants as to the necessary level of detail
for certain permit/process types. Permits/processes for which checklist
requirements are needed are marked with "•" in the table below:



 


Development Permit/Process

 

Existing Conditions Map

 

Sketch Plan

 

Master Plan

 

Construction Plan

 

Final Plat

 

Building Elevations

 

As-Built Drawings





Conditional Districts
 

•

 


 

•

 


 


 


 




Conditional Use Permit
 

•

 


 

•

 


 


 


 




Design Review
 


 

•

 


 


 


 

•

 




Final Plat
 


 


 


 


 

•

 


 

•*



Floodplain Development Permit
 

•

 


 


 

•

 


 


 

•



Major Site Plan
 

•

 


 

•

 


 


 


 




Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat
 

•

 


 

•

 


 


 


 




Minor Subdivision
 


 


 


 


 

•

 


 




Construction Plans
 

•

 


 


 

•

 


 


 

•*



Temporary Use/Special Event Permit
 


 

•*

 


 


 


 


 




Vested Right
 


 


 

•

 


 


 


 




Zoning Permit
 


 

•*

 


 


 


 


 






 



*As needed by the Administrator



   C.   Existing Conditions Map



      An existing conditions map is intended to identify existing
developed conditions and natural features including, but not limited to, the
following:



      •   Rights of way



      •   Existing structures



      •   Cemeteries



      •   Bridges or culverts



      •   Utilities



      •   Driveways & curb cuts



      •   Sidewalks, surface parking & loading areas



      •   Streets with pavement width



      •   Existing easements



      •   Natural features such as large stands of trees, water
features, special flood hazard area



      •   Soils Type



      •   Existing topography



   D.   Sketch Plan



      1.   A sketch plan shall show in simple sketch form the
dimensions of the lot on which the proposed building or use is to be
constructed or conducted and the following:



         •   Proposed layout of existing and proposed streets



         •   Existing or proposed lot(s) layout, building(s)
location and size



         •   Nature of land use, parking areas and means of
ingress/egress



         •   Environmental conditions (i.e. special flood
hazard, wetlands, impervious surface area, etc.)



      2.   Sketch plans shall be reviewed as binding documents for
compliance of Unified Development Ordinance conformance, but shall be used
for non-binding review for all other development application processes in
which a sketch plan is required. All plans shall be submitted at a scale not
less than 1 inch = 50 feet (for site plans) or 1 inch = 200 feet (for
subdivisions) unless otherwise authorized by the Administrator.



   E.   Master Plan



      1.   A master plan is intended to provide a detailed
two-dimensional drawing that illustrates all of the required site features
including:



         •   Buildings & parking areas



         •   Streets locations, street sections & new &
existing rights-of-ways



         •   Property lines and setbacks



         •   Required or proposed buffers



         •   Conceptual landscaping



         •   All related development calculations (e.g.,
density, proposed building areas, number of parking spaces, estimate
impervious surface) in sufficient detail to show compliance with this
ordinance



      2.   Detailed engineering drawings such as subsurface
utilities (e.g., water and sewer) and on-site stormwater facilities are not
required for master plans, except that horizontal water and sewer locations
shall be indicated as required by the utility provider.



   F.   Construction Plan



      1.   Construction plans shall constitute a full and complete
set of engineered drawings necessary for final permitting and construction.



      2.   All plans shall be submitted at a scale not less than 1
inch = 50 feet unless otherwise authorized by the Administrator.



      3.   All streets, utilities, and stormwater, and other
infrastructure systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the adopted Town of Lillington Specifications and utilities provider
requirements where applicable.



   G.   Final Plat



      1.   The final plat shall be prepared by a professional land
surveyor, licensed to practice in the State of North Carolina and shall be
drawn to a scale no less than 1 inch = 100 feet, and shall meet the
requirements of G.S. § 47-30.



      2.   The final plat shall constitute an accurate survey of the
entire phase as shown on the approved plan and shall include all the relevant
notes and certifications.



   H.   Building Elevations



   In order to reasonably evaluate the building, it is necessary to submit
scaled drawings of each elevation visible from a public street.  These
drawings should be in color and should accurately represent the building
heights, floor levels, and building materials.



   I.   As-Built Drawings



   The "as built" drawings shall show the final design specifications for
all public infrastructure. The designer of the infrastructure shall certify,
under seal, that the installed infrastructure is in substantial compliance
with the approved plans and designs and with the requirements of this
ordinance. A final inspection and approval by the Administrator shall occur
before the release of any performance securities.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 7.03  Requirements for Hearings and Decisions



   7.03.1   STANDARDS FOR CONDUCT OF QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARINGS



   A quasi-judicial decision is a process that involves the finding of
facts regarding a specific application of an ordinance and the exercise of
discretion when applying the standards of the ordinance. Quasi-judicial
decisions include decisions involving variances, conditional use permits, and
appeals of administrative decisions. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-393,
decisions on the approval of major site plans and major subdivision
preliminary plats are quasi-judicial in nature if the ordinance authorizes a
decision-making board to approve or deny the application based on one or more
generally stated standards requiring a discretionary decision on the findings
of fact to be made by the decision-making board. As a result, the following
standard procedures shall be incorporated as appropriate.



   A.   Contact with Decision-Making Board Members



   Contact with any members of a decision-making board prior to the public
hearing by any individual regarding the matter is prohibited.



   B.   Conflict of Interest



   A member of the decision-making board shall not participate in or vote
on a quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons'
constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible conflicts
include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to
hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, a close familial,
business, or other associational relationship with an affected person, or a
financial interest in the outcome of the matter. If an objection is raised to
a member's participation and that member does not recuse himself or herself,
the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.



   C.   Participants to be Sworn



   All participants in the public hearing shall be duly sworn in prior to
the submission of any testimony.



   D.   Competent Evidence Required



      1.   All decisions shall be based on competent evidence
entered in as part of the record.



      2.   The term "competent evidence," as used in this
subsection, shall not preclude reliance by the decision-making board on
evidence that would not be admissible under the rules of evidence as applied
in the trial division of the General Court of Justice if (i) the evidence was
admitted without objection, or (ii) the evidence appears to be sufficiently
trustworthy and was admitted under such circumstances that it was reasonable
for the decision making board to rely upon it.



      3.   The term "competent evidence," as used in this
subsection, shall not be deemed to include the opinion testimony of lay
witnesses as to any of the following:



         a.   The use of property in a particular way would
affect the value of other property.



         b.   The increase in vehicular traffic resulting from a
proposed development would pose a danger to the public safety.



         c.   Matters about which only expert testimony would
generally be admissible under the rules of evidence.



   E.   Cross-Examination Permitted



   The cross-examination of witnesses submitting testimony shall be
permitted upon request.



   7.03.2   DECISION STANDARDS



   Each decision-making board under the provisions of this ordinance shall
ensure that the rights of petitioners have not been prejudiced because of the
decision-making body's findings, inferences, or conclusions. In addition,
such decision shall not be:



   A.   In violation of constitutional provisions, including those
protecting procedural due process rights.



   B.   In excess of the statutory authority conferred upon the town or
the authority conferred upon the decision-making board by ordinance.



   C.   Inconsistent with applicable procedures specified by statute or
ordinance.



   D.   Affected by other error of law.



   E.   Unsupported by substantial competent and material evidence in
view of the entire record.



   F.   Arbitrary and capricious.



   7.03.3   DECISION RECORDS



   The following shall become part of the official record of decision:



   A.   Documents and exhibits submitted to the decision-making board;



   B.   Meeting minutes;



   C.   Any party may request, at their expense, a transcript of the
proceedings from any recorded audio/video if available.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 7.04  Administrative Permits



   7.04.1   ZONING PERMIT



   A zoning permit indicates compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance and shall be required for the construction or development of any
new use within the jurisdiction of the Town of Lillington, and any other site
improvement as indicated in the UDO. In addition to new uses, a zoning permit
shall be required for expansions of existing uses, changes of use, any uses
permitted with special conditions (Article III) and any signage requiring a
permit (Article IV).



   A.   Application Prior to Building Permit



   A zoning permit application shall be presented to the Administrator
prior to applying for a building permit from the Harnett County Inspections
Department. No building permit shall be issued for any activity within the
town's jurisdiction until such zoning permit is approved by the town and
presented to the county.



   B.   Pre-Application Process



   No meeting is required but applicants are encouraged to call or visit
the Administrator prior to requesting a zoning permit to determine what
information is required for the application.



   C.   Required Application Information



   Sketch plan and any other relevant information to show compliance (may
be waived by Administrator as appropriate).  A zoning permit shall be issued
in the name of the applicant (except that applications submitted by an agent
shall be issued in the name of the principal and shall be accompanied by a
signed affidavit designating such agent), shall identify the property
involved and the proposed use, shall incorporate by reference the plans
submitted, and shall contain any special conditions or requirements lawfully
imposed by the permit-issuing authority.



   D.   Determination of Compliance



   Once an application containing all needed elements is submitted, the
Administrator shall review the application and approve or deny it based on
compliance with the standards contained in this ordinance.



   E.   Appeals



   Appeals of the decisions of the Administrator shall be heard by the
Board of Adjustment.



   F.   Permit Validity & Extensions



      1.   Zoning permits shall be void after six months from date
of issue unless substantial progress on the project has been made by that
time or unless a statutory zoning vested right exists as described in this
ordinance.  Upon issuance of a building permit by the Harnett County
Inspections Department, the zoning permit shall remain valid as long as a
valid building permit exists for the project.



      2.   Any change to the approved plans that has not been
authorized by the Administrator shall invalidate the zoning permit and any
subsequent building permits.



      3.   The Administrator may grant one extensions of this time
period of up to six months upon submittal by the applicant of sufficient
justification for the extension. Sufficient justification may include, but is
not limited to, delays in other outside agency permits, financing institution
delays, or other similar reasons beyond the control of the applicant.



   7.04.2   TEMPORARY USE/SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS



   Temporary use/special event permit is required for uses permitted in
accordance with Article III prior to the commencement of any use or activity.



   A.   Pre-Application Process



   No meeting is required but applicants are encouraged to call or visit
the Administrator prior to requesting a zoning permit to determine what
information is required for the application.



   B.   Required Application Information: Sketch plan and any other
relevant information to show compliance (may be waived by Administrator as
appropriate).



   C.   Determination of Compliance



   Once an application containing all needed elements is submitted, the
Administrator shall review the application and approve or deny it based on
compliance with the standards contained in this ordinance.



   D.   Appeals



   Appeals of the decisions of the Administrator shall be heard by the
Board of Adjustment.



   E.   Permit Validity & Extensions



   See Article III.



   7.04.3   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE



   Issuance of a certificate of compliance shall be required prior to the
occupancy or use of any new construction and re-occupancy or re-use of any
renovation/rehabilitation in the Town of Lillington. Certificates of
compliance insure that a completed development project has complied with all
the applicable requirements of this ordinance and all other applicable
federal, state and local regulations. Certificates of compliance must be
signed by the Administrator to certify compliance with applicable regulations
of this ordinance.



   A.   Determination of Compliance



   Upon receipt of the request for a certificate of compliance, the
Administrator shall inspect the site for compliance with the approved plan
and the applicable standards of this ordinance. The applicant shall be
notified of any deficiencies in the building(s) or site that prevents the
issuance of the certificate of completion or the certificate shall be issued.



   B.   Appeals



   Appeals of the decisions of the Administrator shall be heard by the
Board of Adjustment.



   7.04.4   ENVIRONMENTAL PERMITS



   A.   Drainage & Stormwater Management



   As part of all construction plan review and approvals, proper permits
shall be provided by the applicant that meet the standards Article VI in this
ordinance and any applicable requirement of the NC Department of
Environmental Natural Resources, Army Corp of Engineers and/or any other
applicable state or federal agency.



   B.   Floodplain Development Permit



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with
Article VI of this ordinance.



      1.   Permit Required Before Land Disturbance



      No such land disturbing activity shall take place in areas
designated as special flood hazard areas until plans associated with the
activity have been reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures
set forth in this ordinance.



      2.   Pre-Application Process



      Applicants are encouraged to meet with the Administrator prior to
submitting an application for development in the designated flood hazard
area. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the project, the proposed
design strategies, and to answer questions of the applicant regarding the
application and schedules for review.



      3.   Required Application Information: Existing conditions map
(may be waived by Administrator as appropriate), construction plans &
as-built drawings – upon completion.



      4.   Additional Information Required



         The following specific items/information shall be presented
to the Administrator in an application for a floodplain development permit:



         a.   Plan Information



         A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:



            i.   The nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed
structures, utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage
areas, drainage facilities and other development;



            ii.   The boundary of the special flood hazard
area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Article VI
, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;



            iii.   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed
development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined
in Article VI ;



            iv.   The boundary of the floodway(s) or
non-encroachment area(s) as determined in Article VI ;



            v.   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided
as set forth in Article VI ;



            vi.   The old and new location of any watercourse
that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;



         b.   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all
development within a special flood hazard area including but not limited to:



            i.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;



            ii.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to
which any non-residential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be
flood-proofed; and



            iii.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to
which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed;



         c.   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA
Form 81-65) with supporting data and an operational plan that includes, but
is not limited to, installation, exercise and maintenance of floodproofing
measures.



         d.   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall
include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of
this ordinance are met. These details include but are not limited to:



            i.   The proposed method of elevation, if
applicable (such as, fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled
foundation, open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);



            ii.   Openings to facilitate equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with Article VI , when solid
foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30;



         e.   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the
regulatory flood protection elevation;



         f.   Plans and/or details for the protection of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to
be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;



         g.   Copies of all other local, state and federal
permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance (wetlands,
endangered species, erosion and sedimentation control, riparian buffers,
mining and the like);



         h.   Documentation for placement of recreational
vehicles and/or temporary structures, when applicable.



         i.   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects
of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if
not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation.



         j.   Permit requirements



         The floodplain development permit shall include, but not be
limited to:



            i.   A description of the development to be
permitted under the floodplain development permit;



            ii.   The special flood hazard area determination
for the proposed development per available data specified in Article VI ;



            iii.   The regulatory flood protection elevation
required for the reference level and all attendant utilities;



            iv.   The regulatory flood protection elevation
required for the protection of all public utilities;



            v.   All certification submittal requirements with
timelines;



            vi.   A statement that no fill material or other
development shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any
watercourse, as applicable; and



            vii.   The flood openings requirements, if in
Zones A, AO, AE or A1-30.



         k.   Certification requirements



            i.   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level in relation to mean sea
level. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny
a floodplain development permit.



            ii.   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31)
is required after the reference level is established. Within seven calendar
days of establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty
of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean
sea level. Any work done within the seven-day calendar period and prior to
submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be
cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



            iii.   A final as-built elevation certificate
(FEMA Form 81-31) is required after construction is completed and prior to
certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
final as-built construction of the elevation of tie reference level and all
attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may
be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to
withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.



            iv.   If non-residential floodproofing is used to
meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data and an operational plan,
is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be
the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and
all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data and plan. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure
to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to
withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.



            v.   Manufactured homes. If a manufactured home is
placed within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is
more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation
certification is required per Article VI .



            vi.   Watercourses. If a watercourse is to be
altered or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration
or relocation; a professional engineer's certified report on the effects of
the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map
showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation
shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit.



         l.   Certification exemptions



   The following structures, if located within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30,
are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification requirements
specified in this ordinance:



            i.   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of
Article VI ;



            ii.    Temporary structures meeting requirements
of Article VI and accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of Article VI .



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 7.05  Major Site Plans and Design Review



   7.05.1   MAJOR SITE PLAN REVIEW



   The major site plan review process shall apply to all residential
developments which include three units or more and to all development
applications which require a transportation impact analysis according to
Section 5.14. Applications not meeting this threshold shall proceed directly
to the construction plan review process.



   A.   Pre-Application Process



   It is required that every applicant for major site plan meet with the
Administrator in a conference prior to the submittal of an application. The
purpose of this conference is to provide clarification and assistance in the
preparation and submission of plans for approval.



   B.   Process Type: Quasi-judicial.



   C.   Required Application Information: Existing conditions map,
master plan and any other relevant information to show compliance (may be
waived by Administrator as appropriate).



   D.   Determination of Compliance



   The Technical Review Committee shall review the plan to ensure that it
is complete. The Administrator shall prepare a report and recommendation on
the application for Planning Board review & recommendation.  After review
and recommendation on the application by the Planning Board, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposal for official action.



   E.   Review Process & Public Hearing



      1.   Planning Board Recommendation



         a.   Upon determination of compliance by the
Administrator, the Planning Board shall review and provide a recommendation
to the Board of Commissioners on the major site plan at the next available,
regularly scheduled meeting.



         b.   If the Planning Board is able to reach a
recommendation without further deliberation, the Planning Board shall submit
a recommendation on the plan and refer it to the Board of Commissioners for
their consideration at the next available public hearing.



         c.   If the Planning Board determines that further
deliberation on the plan is required, the Planning Board shall deliver its
recommendation to the Board of Commissioners within 45 days of its first
consideration on the matter. If no recommendation is received from the
Planning Board within 45 days of it first consideration on the matter, the
Board of Commissioners shall proceed in its consideration of the matter
without a recommendation from the Planning Board.







 



      2.   Public Hearing



      Upon consideration by the Planning Board, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. The applicant and
other property owners likely to be affected by the application shall be given
an opportunity to be heard.



      3.   Decision & Findings of Fact



         The Board of Commissioners shall approve, deny or approve
with conditions the major site plan. No major site plan approval shall be
granted unless it complies with the following findings of fact:



         a.   The major site plan represents an overall
conformance with the adopted goals, recommendations and policies of the land
use plan, Official Zoning Map and any other applicable planning documents
adopted by the town;



         b.   The major site plan conforms to all applicable
provisions of this UDO;



         c.   There exists adequate infrastructure
(transportation, utilities, etc.) to support the major site plan as proposed;
and



         d.   The plan will not be detrimental to the use or
development of adjacent properties.



   F.   Review Period



   The Board of Commissioners shall take action (approve, deny, or approve
with conditions) within 60 days of the delivery of the Planning Board
recommendation. Should the Board of Commissioners fail to act on the site
master plan within the prescribed period, the application shall be considered
approved.



   G.   Decisions



   If the Board of Commissioners approves the major site plan, the
applicant will be directed to proceed to the preparation of construction
plans.  If the Board of Commissioners disapproves or approves conditionally
the plan, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing by the
Administrator and entered in the records of the Board, and the applicant may
make changes and submit a revised plan for consideration in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this section.



   H.   Appeals



   An appeal from the decision of the Board of Commissioners regarding a
major site plan may be made by an aggrieved party and shall be made to the
Superior Court of Harnett County in the nature of certiorari. Any such
petition shall be filed with the clerk of the superior court within 30 days
after the decision of the Board is filed with the Town Clerk, or after a
written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed a
written request for such copy with the secretary or chairman of the Board at
the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later. The decision of the
Board may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by personal service or
by registered mail or certified mail return receipt requested.



   I.   Validity & Extensions



      1.   Approval of a major site master plan shall be valid for
one year from the date of approval. Construction plans shall be presented for
approval prior to the end of this one-year period.



      2.   The Board of Commissioners may grant a single extension
of this time period of up to one year upon submittal by the applicant of
sufficient justification for the extension. Sufficient justification may
include, but is not limited to, delays in other outside agency permits,
financing institution delays, or other similar reasons beyond the control of
the applicant.



      3.   If an extension is denied, or a major site plan is not
presented for approval within a granted extension period, the applicant may
reapply for a major site plan using the same process as if the application
was being considered for the first time.



   J.   Substantial Changes



      1.   Any substantial change to a major site plan as noted
below shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and approved or denied by the
Board of Commissioners.



      2.   The following changes to a major site plan shall be
considered substantial and require approval by the Board of Commissioners:



         a.   When there is introduction of a new vehicular
access point to an existing street, road or thoroughfare not previously
designated for access.



         b.   Modification of special performance criteria,
design standards, or other requirements specified by the major site plan.



         c.   When there is an increase in the total number of
residential dwelling units originally authorized by the approved major site
plan.



         d.   When the total floor area of a development is
increased more than 10% beyond the total floor area last approved by Board of
Commissioners. Changes of less than 10% may be approved by the Administrator.



   7.05.2   SITE CONSTRUCTION PLAN REVIEW







 



   A.   Pre-Application Process



   No meeting is required but applicants are encouraged to call or visit
the Administrator to determine what information is required for the
application.



   B.   Process Type: Administrative.



   C.   Required Application Information: Existing conditions map,
construction plans & as-built drawings (may be waived by Administrator as
appropriate).



   D.   Determination of Compliance



   The site construction plan shall be reviewed by the Technical Review
Committee for compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and for
conformity with the approved major site plan, if applicable. Provided the
application is complete, applications shall be reviewed by the committee and
written review comments will be given to the applicant within 30 days of
receipt of the site construction plan.



   E.   Appeals



   Appeals of decisions of the Technical Review Committee shall be heard
by the Board of Adjustment. An appeal must be made in writing by the
applicant within 30 days of the receipt of the committee's comments.



   F.   Validity & Extensions



   Approval of a site construction plan shall be valid for one year from
the date of approval.  There shall be no extensions permitted.



   G.   Substantial Changes



   See Section 7.05.1.J. above.



   7.05.3   BUILDING DESIGN REVIEW



   The building design review process applies to all development with the
exception of those exempted per North Carolina General Statutes pertaining to
structures subject to regulation under the North Carolina Residential Code
for One and Two-Family Dwellings. Voluntary building design standards may be
applied to such structures upon consent by the owner at the time approval. 
The Administrator shall review building elevations for architectural design
compliance with the standards of this ordinance.







 



   A.   Pre-Application Process



   No meeting is required but applicants are encouraged to call or visit
the Administrator to determine what information is required for the
application.



   B.   Process Type: Administrative



   C.   Required Application Information: Sketch plan (may be waived by
Administrator as appropriate) & building elevations.



   D.   Determination of Compliance



   Once an application containing all needed elements is submitted, the
Administrator shall review the application/plan and approve or deny it based
on compliance with the standards contained in this ordinance.



   E.   Appeals



   Appeals of decisions of the Administrator shall be heard by the Board
of Adjustment. An appeal must be made in writing by the applicant within 30
days of the receipt of the committee's comments.



   F.   Validity & Extensions



   Approval of building elevations shall be valid for one year from the
date of approval.  There shall be no extensions permitted. Any change to the
approved plans that has not been authorized by the Administrator shall
invalidate the approval and any subsequent building permits.



Section 7.06  Subdivisions



   7.06.1   MINOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW







 



   A.   Applicability



      1.   The minor subdivision review process is required for
those divisions of land which contains five or fewer lots result after
subdivision:



         a.   All of which front on an existing approved street;



         b.   Not involving any new public streets, right-of-way
dedication or requiring any new street for access to interior property;



         c.   Not requiring drainage improvements or easements,
other than rear and side lot line easements, to serve the applicant's
property or interior properties;



         d.   Not involving any utility extensions; and



         e.   Not requiring any easements, other than rear and
side lot line easements.



      2.   If the subdivider owns, leases, holds an option on or
holds any legal or equitable interest in any property adjacent to or located
directly across a street, easement, road or right-of-way from the property to
be subdivided, the subdivision shall not qualify under the minor subdivision
procedure. Furthermore, the minor subdivision procedure may not be used a
second time within three years on any property less than 1,500 feet from the
original property boundaries by anyone who owned, had an option on or any
legal interest in the original subdivision at the time the subdivision
received preliminary or final plat approval.



   B.   Pre-Application Process



   It is required that every applicant for a minor subdivision meet with
the Administrator prior to the submittal of an application.  The purpose of
this meeting is to provide clarification and assistance in the preparation
and submission of plats for approval.



   C.   Process Type: Administrative.



   D.   Required Application Information



   Sketch Plan (may be waived by Administrator as appropriate) & Final
Plat.



   E.   Determination of Compliance



   Once an application containing all needed elements is submitted, the
Administrator shall review the application/plan and approve or deny it based
on compliance with the standards contained in this ordinance.



   F.   Appeals



   Appeals of decisions of the Administrator shall be heard by the Board
of Adjustment. An appeal must be made in writing by the applicant within 30
days of the receipt of the committee's comments.



   G.   Validity & Extensions



   Approval of a final plat for a minor subdivision, the plat shall be
signed by the Administrator and the owner(s).  Upon signature, minor
subdivision plats shall be recorded at the Harnett County Register of Deeds
within 30 days following approval or the approval becomes invalid.



   7.06.2   MAJOR SUBDIVISION PRELIMINARY PLAT







 



   A.   Applicability



   The major subdivision preliminary plat review process is required for
all subdivisions except those defined a minor subdivision as indicated in
Section 7.06.1.A. above.



   B.   Pre-Application Process



   It is required that every applicant for major subdivision preliminary
plat meet with the Administrator in a conference prior to the submittal of an
application. The purpose of this conference is to provide clarification and
assistance in the preparation and submission of plans for approval.



   C.   Process Type: Quasi-judicial.



   D.   Required Application Information: Existing conditions map &
master plan.



   E.   Determination of Compliance



   The Technical Review Committee shall review the plan to ensure that it
is complete. The Administrator shall prepare a report and recommendation on
the plan for Planning Board review & recommendation.  After review and
recommendation on the plan by the Planning Board, the Board of Commissioners
shall hold a public hearing on the proposal for official action.



   F.   Review Process & Public Hearing



      1.   Planning Board Recommendation



         a.   Upon determination of compliance by the
Administrator, the Planning Board shall review and provide a recommendation
to the Board of Commissioners on the major subdivision preliminary plat at
the next available, regularly scheduled meeting.



         b.   If the Planning Board is able to reach a
recommendation without further deliberation, the Planning Board shall submit
a recommendation on the plan and refer it to the Board of Commissioners for
their consideration at the next available public hearing.



         c.   If the Planning Board determines that further
deliberation on the plan is required, the Planning Board shall deliver its
recommendation to the Board of Commissioners within 45 days of its first
consideration on the matter. If no recommendation is received from the
Planning Board within 45 days of it first consideration on the matter, the
Board of Commissioners shall proceed in its consideration of the matter
without a recommendation from the Planning Board.



      2.   Public Hearing



      Upon consideration by the Planning Board, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. The applicant and
other property owners likely to be affected by the application shall be given
an opportunity to be heard.



      3.   Decision & Findings of Fact



      The Board of Commissioners shall approve, deny or approve with
conditions the major subdivision preliminary plat. No major subdivision
preliminary plat approval shall be granted unless it complies with the
following findings of fact:



         a.   The major subdivision preliminary plat represents
an overall conformance with the adopted goals, recommendations and policies
of the Land Use Plan, Official Zoning Map and any other applicable planning
documents adopted by the town;



         b.   The major subdivision preliminary plat conforms to
all applicable provisions of this UDO;



         c.   There exists adequate infrastructure
(transportation, utilities, etc.) to support the major subdivision
preliminary plat as proposed; and



         d.   The major subdivision preliminary plat will not be
detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties.



   G.   Review Period



   The Board of Commissioners shall take action (approve, deny, or approve
with conditions) within 60 days of the delivery of the Planning Board
recommendation. Should the Board of Commissioners fail to act on the major
subdivision preliminary plat within the prescribed period, the application
shall be considered approved.



   H.   Decisions



   If the Board of Commissioners approves the major subdivision
preliminary plat, the applicant will be directed to proceed to the
preparation of construction plans.  If the Board of Commissioners
disapproves or approves conditionally the plan, the reasons for such action
shall be stated in writing by the Administrator and entered in the records of
the Board, and the applicant may make changes and submit a revised plan for
consideration in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.



   I.   Appeals



   An appeal from the decision of the Board of Commissioners regarding a
major subdivision preliminary plat may be made by an aggrieved party and
shall be made to the Superior Court of Harnett County in the nature of
certiorari. Any such petition shall be filed with the clerk of the superior
court within 30 days after the decision of the Board is filed with the Town
Clerk, or after a written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party
who has filed a written request for such copy with the secretary or chairman
of the Board at the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later. The
decision of the Board may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by
personal service or by registered mail or certified mail return receipt
requested.



   J.   Validity & Extensions



      1.   Approval of a major subdivision preliminary plat shall be
valid for two years from the date of approval. Construction plans shall be
presented for approval prior to the end of this one-year period.



      2.   If the approved major subdivision preliminary plat
provides for multiple phases within the subdivision, construction plan
approval for any one phase shall extend the major subdivision preliminary
plat approval for all other phases for a period of two years from the date of
the construction plan approval for that phase. If construction plan approval
has not been obtained prior to the end of this two-year period, the major
subdivision preliminary plat approval shall become void.



      3.   The Board of Commissioners may grant a single extension
of this time period of up to one year upon submittal by the applicant of
sufficient justification for the extension. Sufficient justification may
include, but is not limited to, delays in other outside agency permits,
financing institution delays, or other similar reasons beyond the control of
the applicant.



      4.   If an extension is denied, or a major subdivision
preliminary plat is not presented for approval within a granted extension
period, the applicant may reapply for a major subdivision preliminary plat
using the same process as if the application was being considered for the
first time.



   K.   Substantial Changes



      1.   Any substantial change to a major subdivision preliminary
plat as noted below shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and approved or
denied by the Board of Commissioners.



      2.   The following changes to a major subdivision preliminary
plat shall be considered substantial and require approval by the Board of
Commissioners:



         a.   When there is introduction of a new vehicular
access point to an existing street, road or thoroughfare not previously
designated for access.



         b.   Modification of special performance criteria,
design standards, or other requirements specified by the major subdivision
preliminary plat.



         c.   When there is an increase in the total number of
residential dwelling units originally authorized by the approved major
subdivision preliminary plat.



   7.06.3   SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION PLAN REVIEW







 



   A.   Pre-Application Process



   No meeting is required but applicants are encouraged to call or visit
the Administrator to determine what information is required for the
application.



   B.   Process Type: Administrative.



   C.   Required Application Information: Existing conditions map &
construction plans



   D.   Determination of Compliance



   The site construction plan shall be reviewed by the Technical Review
Committee for compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and for
conformity with the approved major subdivision preliminary plat, if
applicable. Provided the application is complete, applications shall be
reviewed by the committee and written review comments will be given to the
applicant within 30 days of receipt of the subdivision construction plan.



   E.   Appeals



   Appeals of decisions of the Technical Review Committee shall be heard
by the Board of Adjustment. An appeal must be made in writing by the
applicant within 30 days of the receipt of the committee's decision.



   F.   Phasing



   Subdivision construction plans for phased subdivisions shall be
reviewed and recorded individually in accordance with the schedule presented
by the applicant during the major subdivision preliminary plat approval.



   G.   Validity & Extensions



      1.   Approval of a Subdivision Construction Plan shall be
valid for 2 years from the date of approval.  A Final Plat shall be recorded
prior to the end of this 2-year period.



      2.   The Administrator may grant a single extension of this
time period of up to one year upon submittal by the applicant of sufficient
justification for the extension. Sufficient justification may include, but is
not limited to, delays in other outside agency permits, financing institution
delays, or other similar reasons beyond the control of the applicant.



   7.06.4   FINAL PLAT







 



   A.   Process Type: Administrative.



   B.   Required Application Information: Final plat & as-built
drawings.



   C.   Required Improvements



   All required infrastructure improvements shall be either installed or
financially guaranteed in accordance with Article X.



   D.   As-Builts



   Upon completion of a development, and before a final plat shall be
approved (unless financially guaranteed), the applicant shall certify that
the completed development is in substantial accordance with the approved
plans and designs, and shall submit actual "as built" plans for all public
infrastructure after final construction is completed.



   E.   Determination of Compliance



   The final plat shall be reviewed by the Administrator for compliance
with the requirements of this ordinance and, in the case of major subdivision
preliminary plats, for conformity with the approved construction plan.
Provided the application is complete, plans shall be reviewed and acted upon
by the Administrator and notice given the applicant within 30 days of receipt
of the final plat. If the Administrator has not completed review in this time
period, the applicant may seek final approval from the Board of Commissioners
at their next meeting.



   F.   Appeals



   Appeals of decisions of the Administrator shall be heard by the Board
of Adjustment. An appeal must be made in writing by the applicant within 30
days of the receipt of the Administrators decision.



   G.   Effect of Approval



   The approval of a final plat does not constitute acceptance for
maintenance or other purposes of improvements in rights-of-way, such as
utility lines, street paving, drainage facilities or sidewalks. Such
improvements, when located within the corporate limits of the Town of
Lillington, may be accepted only by action of the town following inspection
and approval. Public land designated on a plat shall be considered to be
offered for dedication, but not accepted until the Board of Commissioners has
by expressed action done so.



   H.   Phasing



   Final plats for phased subdivisions shall be recorded in accordance
with the schedule presented by the applicant during the construction plan
approval.



   I.   Validity & Extensions



   Final plats that have been granted approval must be recorded within 30
days following approval or the approval becomes invalid. No lots in a
subdivision shall be sold prior to approval by the town and recording of the
final plat for the subdivision.  Upon signature, final plats shall be
recorded at the Harnett County Register of Deeds within 30 days following
approval or the approval becomes invalid.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 7.07  Conditional Use Permits (CUP)



   This section establishes a process and standards to approve certain
uses that, because of unique characteristics or potential impacts on adjacent
land uses, are not permitted in zoning districts as a matter of right. These
uses may be permitted through the issuance of a conditional use permit (CUP)
after ensuring that the use complies with the CUP approval criteria. No
inherent right exists to receive a CUP. Such authorization must be approved
under a specific set of circumstances and conditions. Each application and
situation is unique and may be subject to specific requirements to mitigate
the impacts of the proposed use.



   7.07.1   APPLICATION PROCEDURES







 



   A.   Pre-Application Process



   Every applicant for a conditional use permit is required to meet with
the Administrator in a pre-application conference prior to the submittal of a
formal application. The purposes of this conference are to provide additional
information regarding the review process and assistance in the preparation of
the application.



   B.   Process Type: Quasi-judicial.



   C.   Required Application Information



   An application for a conditional use permit may be filed by the owner
of the property or by an agent specifically authorized by the owner to file
such application. Each application for a conditional use permit shall
contain, an existing conditions map (may be waived by the Administrator as
appropriate) and master plan. Other information necessary to show that the
use or structure complies with the standards set forth in this ordinance
shall also be provided.



   D.   Determination of Compliance



   The Administrator shall review the plan to ensure that it is complete.
The Administrator shall prepare a report and recommendation on the
application for Planning Board review & recommendation.  After review and
recommendation on the application by the Planning Board, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposal for official action.



   E.   Review Process & Public Hearing



      1.   Planning Board Recommendation



         a.   Upon determination of compliance by the
Administrator, the Planning Board shall review and provide a recommendation
to the Board of Commissioners on the conditional use permit at the next
available, regularly scheduled meeting.



         b.   If the Planning Board is able to reach a
recommendation without further deliberation, the Planning Board shall submit
a recommendation on the conditional use permit and refer it to the Board of
Commissioners for their consideration at the next available public hearing.



         c.   If the Planning Board determines that further
deliberation on the conditional use permit is required, the Planning Board
shall deliver its recommendation to the Board of Commissioners within 45 days
of its first consideration on the matter. If no recommendation is received
from the Planning Board within 45 days of it first consideration on the
matter, the Board of Commissioners shall proceed in its consideration of the
matter without a recommendation from the Planning Board.



      2.   Public Hearing



      Upon consideration by the Planning Board, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. The applicant and
other property owners likely to be affected by the application shall be given
an opportunity to be heard.



      3.   Decision & Findings of Fact



      The Board of Commissioners shall approve, deny or approve with
conditions the conditional use permit. No conditional use permit approval
shall be granted unless it complies with the following findings of fact:



         a.   Adequate and reasonable mitigation has been
provided of potentially adverse effects on adjacent properties through the
conforms to the character of the neighborhood, considering the location, type
and height of buildings or structures and the type and extent of landscaping
and screening on the site;



         b.   The proposed conditional use permit represents an
overall conformance with the adopted goals, recommendations and policies of
the land use plan, Official Zoning Map and any other applicable planning
documents adopted by the town;



         c.   There exists adequate infrastructure
(transportation, utilities, etc.) to support the proposed use proposed;



         d.   The proposed use will not cause undue traffic
congestion or create a traffic hazard;



         e.   The proposed use shall not be noxious or offensive
by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas;



         f.   The establishment of the proposed use shall not
impede the orderly development and improvement of surrounding property;



         g.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the
proposed use shall not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety or general welfare.



   F.   Additional Conditions



   The Board of Commissioners may place conditions on the use as part of
the approval to assure that mitigation measures are associated with the use.
The conditions shall become part of the conditional use permit approval.



   G.   Review Period



   The Board of Commissioners shall take action (approve, deny, or approve
with conditions) within 60 days of the delivery of the Planning Board
recommendation. Should the Board of Commissioners fail to act on the
conditional use permit within the prescribed period, the application shall be
considered approved.



   H.   Decisions



   If the Board of Commissioners approves the conditional use permit the
applicant will be directed to proceed to the preparation of construction
plans.  If the Board of Commissioners disapproves or approves conditionally
the plan, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing by the
Administrator and entered in the records of the Board, and the applicant may
make changes and submit a revised plan for consideration in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this section.



   I.   Appeals



   An appeal from the decision of the Board of Commissioners regarding a
major subdivision preliminary plat may be made by an aggrieved party and
shall be made to the Superior Court of Harnett County in the nature of
certiorari. Any such petition shall be filed with the Clerk of the Superior
Court within 30 days after the decision of the Board is filed with the Town
Clerk, or after a written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party
who has filed a written request for such copy with the secretary or chairman
of the Board at the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later. The
decision of the Board may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by
personal service or by registered mail or certified mail return receipt
requested.



   J.   Validity & Extensions



      1.   Conditional uses that have been granted approval must
begin site development within two years following approval or the approval
becomes invalid.



      2.   The Board of Commissioners may grant a single extension
of this time period of up to six months upon submittal by the applicant of
sufficient justification for the extension. Sufficient justification may
include, but is not limited to, delays in other outside agency permits,
financing institution delays, or other similar reasons beyond the control of
the applicant.



      3.   If an extension is denied, or a conditional use permit is
not presented for approval within a granted extension period, the applicant
may reapply using the same process as if the application was being considered
for the first time.



   K.   Substantial Changes



      1.   Any substantial change to a conditional use permit as
noted below shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and approved or denied by
the Board of Commissioners.



      2.   The following changes to a conditional use permit shall
be considered substantial and require approval by the Board of Commissioners:



         a.   When there is introduction of a new vehicular
access point to an existing street, road or thoroughfare not previously
designated for access.



         b.   Modification of special performance criteria,
design standards, or other requirements specified by the conditional use
permit.



         c.   When there is an increase in the total number of
residential dwelling units originally authorized by the approved conditional
use permit.



         d.   When the total floor area of a development is
increased more than 10% beyond the total floor area last approved by Board of
Commissioners. Changes of less than 10% may be approved by the Administrator.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 7.08  Appeals of Administrative Decision



   7.08.1   APPLICABILITY



   Parties aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination,
made by an administrative officer charged with enforcing the provisions of
this ordinance.



   7.08.2   PROCEDURES







 



   A.   Process Type: Quasi-judicial.



   B.   Filing Process



   An appeal of an administrative decision may be taken by any person
aggrieved (or by their authorized agent), or by the Administrator, to the
Board of Adjustment. Such an appeal shall be made within 30 days of the
receipt by such aggrieved party of the written notice of decision from the
Administrator, within 30 days of the filing of the written notice with the
Town Clerk.



   C.   Proceedings



   The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the contested action unless the Administrator certifies that, in his/her
opinion, by reason of facts stated in the certification, such a stay would
cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall
not be stayed except by restraining order or preliminary injunction granted
by the Superior Court of Harnett County.



   D.   Required Application Information



   Such relevant information as may reasonably allow the Board of
Adjustment to understand the basis for the appeal.  The Administrator shall
similarly prepare a report detailing the regulations and interpretation
behind the matter being appealed and their reason for their decision.



   7.08.3   REVIEW PROCESS



   A.   Upon receiving the application, the Board of Adjustment shall
conduct a public hearing on the appeal. Any party may appear in person or be
represented by an agent at the hearing.



   B.   After conducting the public hearing, the Board of Adjustment
shall adopt an order reversing or affirming, wholly or in part, or modifying
the order requirements, decision or determination in question. It shall take
a four-fifths vote of the Board of Adjustment to reverse or modify the
contested action.



   C.   The Board of Adjustment, in making its ruling, shall have all
the powers of the Administrator from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue
or direct the issuance of a permit.



   D.   The decision of the Board of Adjustment must be in writing and
permanently filed in the minutes of that reviewing body as a public record.
All findings of fact and conclusions of law must be separately stated in
final decisions or orders of the Board of Adjustment, which must be delivered
to parties of interest by certified mail.



   7.08.4   APPEALS



   Any appeal from a decision of the Board of Adjustment may be made by an
aggrieved party and shall be made to the Harnett County Superior Court. Any
such petition shall be filed with the clerk of the superior court within 30
days after the decision of the Board is filed with the Town Clerk, or after a
written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed a
written request for such copy with the secretary or chairman of the Board at
the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later. The decision of the
Board may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by personal service or
by registered mail or certified mail return receipt requested.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 7.09  Variances



   7.09.1   APPLICABILITY



      A.   The variance process administered by the Board of
Adjustment is intended to provide limited relief from the requirements of
this ordinance in those cases where strict application of a particular
requirement will create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
prohibiting the use of the land in a manner otherwise allowed under this
ordinance.



      B.   It is not intended that variances be granted solely to
remove inconveniences or financial burdens that the requirements of this
ordinance may impose on property owners in general or to increase the
profitability of a proposed development, although such factors can be taken
into consideration.



   C.   In no event shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance
which would allow the establishment of a use which is not otherwise allowed
in a land development district or which would change the land development
district classification or the district boundary of the property in question.



   D.   In no event shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance
which would conflict with any state code unless otherwise authorized by laws
and regulations.







 



   7.09.2   PROCEDURES



   A.   Pre-Application Process



   Every applicant for a variance is encouraged to meet with the
Administrator in a pre-application conference prior to the submittal of a
formal application. The purposes of this conference are to provide additional
information regarding the review process and assistance in the preparation of
the application.



   B.   Process Type:  Quasi-judicial.



   C.   Filing Process



   An application for a variance may be filed by the owner of the property
or by an agent specifically authorized by the owner to file such application.



   D.   Determination of Compliance



   The Administrator shall review the plan to ensure that it is complete
and shall prepare a report on the application for the Board of Adjustment to
consider.



   E.   Proceedings



   The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the contested action unless the Administrator certifies that, in his/her
opinion, by reason of facts stated in the certification, such a stay would
cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall
not be stayed except by restraining order or preliminary injunction granted
by the Superior Court of Harnett County.



   F.   Required Application Information



   Such relevant information as may reasonably allow the Board of
Adjustment to understand the basis for the appeal.  The Administrator shall
similarly prepare a report detailing the regulations and interpretation
behind the matter being appealed and their reason for their decision.



   7.09.3   REVIEW PROCESS



   A.   Upon receiving the application, the Board of Adjustment shall
conduct a public hearing on the variance.



   B.   After conducting the hearing, the Board of Adjustment may: deny
the application; conduct an additional public hearing on the application;
approve the application; or approve the application with additional
conditions. A concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be necessary to grant a variance.



   C.   A decision by the Board of Adjustment shall be made within 45
days of the date of the hearing.



   D.   Any approval or denial of the request shall be accompanied by
written findings of fact supporting the conclusion that the variance meets or
does not meet each of the standards set forth on Section 7.09.3E. below.



   E.   The Board of Adjustment shall not grant a variance unless and
until it makes all of the following findings:



         a.   Carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance
would result in an unnecessary hardship. It shall not be necessary to
demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be
made of the property.



         b.   The hardship results from conditions that are
peculiar to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships
resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from
conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not
be the basis for granting a variance.



         c.   The hardship did not result from actions taken by
the applicant of the property owner. The act of purchasing property with
knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a
variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship.



         d.   The requested variance is consistent with the
spirit, purpose, and intent of this ordinance, such that the public safety is
secured, and substantial justice is achieved.



   F.   Additional Conditions



   In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may attach such
conditions to the approval as it deems necessary and appropriate to satisfy
the purposes and objectives of this ordinance. The Board of Adjustment may
also attach conditions in order to reduce or minimize any injurious effect of
such variance upon other property in the neighborhood and to ensure
compliance with other terms of this ordinance. Such conditions and safeguards
must be reasonably related to the condition or circumstance that gives rise
to the need for a variance.



   7.09.4   STANDARDS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND WATERSHED
PROTECTION VARIANCE REQUESTS



   Variances from the standards set forth in this ordinance for flood
damage prevention and watershed protection may be granted subject to the
following additional provisions:



   A.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result or
when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal,
state or local laws.



   B.   Variances shall only be issued upon:



      1.   A determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief;



      2.   A showing of good and sufficient cause; and



      3.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship.



   C.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in a substantial increase in flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   D.   In passing upon variances, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this ordinance and:



      1.   The danger that material may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others.



      2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage.



      3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



      4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.



      5.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.



      6.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.



      7.   The relationship of the proposed use to the land
development plan and flood damage prevention program for that area.



      8.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



      9.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.



      10.   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets
and bridges.



   E.   Any applicant to whom a variance from the floodplain
development regulations is granted shall be given written notice. This notice
shall specify the difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and contain a written
statement that such construction below the base flood elevation increases
risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct
a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such
notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
Variances records shall be provided to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency upon request.



   7.09.5   APPEALS



   Any appeal from a decision of the Board of Adjustment may be made by an
aggrieved party and shall be made to the Harnett County Superior Court. Any
such petition shall be filed with the clerk of the superior court within 30
days after the decision of the Board is filed with the Town Clerk, or after a
written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed a
written request for such copy with the secretary or chairman of the Board at
the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later. The decision of the
Board may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by personal service or
by registered mail or certified mail return receipt requested.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 7.10  Text Amendments and Rezonings (Map Amendments)



   The Board of Commissioners may from time to time amend any part of the
text of this ordinance or amend the Official Zoning Map of the town.



   7.10.1   APPLICATION PROCEDURES







 



   A.   Pre-Application Process



   Every applicant for a rezoning or text amendment is required to meet
with the Administrator in a pre-application conference prior to the submittal
of a formal application. The purposes of this conference are to provide
additional information regarding the review process and assistance in the
preparation of the application.



   B.   Process Type: Legislative.



   C.   Required Application Information



   A petition for a text amendment or rezoning of a part of the town's
official zoning map shall be filed on a form provided by the Administrator.
Such petition shall contain all the information required on the form and must
be determined to be complete by the Administrator prior to advancing it
through the review process.



   D.   Determination of Compliance



   The Administrator shall review the application to ensure that it is
complete. The Administrator shall prepare a report and recommendation on the
application for Planning Board review & recommendation.  After review and
recommendation on the application by the Planning Board, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposal for official action.



   E.   Review Process & Public Hearing



      1.   Planning Board Recommendation



         a.   Upon determination of compliance by the
Administrator, the Planning Board shall review and provide a recommendation
to the Board of Commissioners on the application at the next available,
regularly scheduled meeting.



         b.   If the Planning Board is able to reach a
recommendation without further deliberation, the Planning Board shall submit
a recommendation on the application and refer it to the Board of
Commissioners for their consideration at the next available public hearing.



         c.   If the Planning Board determines that further
deliberation on the application is required, the Planning Board shall deliver
its recommendation to the Board of Commissioners within 45 days of its first
consideration on the matter. If no recommendation is received from the
Planning Board within 45 days of it first consideration on the matter, the
Board of Commissioners shall proceed in its consideration of the matter
without a recommendation from the Planning Board.



      2.   Effect of Planning Board Recommendation



         a.   If the Planning Board makes a favorable
recommendation, the matter shall proceed to a public hearing before the Board
of Commissioners.



         b.   If the Planning Board recommends against such
amendment, a 3/4 majority vote by the Board of Commissioners shall be
required to approve the request.



         3.   Public Hearing



      Upon consideration by the Planning Board, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. The applicant and
other property owners likely to be affected by the application shall be given
an opportunity to be heard.



         4.   Board of Commissioners Decision



            a.   Following receipt of a recommendation from
the Planning Board, or after 45 days from the Planning Board meeting if no
recommendation is received, the Board of Commissioners shall conduct a public
hearing on the matter.



            b.   Upon reviewing all of the pertinent
information, the Board of Commissioners take action to:



               i.   Adopt the proposed amendment/rezoning
request.



               ii.   Adopt the proposed amendment/rezoning
request with modifications.



               iii.   Reject the proposed
amendment/rezoning request.



               iv.   Refer the proposed amendment back to
the Planning Board for further consideration.



   F.   Land Use Plan Consistency



   In accordance with G.S. § 160A-383, all text amendments/rezonings
shall be made in accordance with the land use plan and any other officially
adopted applicable plans. The Planning Board shall advise and comment on
whether the proposed amendment is consistent with any comprehensive plan that
has been adopted and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable.
When adopting or rejecting any rezoning request, the Board of Commissioners
shall adopt a statement describing whether its action is consistent with the
adopted comprehensive plan and explaining why the Board of Commissioners
considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest.



   G.   Citizen Comments



      1.   If any resident or property owner in the town submits a
written statement regarding a proposed amendment, modification, or repeal to
this ordinance to the Town Clerk at least two business days prior to the
proposed vote on such change, the Town Clerk shall deliver such written
statement to the Board of Commissioners.



      2.   If the proposed change is the subject of a quasi-judicial
proceeding under G.S. § 160A-388, the Town Clerk shall provide only the
names and addresses of the individuals providing written comment, and
provisions of such names and addresses to all members of the Board of
Commissioners shall not disqualify any member of the Board of Commissioners
from voting.



      3.   Any resident or property owner who submits a written
statement of citizen concern may withdraw their written statement any time
prior to the meeting at which the item will be considered.



   H.   Appeals



   An appeal from the decision of the Board of Commissioners regarding a
text amendment/rezoning may be made by an aggrieved party and shall be made
to the Superior Court of Harnett County in the nature of certiorari. Any such
petition shall be filed with the clerk of the superior court within 30 days
after the decision of the Board is filed with the Town Clerk, or after a
written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed a
written request for such copy with the secretary or chairman of the Board at
the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later. The decision of the
Board may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by personal service or
by registered mail or certified mail return receipt requested.



   I.   Period to Subsequent Application



      1.   After an application for an amendment has been approved
or denied by the Board of Commissioners, there shall be a six month waiting
period before an application shall be considered on the same issue.



      2.   This waiting period may be waived by the Board of
Commissioners (three-fourths vote required) if it determines that there have
been substantial changes in conditions or circumstances which may relate to
the request.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 7.11  Conditional Districts



   Conditional Districts (CD) are districts with conditions voluntarily
added by the applicant and approved in a legislative procedure by the Board
of Commissioners in accordance with G.S. § 160A-382. Conditional Districts
provide for orderly and flexible development under the general policies of
this ordinance without the constraints of some of the prescribed standards
guiding by-right development. Conditional Districts may be used in any
district but is not intended to relieve hardships that would otherwise be
handled using a variance procedure.



   7.11.1   APPLICATION PROCEDURES



   A.   Process Type: Legislative.



   B.   Applicant and Property Information



      1.   Conditional District classification shall only be
considered upon the request of the owners and/or their representatives of all
the property to be included in the specific Conditional District request.



      2.   A Conditional District shall consist of land under
unified control which may be planned and developed as a single development or
as an approved programmed series of development phases by multiple
developers. Unified control means that all land to be included within a
Conditional District shall be owned or otherwise under the legal control of
the applicant for a Conditional District.



      3.   The applicant shall be legally capable of providing a
commitment to the town that the Conditional District development will comply
with all documents, plans, standards and conditions ultimately approved by
the town.



   C.   Required Application Information



      1.   A Conditional District shall consist of the existing
conditions map, a sketch plan (may be waived by the Administrator as
appropriate), and master plan; as well as any other plans, drawings,
renderings, elevations, maps and documents specifically included as
development documents for approval by the Board of Commissioners.



      2.   A Conditional District master plan, is a site specific
plan that is a condition of the Conditional District rezoning.



      3.   In addition to those items required for master plans, a
Conditional District master plan shall, at a minimum, illustrate the
following:



         a.   The underlying zoning districts and a full list of
proposed uses consistent in character with those zoning districts. Such use
classifications may be selected from any of the uses, whether permitted, by
right or with supplemental standards, allowed in the general zoning district
upon which the Conditional District is based. Uses not otherwise permitted
within the general zoning district shall not be permitted within the
Conditional District;



         b.   General traffic routes (external and internal) to
and from the development with major access points identified;



         c.   Tabular data, including the range and scope of
proposed land uses, proposed densities, floor area ratios and impervious
surface ratios as applicable to development type; and land areas devoted to
each type of general land use and phase of development;



      d.   A proposed development schedule if the project is to be
phased.



   7.11.2   EXCEPTION FOR CONDITIONAL DISTRICTS WITH USE LIMITATIONS
ONLY



   If an applicant proposes a Conditional District which meets the
following criteria, no Conditional District master plan shall be required in
the application:



   A.   The only proposed deviation in use from the underlying zoning
is to impose additional limitations on the uses that will be allowed in the
Conditional District.



   B.   No other deviations from the standards of the underlying zoning
are proposed in the Conditional District.



   7.11.3   REVIEW PROCESS AND PUBLIC HEARING



   The procedure for approval of a Conditional District shall follow the
procedure for review of text amendments and rezonings (map amendments) as
outlined in Section 7.10.



   A.   Effect of Approval



   The applicant may proceed with development only after approval of the
Conditional District master plan by the Board of Commissioners, followed by
approval of any necessary site or subdivision plans/plats, except that all
subsequent approvals shall be completed by the Administrator. The development
and use of all land within the Conditional District shall be in keeping with
the approved master plan and all applicable provisions therein.



   B.   Substantial Changes



   Any substantial change to a master plan as noted below shall be
reviewed by the Planning Board and approved or denied by the Board of
Commissioners as an amended Conditional District. The following changes to a
Conditional District master plan shall require approval by the Board of
Commissioners:



      1.   Land area being added or removed from the Conditional
District.



      2.   Modification of special performance criteria, design
standards, or other requirements specified by the original approval.



      3.   A change in land use or development type beyond that
permitted by the approved Conditional District master plan.



      4.   When there is introduction of a new vehicular access
point to an existing street, road or thoroughfare not previously designated
for access.



      5.   When there is an increase in the total number of
residential dwelling units originally authorized by the approved Conditional
District master plan.



      6.   When the total floor area of a development is increased
more than 10% beyond the total floor area last approved by Board of
Commissioners. Changes of less than 10% may be approved by the Administrator.



   7.11.4   RESCISSION OF CONDITIONAL DISTRICTS



   A.   The applicant shall secure a valid building or construction
permit(s) within two years from date of approval of the Conditional District
unless otherwise specified.



   B.   If such project is not complete or a valid building or
construction permit is not in place at the end of the two-year period, the
Administrator shall notify the applicant of either such finding.



   C.   Within 60 calendar days of notification, the Administrator
shall make a recommendation concerning the rescission of the Conditional
District to the Board of Commissioners.



   D.   The Board of Commissioners may then rescind the Conditional
District, or extend the life of the Conditional District for a specified
period of time.



   E.   The rescission of a Conditional District shall follow the same
procedure as was needed for approval.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 7.12  Vested Rights



   The zoning vested right is a right which must be requested by the
applicant at the time of submittal and is established pursuant to G.S. §
160A-385.1 to undertake and complete the development and use of property
under the terms and conditions of an approved plan. Obtaining a permit or
plan approval through the vested rights procedure gives the applicant the
right to start construction of the development as approved and an additional
two years, or up to five years to begin and/or complete work as appropriate.



   7.12.1   APPLICATION PROCEDURES



   A.   Process Type: Legislative.



   B.   Required Application Information: Sketch plan (may be waived by
Administrator) and master plan.



   C.   Determination of Compliance



   The Administrator shall review the application to ensure that it is
complete. The Administrator shall prepare a report and recommendation on the
application for Planning Board review & recommendation.  After review and
recommendation on the application by the Planning Board, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposal for official action.



   7.12.2   REVIEW PROCESS & PUBLIC HEARING



   A.   Planning Board Recommendation



      1.   Upon determination of compliance by the Administrator,
the Planning Board shall review and provide a recommendation to the Board of
Commissioners on the application at the next available, regularly scheduled
meeting.



      2.   If the Planning Board is able to reach a recommendation
without further deliberation, the Planning Board shall submit a
recommendation on the application and refer it to the Board of Commissioners
for their consideration at the next available public hearing.



      3.   If the Planning Board determines that further
deliberation on the application is required, the Planning Board shall deliver
its recommendation to the Board of Commissioners within 45 days of its first
consideration on the matter. If no recommendation is received from the
Planning Board within 45 days of it first consideration on the matter, the
Board of Commissioners shall proceed in its consideration of the matter
without a recommendation from the Planning Board.



   B.   Public Hearing



   Upon consideration by the Planning Board, the Board of Commissioners
shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. The applicant and other property
owners likely to be affected by the application shall be given an opportunity
to be heard.



   C.   Board of Commissioners Decision



   Following a public hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall take one
of the following actions:



      1.   Approve the vested rights request. The Administrator is
then directed to issue a vested rights zoning permit.



      2.   Approve the vested rights request subject to conditions
which are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The
Administrator is then directed to issue the vested rights zoning permit
subject to the changes in the plan/plat to be made by the developer.



      3.   Table the vested rights request pending the submittal of
additional information.



      4.   Deny the vested rights request.



   D.   Appeals



   There is no appeal process for a vested rights request.



   7.12.3    VESTED RIGHT DURATION



   A.   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this section
shall remain vested for a period of two years, or up to five years as
approved by the Board of Commissioners.



   B.   Upon issuance of a permit/plan approval, the expiration
provisions for those permits/plans shall apply, except that they shall not
expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a zoning vested
right under this section is outstanding. A zoning vested right shall
terminate at the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to
buildings and uses for which no valid permit/plan applications have been
filed.



   C.   The town may terminate the zoning vested rights upon payment to
the affected landowner of compensation for all costs, expenses and other
losses incurred by the landowner, including, but not limited to, all fees
paid in consideration of all financing and all architectural, legal and other
fees incurred after approval by the town.



   D.   The zoning vested right may be terminated upon the enactment or
promulgation of a state or federal law or regulation that precludes
development as contemplated in the plan. In such a case the Board of
Commissioners may, by ordinance, after notice and a hearing, modify the
affected provisions upon a finding that the change in state or federal law
has a fundamental effect on the plan.



   E.   A zoning vested right is not a personal right but shall attach
to and run with the applicable property. After approval of a plan, all
successors to the original landowner shall be entitled to exercise such right
while applicable.



   F.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the revocation of the
original approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable
terms and conditions of the approval or this ordinance.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Article VIII.
NONCONFORMITIES



Section 8.01  Purpose and Intent



      A.   The purpose of this article is to protect the rights of
property owners who have lawfully established, and continuously maintained in
a lawful manner, a use prior to the adoption of this ordinance or prior to
any amendment to this ordinance that otherwise renders such use unlawful. A
non-conforming use or structure that was recognized prior to the adoption of
this ordinance shall continue to operate under the provision of law under
which the nonconforming structure or use was recognized so long as the
non-conforming use or structure is not in violation of such provision of law,
the adoption of this ordinance notwithstanding.



      B.   Nothing in this article prohibits the voluntary
compliance with any future ordinance, regulation, or incentive. Modifications
to non-conforming situations shall be required to comply with standards of
this UDO in effect at the time of the modification unless specifically
exempted in this article or otherwise approved by the town.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 8.02  General Provisions & Applicability



   Upon the effective date of this ordinance, and any amendment thereto,
pre-existing structures or lots of record and existing and lawful uses of any
building or land which do not meet the minimum requirements of this ordinance
or which would be prohibited as development in the district in which they are
located shall be considered as nonconforming.



   Except as specifically provided in this article, it shall be unlawful
for any person to engage in any activity that causes an increase in the
extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming situation.



   A.   A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any portion of a
completed building that, when the use was made nonconforming by this
ordinance, or adoption of ordinances repealed by this ordinance, was clearly
designed or arranged to accommodate such uses. However, a nonconforming use
may not be extended to additional buildings or to land outside the original
buildings.



   B.   A nonconforming use of open land may not be extended to cover
more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming, except
that a use that involves the removal of natural materials from the lot (e.g.,
a quarry) may be expanded to the boundaries of the lot where the use was
established at the time it became nonconforming, if 10% or more of the earth
products had already been removed at such time that zoning was adopted at the
same location.



   C.   Where a nonconforming situation exists, the equipment or
processes may be changed if these or similar changes amount only to changes
in degree or activity rather than changes in kind and no violations of other
articles of this ordinance occur.



   D.   Physical alteration of structures or the placement of new
structure(s) on open land are unlawful if they result in:



      1.   An increase in the total amount of space devoted to a
nonconforming use; and/or



      2.   Greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional
restrictions such as yard requirements, height limitations, or density
requirements.



   E.   Minor repairs to and routine maintenance of property where
nonconforming situations exist are permitted and encouraged.



   8.02.1   APPLICABILITY TABLE



   The following table summarizes the requirements that shall be met when
there are changes to existing development and/or to nonconforming structures
or uses. A "•" indicates that compliance with all applicable standards is
required.



 

 
Article II: Dimensional Standards
 
Article IV: Building Design Standards
 
Article IV: Landscaping & Buffering
 
Article IV: Parking Lot Landscaping
 
Article IV: Lighting
 
Article IV: Signs
 
Article V: Sidewalks




Existing Development


Change of Use (From Residential to Non-Residential)
 


 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



Parking Area Expansion


Less than 15 spaces or 50% of paved area
 


 


 


 

•a

 

•a

 


 




Expansion of more than 15 spaces or more or 50% of paved area
 


 


 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



Structure or Building Expansion/Reconstruction


Less than 50% of Existing Gross Floor Area
 

•ab

 

•a

 


 


 

•a

 

•

 




Greater than 50% of Existing Gross Floor Area
 

•ab*

 

•*

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•

 

•



a For expanded/reconstructed portion only

b Exception: Maximum front setbacks should be met to the extent practical as
determined by the Administrator

* For expansions, reconstruction areas and all other walls facing public
streets




 



   8.02.2   APPEALS AND MODIFICATIONS



   A.   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from any
land owner:



      1.   To make a change in use of a nonconforming use to a
different, less-intense nonconforming use;



      2.   To make a change in location of a nonconforming use of
land to another location on the same property; or;



      3.   Allow the replacement of a nonconforming use.



   B.   The Board of Adjustment may only grant a change for a
nonconforming use or replacement of a nonconforming structure which has been
destroyed after having first held a public hearing and having determined that:



      1.   Said change will be more suitable and appropriate for the
lot(s) on which it is located than the existing situation; and



      2.   The proposed change will have a less harmful effect than
the existing situation on the properties surrounding the lot(s) in question;
and,



      3.   The decision to grant the change will be in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to
the neighborhood or otherwise be detrimental to the public welfare.



   C.   The Board of Adjustment, in granting such changes, may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards when made a part of
the terms upon which the change was granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this ordinance and shall be subject to enforcement provisions a prescribed
per Article IX of this ordinance.



   8.02.3   DISCONTINUANCE



   A nonconforming use shall be presumed discontinued when any of the
following has occurred:



   A.   The owner has indicated intent, in writing to the
Administrator, to abandon the use.



   B.   A conforming use has replaced the original nonconforming use.



   C.   The building or structure housing the nonconforming use has
been removed.



   D.   The owner has physically changed the building or structure or
its permanent equipment in such a way as to indicate clearly a change in use
or activity to something other than the nonconforming use.  The property,
structure or use has been vacant or completely inactive for one year.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 8.03  Nonconforming Lots



   8.03.1   DEFINITION AND APPLICABILITY



   A nonconforming lot is a lot of record existing on the effective date
of this ordinance or any amendment to it that does not meet the dimensional
requirements of Article II for the zoning district in which the lot is
located.  A nonconforming vacant lot of record is one that was recorded by
plat or description in the Harnett County Register of Deeds prior to the
adoption of this ordinance or prior to the time that the lot was brought into
the town's jurisdiction. This definition shall not be interpreted to include
recorded lots that were in violation of any prior zoning or subdivision
regulations of the town and which will remain in violation.



   8.03.2   STANDARDS



   A.   Adjoining Lots



   When two or more adjoining lots of record with continuous frontage,
where no more than one is developed, are in one ownership at any time after
the adoption of this ordinance, and such lots individually or together are
less than the minimum square footage and/or have less than the minimum width
required in the zoning district in which they are located, then such lot(s)
shall be combined to create lots which meet the minimum size requirements or
which minimize the degree of nonconformity.



   B.   Lots Not Meeting Minimum Lot Size



      1.   Except as set forth in Section 8.03.2.A. above, in any
zoning district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, and
regardless of whether or not a vested right has been established, any lot of
record existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations which has
dimensions which are less than required by these regulations may be used as a
building site for a single-family dwelling with related accessory buildings,
provided that the lot area and width are not less than 80% of the
requirements in the district.



      2.   If the lot is smaller or narrower, a variance may be
requested of the Board of Adjustment, but in no case shall the Board reduce
the requirements by more than 40%. If a lot of record existing at the time of
adoption of this ordinance in a zoning district other than residential, has
dimensions which are less than required by these regulations, a variance may
be requested from the Board of Adjustment, but in no case shall the Board
reduce the requirements by more than 30%.



   C.   Exceptions for Previously Approved Plats



   A nonconforming lot may be developed if, at the effective date of this
ordinance, the lot is located in a subdivision that had received preliminary
plat approval or a subdivision that had received final plat approval.



   D.   Existing Structures on Non-Conforming Lots



      1.   Any structure on a nonconforming occupied lot may be
occupied, without expansion, by a conforming use or may be improved or
expanded in accordance with the standards listed in this section. Structural
alterations or remodeling of structures on nonconforming lots required by an
authorized public official shall be permitted. Routine maintenance shall also
be permitted so long as no expansion of the nonconformity occurs as a result
of the maintenance.



      2.   Any improvement or expansion of any structure on a
nonconforming occupied lot must comply with all other minimum requirements of
this ordinance or a variance must be obtained from these requirements through
an action of the Board of Adjustment.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 8.04  Nonconforming Manufactured Home Parks



   All Manufactured Home Parks existing at the time of the adoption of
this ordinance shall not be allowed to expand or increase in any manner
unless such expansion meets fully the requirements set forth in this
ordinance.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 8.05  Nonconforming Plans



   A.   APPROVED PLANS



      1.   Previously Approved Plans Grandfathered



      Any plan (including but not limited to preliminary plats, site
plans, construction plans, final plats, conditional zoning district plans,
conditional use permit plans) for the development of property and/or
construction of a building which has received final approval by the town for
development and/or construction, but does not conform to this ordinance, may
be developed and/or constructed in accordance with the rules and regulations,
including any conditions imposed upon approval, that were in place prior to
the effective date of this ordinance. Any plan approved prior to the adoption
of this ordinance, but which conforms to its provisions, shall be
administered, interpreted, amended and implemented in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance.



      2.   Choice of New Ordinance



      A property owner with an approved plan as identified in 8.05.A.1.
above may elect to develop such property and/or construct such building in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this ordinance in lieu of the
rules and regulations upon which the plan was approved. The Administrator
shall notify the property owner in writing of any additional required
procedures or modifications which may be necessary in order for the plan to
conform to the ordinance.



      3.   Amendments or Modifications of Previously Approved Plans



      Any amendment or modification to an approved plan, which would
have required approval pursuant to the ordinance, the rule or regulation by
which the plan was originally approved, shall be reviewed and considered in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this ordinance as if it were an
amendment or modification to a plan originally approved under this ordinance.



   B.   VESTED RIGHTS



      This section does not prohibit the exercise of any vested right
established by common law ordinance or statute.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 8.06  Nonconforming Uses and Structures



   8.06.1   DEFINITION AND APPLICABILITY



   A.   Nonconforming Use



   A nonconforming use is a use which was once a permitted use on a parcel
of land or within a structure, or which precedes any ordinances, but which is
now not a permitted use of that parcel according to Article III of this
ordinance. This definition includes open uses of land as well as the
structures that contain nonconforming uses. The nonconformity may result from
the adoption of this ordinance or any subsequent amendment.



   B.   Nonconforming Structure



   A nonconforming structure does not conform to dimensional, design,
locational, or other requirements of this ordinance. The nonconformity may
result from adoption of this ordinance or any subsequent amendment.



   8.06.2   STANDARDS FOR NONCONFORMING USES



   A.   Continuation



   Any legally established nonconforming use may be continued subject to
the standards listed in this ordinance. However, once a nonconforming use is
made conforming, it may not later be used for any nonconforming use or
expanded in violation of this ordinance.



   B.   Extension of Use



   Any non-conforming use of land or structure, shall not hereafter be
enlarged or extended in any way which serves to increase the nature of
non-conformity, except where the non-conforming use is a residential
structure used exclusively for dwelling purposes, said structure is a
permitted use and the proposed addition shall conform to all zoning
requirements; and the total area of the addition shall be limited to 25%
percent of the area of the original non-conforming structure; and shall be
used solely for residential purposes.



   C.   Loss of Nonconforming Status



   A nonconforming use that is discontinued for a continuous period of
more than one year may not be reestablished. All subsequent uses of the site
or structure must be in conformance with the particular regulations for the
zoning district in which the property is located.



   8.06.3   STANDARDS FOR NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES



   A.   Continuation



   Any legally established nonconforming building or structure may be
continued subject to the standards listed in this ordinance. However, once a
nonconforming structure is made conforming, it may not later be used for any
nonconforming use or expanded in violation of this ordinance. Should any
non-conforming structure be moved for any reason for any distance, whatever,
it shall hereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in
which it is relocated.



   B.   Repairs and Modernization



   Repairs and modernization of any nonconforming building or structure
are permitted provided that such repairs or modernization shall in no way
serve to augment the nature of non-conformity. Nothing in this ordinance
shall be construed so as to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by the
Administrator charged with protecting the public safety, health and welfare.



   C.   Loss of Nonconforming Status



   The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be extended
throughout the building provided no structural alterations (except those
required by law or ordinance or ordered by an authorized officer to secure
the safety of the building) are made therein but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside the building. If the nonconforming use of
such building is discontinued for a continuous period exceeding one year,
every future use of such premises shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this ordinance.



   D.   Restoration After Destruction or Damage



      1.   Should a non-conforming building or structure or
non-conforming portion of a building or structure be destroyed by any means
to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance.



      2.   The above requirement does not apply to single-family
dwellings and accessory buildings or structures.  Structures meeting these
classifications may be reconstructed as long as such reconstruction does not
increase the nonconformity of the original structure.



   E.   Manufactured Homes



   No Class C manufactured home shall be removed for more than seven days
and replaced unless its lot and stand conform to the requirements of this
ordinance.



   F.   Enlargement and Expansion



   Any structure which is nonconforming solely because of its encroachment
in a required yard area may be extended in any lawful manner that does not
further encroach in that yard. Expansions to structures classified as
existing development must meet the requirements of this ordinance; however,
the built-upon area of the existing development is not required to be
included in the density/built-upon area calculations.



   G.   Nonconforming Non-Residential Structures within a Special Flood
Hazard Area



   Any nonconforming building or structure wholly or partly within a
special flood hazard area may be flood-proofed according to methods and
specifications set for in the publication of the Office of the Corps of
Engineers, U.S. Army, entitled Flood-proofing Regulations.



   8.06.4   NONCONFORMING ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES



   No nonconforming accessory use or accessory structure shall continue
after the principal use or structure is terminated by abandonment, damage, or
destruction unless such accessory use or structure is made to conform to the
standards for the zoning district in which it is located. No nonconforming
accessory use or structure shall become or replace any terminated principal
nonconforming use or structure except as permitted in Section 8.06.3.D. above.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 8.07  Nonconforming Signs



   A.   Signs erected after the passage of this ordinance shall conform
to the standards set forth in Article IV. All nonconforming signs in
existence as of the effective date of this ordinance may be continued and
shall be maintained in good condition.



   B.   Nothing in this article shall prevent the normal maintenance of
an existing nonconforming sign. However, a nonconforming sign shall not be:



      1.   Changed to another type or shape of nonconforming sign;
provided, however, the copy, content, or message of the sign may be changed
so long as the shape or size of the sign is not altered;



      2.   Structurally altered, except for normal maintenance;



      3.   Physically expanded, enlarged or extended in any manner;



      4.   Reestablished after the sign is removed, except for
normal maintenance; or



      5.   Reestablished after damage or destruction where the
estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 50% of the assessed value of the
sign in its entirety.



   C.   All non-conforming signs created as a result of the passage of
this ordinance shall be allowed to remain in place in accordance with this
section. Signs erected after the passage of this ordinance shall conform to
the standards set forth herein.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Article IX.
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES



Section 9.01  Complaints Regarding Violations



   Whenever the Administrator receives a written, signed complaint
alleging a violation of this ordinance, he or she shall investigate the
complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and inform the complainant in
writing what actions have been or will be taken.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 9.02  Persons Liable



   The owner, tenant or occupant of any building or land or part thereof
and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who
participates in, assists, directs, creates or maintains any situation that is
contrary to the requirements of this ordinance may be held responsible for
the violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein
provided.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 9.03  Enforcement Authority



   This ordinance shall be enforceable in accordance with the provisions
of G.S. § 160A-175.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 9.04  No Criminal Violations



   The violation of any section or provision of this ordinance shall not
constitute a criminal violation, but shall be enforceable through civil
procedures.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 9.05  Civil Remedies



   The town shall issue civil citation and penalties for any violation of
this ordinance. See Section 9.09 for penalties schedule.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 9.06  Equitable Relief



   A.   The town may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for
an appropriate equitable remedy.



   B.   It shall not be a defense to the town's application for
equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 9.07  Combination of Remedies



   The town may choose to enforce this article by any one, all or
combination of the above procedures.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 9.08  Permit Revocation



   A.   Any permit may be revoked by the permit-issuing authority (in
accordance with the provisions of this section) if the permit recipient fails
to develop or maintain the property in accordance with the plans submitted,
the requirements of this section or any additional requirements lawfully
imposed.



   B.   Before a conditional use permit may be revoked, all of the
notice and hearing and other requirements of this ordinance shall be complied
with. The notice shall inform the permit recipient of the alleged grounds for
the revocation.



   C.   Before a zoning permit may be revoked, the Administrator shall
give the permit recipient ten days' notice of intent to revoke the permit and
shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons for the revocation and of
his or her right to obtain an informal hearing on the allegations.  If the
permit is revoked, the Administrator shall provide to the permittee a written
statement of the decision and the reasons therefore.



   D.   No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in the
manner authorized by any permit after such permit has been revoked in
accordance with this section.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 9.09  Penalties



   The town shall issue civil citation and penalties for any violation of
this ordinance. Civil citations and penalties shall be paid according to the
following procedure:



   A.   The Administrator shall issue a warning citation in writing, by
personal delivery or by registered or certified mail, to the person
responsible for any violation, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. This notification shall also
include possible penalties and/or legal actions, deadlines for correction or
appeal, and method of appeal.



   B.   If the violation has not been corrected (or an extension has
not been granted by the Administrator), and no appeal has been made to the
Board of Adjustment within ten days of the date of the notification, the
Administrator shall issue subsequent civil citations and penalties according
to the schedule outlined below:



 


1.   CIVIL CITATION AND PENALTY SCHEDULE




Citation

 

Penalty




Warning Citation

 

N/A




Official Citation

 

$25




Second Citation

 

$100




Third Citation

 

$250




Fourth & Subsequent Citations

 

$500




 



      2.   All violations must be corrected within ten days of
issuance of the citation.



      3.   Any required civil penalty must be paid in-full within
ten days issuance of the citation.



   C.   Any violation(s) that is corrected but subsequently
reestablished within a period of 180 days from the date of correction shall
be considered a continuation of the violation and the Administrator shall
issue the citation at the next penalty level.



   D.   If the penalty is not paid timely, the town may pursue legal
action to enforce its rights hereunder in including, but not limited to, the
placement of a lien on the property subject to the penalty. Further, in the
event legal action shall be taken by the town, the town shall be entitled to
reasonably attorney's fees, costs and expenses.



   E.   In addition to, and without waiving, other relief that may be
sought contemporaneously therewith or in a subsequent action, the town may
recover civil penalties in a civil action if the offender does not pay the
penalty within ten days of the date of the notification after being cited for
a violation.



   F.   If a building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed or altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is occupied or used in violation of the North Carolina
General Statutes, this ordinance or other regulation made under authority
conferred thereby, the town may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction
for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding
the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful
use of the property.



   G.   In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case. An order of abatement may
direct that buildings or other structures on the property be closed, and
demolished, or removed; that fixtures, furniture or other movable property be
removed from buildings on the property; that grass and weeds be cut; that
improvements or repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is
necessary to bring the property into compliance with this ordinance. If the
defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of
abatement within the time allowed by the court, he or she may be cited for
contempt and the town may execute the order of abatement. The town shall have
a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 9.10  Specific Violations and Penalties



   9.10.1   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS



   A.   Any person or other entity violating Article III shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned
not more than 30 days.



   B.   In addition to any other remedies, the town may apply to
General Court of Justice for suitable equitable relief to abate or otherwise
enjoin any violation of Article III.  Any violation would result in
revocation of permit or license.



   9.10.2   SUBDIVISIONS



   A.   After the effective date of this ordinance, any person who,
being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the
subdivision regulation jurisdiction of the town as defined herein, hereafter
transfers or sells land by reference to a plat showing a subdivision of land
before such plat has been properly approved under this article and recorded
in the Harnett County Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   B.   The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of
transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties.



   C.   The town, through its attorney or other official designated by
the Board of Commissioners, may enjoin illegal subdivision, transfer or sale
of land by action for injunction.



   D.   Further, violators of this article shall be subject, upon
conviction, to fine and/or imprisonment as provided in G.S. Ch. 14-4.



   9.10.3   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



   Violation of the provisions of Article VI of this ordinance or failure
to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special
exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates Article
VI or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than $50 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days,
or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)




Article X.
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS




Section 10.01  Word Interpretation



   10.01.1   GENERALLY



   The text within the UDO shall control where there is any conflict
between text within the UDO and any caption, illustration or graphic
presentation. Unless prohibited by context, reference to any article, section
or paragraph shall include all portions of that article, section or paragraph.



   10.01.2   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION



   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense;
words used in the singular number shall include the plural number; and words
used in the plural number shall include the singular number.



   B.   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by the
UDO, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of
time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so
computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday,
in which event, the period shall run until the end of the next day which is
neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time
prescribed or allowed is less than ten days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays
and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.



   C.   A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to female persons and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as
well as to male persons.



   D.   The words "may" and "should" are always permissive and never
mandatory.



   E.   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely permissive.



   F.   The word "month" shall mean 30 calendar days.



   G.   The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations,
clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as
well as to individuals.



   H.   Whenever the UDO refers to a specific portion of the Code of
Ordinances or the UDO itself, that reference shall include any subsequent
amendment to the referenced portion or any subsequent provision superseding
the provision.



   I.   The terms "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or
building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or
designed to be used or occupied"; the term "existing" as applied to any use,
structure, or development includes the words "existing on the effective date
of this UDO."



   10.01.3   RESPONSIBILITY FOR INTERPRETATIONS



   All interpretations shall be the responsibility of the Administrator.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 10.02  ABBREVIATIONS



   As used in this UDO, the following abbreviations shall have the
meanings assigned to them in this section.



   A.   BMP: Best Management Practices



   B.   DBH: Diameter at breast height, which is the diameter of a tree
measured four and one-half feet above grade.



   C.   DENR: North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.



   D.   IESNA: The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.



   E.   NCDOT: North Carolina Department of Transportation



   F.   TIA: Traffic impact analysis



   G.   TRC: Technical Review Committee



   H.   G.S.: North Carolina General Statues



   I.   UDO: Unified Development Ordinance



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 10.03  DEFINITIONS (GENERAL)



   As used in the UDO, the following terms shall have the meanings
assigned to them in this section. When one or more defined terms are used
together, their meanings shall also be combined as the context shall require
or permit. All terms not specifically defined shall carry their usual and
customary meanings. Undefined terms indigenous to a trade, industry or
profession shall be defined when used in such context in accordance with
their usual and customary understanding in the trade, industry or profession
to which they apply.



ABUTTING. Having property or district lines in common. Lots are also
considered to be abutting if they are directly opposite each other and
separated by a street or alley.



ACCESS. A way of approaching or entering a property.  Access also includes
ingress, the right to enter and egress, the right to leave.



ACTIVE CONSTRUCTION. Activities that contribute directly to the building of
facilities including land-disturbing activities for roads, parking lots,
footings, etc.



ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated to carry out the responsibilities
established in this UDO or their designee.



ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or Significant
portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL
AREA, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such material.



ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having a substantial portion of
materials or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on sexual activities,
anatomical genital areas, or the female breast as listed and defined in G.S.
§ 14-210.10 (or any successor thereto).



ADULT MOTELS AND HOTELS. A place where motion pictures not previously
submitted to or not rated by the Motion Picture Association of America are
shown in rooms designed primarily for lodging, which said motion pictures
have as the dominator primary theme matters depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities.



ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  An enclosed building used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL
AREAS, for observation by patrons therein.



AIRSTRIP. A surface used for take-off and landing of aircraft.



ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES STORE. The retail sales of beer, wine, and/or other
alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption as a primary use.



APPLICANT. A person, including any governmental entity, seeking development
approval.



AMUSEMENTS, INDOOR. Establishments that provide commercial recreation
activities completely within an enclosed structure such as video arcades,
skating rinks, roller rinks, shooting ranges, bowling alleys, and
billiards/pool halls.



AMUSEMENTS, OUTDOOR. Establishments that provide commercial recreation
activities primarily outdoors such as miniature golf establishments; go-cart
facility; theme parks, carnivals, fairgrounds, and midways; paintball parks;
and water rides.



ANIMAL PRODUCTION. Industries in the animal production subsector raise or
fatten animals for the sale of animals or animal products. The subsector
comprises establishments, such as ranches, farms, and feedlots primarily
engaged in keeping, grazing, breeding, or feeding animals. These animals are
kept for the products they produce or for eventual sale. The animals are
generally raised in various environments, from total confinement or captivity
to feeding on an open range pasture. Establishments primarily engaged in the
farm raising and production of aquatic animals or plants in controlled or
selected aquatic environments are included in this subsector.



ATM. Computerized, self-service machines used by banking customers for
financial institutions, including deposits, withdrawals and fund transfers,
without face-to-face contact with financial institution personnel. These
machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations.



AUTOMOBILE/VEHICLE SALES, RENTAL, SERVICE & REPAIR. Establishments which may
have showrooms or open lots for selling, renting or leasing automobiles,
light trucks, motorcycles, and ATVs.



BANKS, CREDIT UNIONS, FINANCIAL SERVICES. Establishments that engage in
financial transactions that create, liquidate, or change ownership of
financial services. Banks, credit unions, and savings institutions may
perform central banking functions, accept deposits, and lend funds from these
deposits. In addition to banks and credit unions, financial services
institutions may include: credit agencies, trust companies, holding
companies, savings and loan institutions, check cashing services,
securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers, security and commodity
exchanges, vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies, and investment
companies.



BAR/TAVERN. A business where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-site
consumption, which are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars,
taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is
subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May also include beer brewing
as part of a microbrewery and other beverage tasting facilities.



BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. A private home of not more than eight guest
rooms that offers bed and breakfast accommodations, and that: 1) No more than
eight guest rooms that offers bed and breakfast accommodations may be
provided on each private residence; 2) Serves only the breakfast meal, and
that meal is served to overnight guests of the business; 3) An owner/manager
of a bed and breakfast home shall reside on the property.



BERM. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, and/or decrease noise.



BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP): A structural or non-structural
management-based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce
non-point source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality
protection goals.



BONA FIDE FARM PURPOSES. Includes the production and activities relating or
incidental to the production of crops, fruits, vegetables, ornamental and
flowering plants, dairy, livestock, poultry, and all other forms of
agriculture as defined in G.S. § 106-581.1 and all other purposes described
in G.S. § 153A-340.b.2.



BUFFER. A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as
plantings or fencing, used to separate and screen incompatible land uses form
each other.



BUFFERYARD. The area of a required buffer in which plantings or other
screening elements are to be located.



BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind.



BUILDING, ACCESSORY OR ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A building or structure that is
located on the same lot as a principal building or structure, used
incidentally to a principal building or used for purposes that are secondary
the principal use of the site. For example, a storage shed is considered an
accessory building when located on a lot with a single-family dwelling.



BUILDING, PRINCIPAL OR PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. The building or structure on a
lot that houses the principal use. For example, in the example for the
previous definition, the single-family home would be the principal building



BUILDING FLOOR AREA. The gross floor area of an individual structure built
for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.



BUILDING FRONT OR FRONTAGE. The length of that side of the principal building
that faces the street. For corner lots, the front shall be determined by the
Administrator based on other development along the faces of the block on
which the corner lot is located.



BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average sidewalk or street
grade, or finished grade of the building line, whichever is the highest, to
the highest point of the building.



BUILDING STORY.  A story is a habitable level within a building of no more
than 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling. Unoccupied
attics less than seven feet in height and raised basements less than six feet
in height (as measured from the average grade of the fronting sidewalk) are
not considered stories for the purposes of determining building height. A
mezzanine shall be considered a story if it is contiguous with at least 60%
of the building's front façade, is designed to be occupiable, and maintains
an average depth of at least 16 feet. The under-roof area with dormers does
not count as a story.



BUILT-UPON AREA. Built-upon areas shall include that portion of a development
project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover including
buildings, pavement, gravel areas, recreation facilities, etc. (Note: Wooden
slatted decks and the water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious.)



CAMPS & CAMPING ESTABLISHMENTS. Sites where the main operation is to
accommodate campers and their equipment, provide overnight recreational
camps, may provide cabins, food services, washrooms, trailer parks, etc.



CANOPY TREE. Large-growing, shade-producing trees with an expected mature
height of 40 feet or greater and an expected mature crown spread of 30 feet
or greater.



CEMETERY. A parcel of land used for internment of the dead in the ground or
in mausoleums.



CHEMICAL, MEDALS, MACHINERY & ELECTRONIC MANUFACTURING. Manufacturing
facility that transforms or refine chemicals or metals, and manufacture
products from chemicals or metals.



CO-LOCATION. The use of an approved telecommunications structure to support
antenna for the provision of wireless services.



CHANGE OF USE. For the purposes of this UDO only this term shall mean any
alteration in the use of a lot or structure which, in the determination of
the Administrator, changes the primary use such lot or property from one use
type listed in the Use Table in Article III to another use type.



CHILD/ADULT DAY CARE CENTER (MORE THAN EIGHT PERSONS). An individual, agency,
or organization providing supervision or care on a regular basis for children
or adults who are not related by blood or marriage to, and who are not the
legal wards or foster children of, the supervising adults; and who are not
residents in the center; designed and approved to accommodate more than eight
children or adults at a time based on state regulations; not an accessory to
residential use.



CHILD/ADULT DAY CARE HOME (EIGHT OR LESS PERSONS). Supervision or care
provided on a regular basis as an accessory use within a principal
residential dwelling unit, by a resident of the dwelling, for no more than
eight children (no more than five of which may be of pre-school age).



CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. Official certification that a structure conforms to
provisions of the UDO (and building code) and may be used or occupied. Such a
certificate is granted for new construction or for alterations or additions
to existing structures or a change in use. Unless such a certificate is
issued, a structure cannot be occupied or used.



CIRCULATION AREA. That portion of the vehicle use area used for access to
parking or loading areas or other facilities on the lot.



CORNER LOT. A lot which abuts the right-of-way of two streets at their
intersection.



COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY. Junior colleges, colleges, universities, and professional
schools with physical structures (excluding online and remote programs).
These establishments furnish academic or technical courses and grant degrees,
certificates, or diplomas at the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate levels
in a campus setting in more than one building.



COMMUNITY SUPPORT FACILITY. A permanent, stand-alone support facility
providing personal assistance to individuals in need; such assistance to
individuals may include temporary shelter, food services provisions,
counseling, instruction, medical services, and other incidental services.
This definition does not include emergency/hazard shelters or clothing/food
collection centers as accessory uses.



COMBINATION USE. A use consisting of a combination on one lot of two or more
principal uses separately.



COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION OR DEVELOPMENT. No further land-disturbing
activity is required on a phase of a project except that which is necessary
for establishing a permanent ground cover.



COMPATIBLE/COMPATIBILITY. A condition in which land uses or conditions can
coexist in a relative proximity to each other in a stable fashion over time
such that no use or condition is unduly negatively impacted directly or
indirectly by another use or condition. Compatibility does not require
homogeneity, but does consider the relative scale, design and intensity of
nearby structures, uses and activities.



CONFERENCE/CONVENTION FACILITY. A commercial facility for public assembly
including, but not limited to auditoriums, conference facilities, convention
centers, exhibition halls, and the like.



COMMUNITY GARDEN. An exterior area for the small-scale production of
vegetables and flowering plants for personal or small commercial use. This
definition includes community and private gardens.



CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION. Government establishments generally designed for
the confinement, correction, and rehabilitation of offenders sentenced by a
court.



CONSERVATION EASEMENT. The grant of a property right or interest from the
property owner to a unit of government or nonprofit conservation organization
stipulating that the described land shall either remain in its natural,
scenic, open or wooded state; or be used for agricultural purposes authorized
specifically authorized by the easement.



CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. The circular area of ground surrounding a tree extending
from the center of tree to the greater of 1.5 feet per caliper inch DBH of
the tree or the dripline (furthest extent of tree canopy).



CUTOFF FIXTURE. An outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in such a
manner that no more than 2½% of the total light emitted by the fixture is
projected above the horizontal plane of the fixture.



DEDICATION. A gift, by the owner, or a right to use land for a specified
purpose or purposes. Because a transfer of property rights is entailed,
dedication must be made by written instrument, and is completed with an
acceptance.



DEVELOPMENT FLOOR AREA. The total building floor area of any construction
projects simultaneously developed by a single developer.



DEVELOPMENT. Process or result of subdivision of land, or the construction,
reconstruction, site improvement, installation of improvements, establishment
of a temporary or accessory improvement or structure or other modification to
land or a body of water.



DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. Any development approval, whether discretionary or
ministerial, approved by the town pursuant to this UDO.



DEVELOPMENT CONDITIONS. The written development program, dimensional
standards, special conditions and restrictions on development submitted with
the application for zoning approval.



DEVELOPMENT ENVELOPE. Area within which grading, lawns, pavement and
buildings will be located.



DEVELOPMENT PATTERN. A type of development described in this UDO or otherwise
established that is characterized by a mix of uses, intensities of
development or specific design characteristics.



DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. A continuous (through) lot which is accessible from both
streets upon which it fronts.



DRAINAGE EASEMENT. A 20 foot wide minimum strip of land reserved for
conveyance of stormwater required when the total drainage area exceeds four
lots or four acres, whichever is less, generally located along rear or side
lot lines, but may cross lots at such points that will not pose a hazard to
persons or property.



DRAINAGEWAY. A natural or artificial stream or depression that conveys
surface water.



DRIVE-THRU/DRIVE-IN FACILITY. A primary or accessory facility where goods or
services may be obtained by motorists without leaving their vehicles. These
facilities include drive-through bank teller windows, dry cleaners, fast-food
restaurants, drive-through coffee, photo stores, pharmacies, etc. Does not
include: automated teller machines (ATMs), gas stations or other vehicle
services, which are separately defined.



DRIVE-IN THEATER. A specialized outdoor theater for showing movies or motion
pictures on a projection screen where patrons view movies from their vehicles.



DRIPLINE. A vertical line extending from the outer edge of a tree canopy to
the ground.



DRY CLEANING & LAUNDRY SERVICES. Coin operated laundries, dry cleaning
pick-up stores without dry cleaning equipment, or dry cleaning stores that do
not provide cleaning services to other collection stations or stores.



DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT. A unit designed and intended to house a person or
family that includes bathroom, cooking and sleeping facilities.



DWELLING, ACCESSORY. A dwelling unit either detached or attached, such as a
garage apartment or cottage, located on a lot with an existing single-family
dwelling.



DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.  A building including three or more dwelling Units.



DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY CONVERSION. A multi-family dwelling containing not
more than four dwelling units and results from the conversion of a single
building containing at least 2,000 square feet of gross floor area that was
in existence on the effective date of this provision and that was originally
designed, constructed and occupied as a single-family residence.



DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (TOWNHOME). A multi-family dwelling in which
each dwelling unit shares a common wall (including without limitation the
wall of an attached garage or porch) with at least one other dwelling unit
and in which each dwelling unit has living space on the ground floor and a
separate ground floor entrance and each dwelling unit is conveyed through a
subdivision plat.



DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A free standing building designed for
and/or occupied by one household. These residences may be individually owned
as residences or residences owned by rental or management companies. Also
includes factory-built, modular housing units that comply with NC State
Building Code.



DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY OR DUPLEX. A two-family residential use in which the
dwelling units share a common wall (including without limitation the wall of
an attached garage or porch) and in which each dwelling unit has living space
on the ground floor and a separate ground floor entrance.



EASEMENT. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner
for limited use of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and
within which the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent
structures except when authorized by the town.



ELECTRONIC GAMING OPERATIONS. Any business activity, whether as a principal
or accessory use, in which patrons use electronic or mechanical machines,
including, but not limited to, computers and gaming terminals, to conduct or
stimulate games of chance, including the use of the machines to reveal the
pre-determined value of an entry, and where cash, merchandise or other items
of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether the value is
determined by the machines or by pre-determined odds. Gaming operations do
not include any lottery approved by the State of North Carolina or any
nonprofit activity otherwise lawful under state law.



EMERGENCY/HAZARD SHELTERS. A shelter intended to protect occupants from
temporary emergencies and hazards.



ENGINEERED (OR STRUCTURAL) STORMWATER CONTROLS. A structural best management
practice (BMP) used to reduce non-point source pollution to receiving waters
in order to achieve water quality protection goals.



EROSION. The wearing away of land surface by the action of the wind, water,
gravity, or any combination thereof.



ESTABLISHED FARM. Means an ongoing agricultural operation including all such
operations that qualify for the agricultural use value tax rate.



EXISTING DEVELOPMENT. Those projects that are built or those projects that at
a minimum have established a vested right under North Carolina zoning law as
of the effective date of this ordinance.



EXTRATERRITORIAL PLANNING JURISDICTION (ETJ). That portion of the town's
planning jurisdiction that lies outside the corporate limits of the town.



FAÇADE. That portion of any exterior elevation on the building extending
from grade to top of the parapet, wall or eaves and the entire width of the
building elevation.



FAMILY. One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit.



FAMILY CARE HOME (SIX OR FEWER



RESIDENTS). A home with support and supervisory personnel that provides room
and board, personal care and rehabilitation services in a family environment
for not more than six resident handicapped persons and is certified by the
State of North Carolina. (G.S. § 168-21)



FINISHED GRADE. The grade after construction, exclusive of any filling,
berming, mounting, or excavating.



FLOOR. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e. top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in a frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a
garage used solely for parking vehicles.



FRONTAGE. All property abutting a street line measured along the street line.



FUNERAL HOMES/CREMATORIUMS.  Establishments for preparing the dead for
burial or internment and conducting funerals (i.e. providing facilities for
wakes, arranging transportation for the dead, and selling caskets and related
merchandise).



GAS / FUELING STATION. Establishment that primarily retails automotive fuels.
These establishments may further provide services such as automotive repair,
automotive oils, and/or replacement parts and accessories. Gas stations
include structures that are specialized for selling gasoline with storage
tanks, often underground or hidden. The sale of food and other items as well
as car washes shall be incidental to the gas station.



GENERAL COMMERCIAL. A place of business providing the sale and display of
goods or sale of services directly to the consumer, with goods available for
immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser.



GENERAL COMMERCIAL – GREATER THAN 25,000 SF. A use category allowing
general commercial premises greater than 25,000 square feet in gross leasable
area to be available for the commercial sale of merchandise and prepared
foods, but excluding manufacturing.



GREENWAY. A linear natural preserve available for free and unstructured
recreation to the general public. This term is not meant to be inclusive of
required pedestrian/bicycle connections from adjacent development to
greenways.



GROSS FLOOR AREA. (1) The total area of a building measured by taking the
outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy
or storage. (2) The sum of the enclosed area on all floors of a building
measured from the outside faces of the exterior walls. It includes any below
grade floor areas used for habitation or storage.



GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA. The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy
and exclusive use, including any basements, mezzanines, or upper floors. It
is measured from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall
faces.



GROUND COVER. Any natural vegetative growth or other material that renders
the soil surface stable against accelerated erosion.



HALFWAY HOUSE. A home for not more than nine persons who have demonstrated a
tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness (as defined in G.S. §
122C-3(14), or anti-social or criminal conduct, together with not more than
two persons providing supervision and other services to such persons, all of
whom live together as a single housekeeping unit.



HEAVY EQUIPMENT/MANUFACTURED HOME



RENTAL/SALES. Establishments which may have showrooms or open lots for
selling, renting or leasing heavy equipment such as buses, trucks,
manufactured homes, construction equipment, or boats or marine craft.



HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or profession carried on entirely within a
dwelling by one or more occupants thereof, provided that such use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.



HOSPITAL. A health care facility and related facilities the purpose of which
is to provide for care, treatment, testing for physical, emotional, or mental
injury, illness, or disability, and overnight boarding of patients, either on
a for profit or not-for-profit basis; but not including group homes.



HOTEL/MOTEL/INN. Establishments providing lodging and short-term
accommodations for travelers. They may offer a wide range of services
including, overnight sleeping space, food services, convention hosting
services, and/or laundry services. Entertainment and recreation activities
may also be included. Extended-stay hotels are included in this category.



ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING SOCIETY OF NORTH AMERICA (IES OR IESNA). The
professional society of lighting engineers, including those from
manufacturing companies, and others professionally involved in lighting.



IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Impervious surface area includes any material which
reduces and/or prevents absorption of storm water. This includes but is not
limited to, buildings, roads, pavement, gravel surfaces, etc.



INDUSTRY, HEAVY. A non-residential use that requires a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for an industrial or stormwater
discharge; or that involves the use or storage of any hazardous materials or
substances; or that is used for the purpose of manufacturing, assembling,
finishing, cleaning or developing any product or commodity; or that involves
the mining or extraction of any minerals, ore, fossil fuels, or other
materials from beneath the surface of the earth. Typically, the largest
facilities in a community, these structures house complex operations, some of
which might be continuous (operated 24 hours a day, seven days a week).



INDUSTRY, LIGHT. A non-residential use that involves the manufacturing,
assembling, finishing, cleaning or developing any product or commodity.
Facilities are typically designed to look and generate impacts like a typical
office building, but rely on special power, water, or waste disposal systems
for operation. Noise, odor, dust, and glare of each operation are completely
confined within an enclosed building, insofar as practical. This includes
medical and testing laboratories. This definition also includes facilities
for scientific research, and the design, development, and testing of
electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical, computer and telecommunications
components in advance of product manufacturing, and the assembly of related
products from parts produced off-site, where the manufacturing activity is
secondary to the research and development activities. Also included are
laundry/dry cleaning plants as principal uses engaged primarily in high
volume laundry and garment services, including: carpet and upholstery
cleaners; diaper services; dry-cleaning and garment pressing; and commercial
laundries.



KENNELS, OUTDOOR. A use or structure intended and used for the breeding or
accommodation of small domestic animals for sale or for the training or
overnight boarding of animals for persons other than the owner of the lot,
but not including a veterinary clinic in which the overnight boarding of
animals is necessary for or accessory to the testing and medical treatment of
the physical disorders of animals.



LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any use of the land by any person in residential,
industrial, educational, institutional, or commercial development, highway
and road construction and maintenance, that results in a change in the
natural cover or topography and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation.



LANDFILL. A disposal facility for hazardous or nonhazardous solid waste.
These establishments also manage recycling and resource recovery facilities
that operate in conjunction with landfills.



LANDSCAPE PLAN. A plan illustrating the design and specifications for the
preservation of existing vegetation; the placement of any live plant
materials such as trees, shrubs, grasses, ground covers, etc.; and the
location and design of built features such as berms, fencing, walls, etc.



LIGHT MANUFACTURING WORKSHOPS. The assembly, fabrication, production or
processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily do not
create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside
of the building and are visually undifferentiated from an office building or
a residentially-scaled garage. These typically involve the work of artisans
or craftsman. May also include beer brewing or other similar facilities as
part of a microbrewery and other beverage tasting facilities.



LIGHT POLLUTION. Any adverse effect of manmade light including, but not
limited to, light trespass, up-lighting, the uncomfortable distraction to the
eye, or any manmade light that diminishes the ability to view the night sky;
often used to denote urban sky glow.



LIVE-WORK UNITS. An attached residential building type with a small
commercial enterprise on the ground floor and a residential unit above or
behind with a common tenant in both spaces (no dual occupancy is permitted).



LOT. A parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other officially
approved means of access.



LOT FRONTAGE. The lot width measured at the street right-of-way line from
which the lot obtains access.



LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT. A method of site development and stormwater
management that mimics the natural hydrologic functions of infiltration,
runoff, and evapotranspiration on a site before development occurs.



MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit that is composed of one or more
components, each of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing
plant and designed for installation or assembly and installation on the
building site.



MANUFACTURED HOME, CLASS A.  A dwelling unit constructed with one or more
components which are pre-fabricated and hauled to the site that are capable
of producing a dwelling which is indistinguishable from conventionally built
homes and which meets the construction requirements of the North Carolina
Residential Building Code as amended.



MANUFACTURED HOME, CLASS B. A dwelling unit that: (1) Is not constructed in
accordance with the requirements of the North Carolina Uniform Residential
Building Code as amended; and (2) Is composed of two or more components, each
of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to
be transported to the home site; and (3) Meets or exceeds the construction
standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.



MANUFACTURED HOME, CLASS C. Any manufactured home that does not meet the
definition criteria of a Class A or Class B manufactured home but which, at a
minimum, exceeds 32 feet in length and eight feet in width.



MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A residential use in which more than one Class B or
Class C manufactured home is located on a single Lot.



MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision of land into four or more lots, or which
requires the dedication of public utilities and/or public streets.



MATERIALS RECOVERY & WASTE TRANSFER



FACILITIES. This industry comprises establishments primarily engaged in a)
operating facilities for separating and sorting recyclable materials from
nonhazardous waste streams (i.e., garbage) and/or b) operating facilities
where commingled recyclable materials, such as paper, plastics, used beverage
cans, and metals, are sorted into distinct categories.



MECHANICAL UTILITY. Any piece of machinery or equipment with moving parts,
generates noise, or causes any kind of environmental disturbance or creates
emission of any kind, including air movement. Said machinery or equipment is
generally functional or utilitarian in nature.



MEDICAL CLINIC. Medical service facilities that provide outpatient ambulatory
or outpatient health care such as emergency medical clinics; ambulatory
surgical centers; dialysis centers; outpatient family planning services;
community health centers and clinics; blood and organ banks; and medical
services such as physician's and dentist's offices.



MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision of land into three or fewer lots which
does not require the dedication of public utilities and/or public streets.



MULTI-USE TRAIL. A trail designed for compatible and safe concurrent use by
pedestrians and bicyclists.



MUSEUM/CULTURAL FACILITIES. Facilities designed to promote cultural
advancement and serve the community such as occasional live theater, dance,
or music establishments; art galleries, studios and museums; non-profit civic
or fraternal organizations; museums, exhibition, or similar facility; and
libraries.



NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS. Improved space set aside for public use and recreation
that is comprised of one or more of the following: greenway, green, square,
playground, or community garden.



NIGHT CLUB. A business that operates primarily in the evening hours that
principally provides entertainment such as live music, and/or dancing,
comedy, etc.



NON-CONFORMING PROJECT. Any structure, development or undertaking that is
incomplete at the effective date of this UDO and would be inconsistent with
any regulation applicable to the district in which it is located if completed
as proposed or planned.



NURSERIES & GARDEN CENTERS. Any establishment that provides activities
related to growing crops mainly for commercial food and fiber. 
Establishments, such as farms, orchards, groves, greenhouses, and nurseries,
which are primarily engaged in the commercial production of crops, plants,
vines, or trees and their seeds should be included in this category.



OFFICIAL MAPS OR PLANS. Any maps or plans officially adopted by the
Lillington Board of Commissioners as a guide to the development of the Town
of Lillington.



OPEN AIR RETAIL. A retail sales establishment operated primarily in the open
air including, but not limited to: farmers market, flea markets, sidewalk
kiosks and the like. Uses not included are: car sales, equipment sales, boats
sales, and home and garden supplies and equipment.



OPEN SPACE. Those areas set aside and protected from development which may be
left in a generally unimproved state.



OUTPARCEL. A parcel of real property having access to at least one public
street, private roadway or private drive that is part of a larger commercial
development, but that may be sold or leased without further subdivision.



OUTSIDE OR DISPLAY SALES. The sale of goods and products outside of a
permanent structure that are clearly related to the function contained in
that structure. This includes, but is not limited to, landscape materials,
lawn and garden supplies, and produce.



OWNER. The legal or beneficial owner of land, including but not limited to a
mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or long-term
or commercial lessee, or any other person or entity holding proprietary
rights in the property or having legal power of management and control of the
property. OWNER shall include long-term commercial tenants; management
entities, such as those charged with or engaged in the management of
properties for profit; and every person or entity having joint ownership of
the property. A secured lender not in possession of the property does not
constitute an owner, unless the secured lender is included within the meaning
of OWNER under another description in this definition, such as a management
entity.



PARCEL. An area of land not dedicated for public or common use capable of
being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may
be established and includes but is not limited to lots.



PARKING LOT/STRUCTURE – PRINCIPAL USE. A stand-alone parking lot or
structure (deck/garage) that is available for public or private use, but that
is not accessory to another use.



PARKING AREA AISLES. That portion of the vehicle use area consisting of lanes
providing access to parking spaces.



PAWNSHOPS. Premises operated by a pawnbroker who is engaged in the business
of lending money on the security of pledged goods and who may also purchase
merchandise for resale from dealers and traders. (Subject to G.S. Ch. 91A)



PERMIT ISSUING AUTHORITY.  A person or entity authorized by this UDO to
grant development approval, whether discretionary or ministerial.



PERSONAL CARE SERVICES. Cosmetic services such as hair and nail salons,
barber shops, clothing alterations, shoe repair, weight loss centers and
non-permanent makeup services.



PERSONAL CARE SERVICES (RESTRICTED). A personal service establishment that
may tend to have a blighting and/or deteriorating effect upon surrounding
areas and that may need to be dispersed from other similar uses to minimize
its adverse impacts, including check-cashing services and tattooing,
piercing, and similar services. These uses may also include accessory retail
sales of products related to the services provided.



PLANNING JURISDICTION. The area within the town limits as well as the area
beyond the town limits within which the town is authorized to plan for and
regulate development, as set forth in this UDO.



PLAT. A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been
subdivided.



POST OFFICE. Establishments conducting operations of the United States Postal
Service including permanent, contract, and lease stations.



PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Services provided that make available the knowledge
and skills of their employees to sell expertise and perform professional,
scientific, and technical services to others such as legal services;
accounting, tax, bookkeeping, and payroll services; architectural,
engineering, and related services; graphic, industrial, and interior design
services; consulting services; research and development services;
advertising, media, and photography services; real estate services;
investment banking, securities, brokerages; and insurance-related services.



PRODUCE STANDS. A temporary open air stand or place for the seasonal selling
of agricultural produce by an individual (excludes Open Air Retail).



PUBLIC SAFETY STATION. Facilities for federal, state and local law
enforcement and fire protection agencies, and their accessory uses including
office space, temporary holding cells, equipment and evidence storage
facilities, and vehicle garages. This definition is not intended to be
inclusive of vehicle impoundment lots or state prison facilities.



PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION/ CIVIC MEETING FACILITY. Not-for-profit membership
organizations such as alumni associations, booster clubs, scouting
organizations, ethnic associations, social clubs, fraternal lodge and
veterans' membership organizations primarily engaged in promoting the civic
and social interests of their members. The uses often include meeting and
storage facilities.



RACETRACK. An outdoor course prepared for horse, dog, automobile, or other
vehicle racing.



RECREATION FACILITIES, INDOOR. Uses or structures for active recreation
including gymnasiums, natatoriums, fitness center, athletic equipment, indoor
running tracks, climbing facilities, court facilities and their customary
accessory uses. This definition is inclusive of both non-profit and
for-profit operations.



RECREATION FACILITIES, OUTDOOR. Parks and other open space used for active or
passive recreation such as ball fields, batting cages, skateboard parks,
playgrounds, greenway trails, driving ranges, and tennis courts and their
customary accessory uses including, but not limited to, maintenance sheds,
clubhouses (with or without food service), pools, restrooms, and picnic
shelters.



RECYCLING COLLECTION STATIONS. A center for the acceptance by donation,
redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public.



REDEVELOPMENT. Any rebuilding activity other than a rebuilding activity that
results in no net increase in built-upon area and provides equal or greater
stormwater control than the previous development.



RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES. A staffed premises (not a single-family
dwelling) with paid or volunteer staff that provides full-time care to more
than six individuals. Residential care facilities include group homes (G.S.
Ch. 131D), nursing homes (G.S. § 131E-101), residential child-care
facilities (G.S. § 131D-10.2), assisted living residences (G.S. Ch. 131D-2),
adult care homes (G.S. Ch. 131D-2), retirement housing, congregate living
services, assisted living services, continuing care retirement centers,
skilled nursing services and orphanages. This term excludes family care homes
and halfway houses.



RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any facility such as a church, temple, monastery,
synagogues, or mosque used for worship by a non-profit organization and their
customary related uses for education (pre-schools, religious education,
etc.), recreation (gymnasiums, activity rooms, ball fields, etc.), housing
(rectory, parsonage, elderly or disabled housing, etc.) and accessory uses
such as cemeteries, mausoleums, offices, soup kitchens, and bookstores.



RESTAURANT. A retail business selling ready-to-eat food and/or beverages for
on or off-premise consumption. Customers may be served from an ordering
counter (i.e. cafeteria or limited service restaurant); at their tables
(full-service restaurant); and, at exclusively pedestrian oriented facilities
that serve from a walk-up ordering counter (snack and/or nonalcoholic bars).
To qualify as a restaurant, an establishment's gross receipts from food and
nonalcoholic beverages shall be not less than 30% of the total gross receipts
from food, nonalcoholic beverages, and alcoholic beverages.



RETENTION POND. A pond that has a permanent pool and which also collects
storm water runoff, filters the water and releases it slowly over a period of
days.



RIDING STABLES. An establishment where horses are boarded and cared for, and
where instruction in riding, jumping and showing and/or the hiring of horses
for riding is offered.



RIGHT-OF-WAY. An interest in land to the town, county or state that provides
for the perpetual right and privilege of the town, its agents, franchise
holders, successors, and assigns to construct, install, improve, reconstruct,
remove, replace, inspect, repair, maintain, and use a public street,
including related and customary uses of street rights-of-way such as
sidewalks, bike paths, landscaping, mass transit facilities, traffic control,
traffic control devices and signage, sanitary sewer, stormwater drainage,
water supply, cable television, electric power, gas, and telephone
transmission and related purposes in, upon, over, below, and across the
rights-of-way.



ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSE. A residential use consisting of at least one
dwelling unit together with more than two rooms that are rented out or are
designed or intended to be rented but which rooms, individually or
collectively, do not constitute separate dwelling units. A rooming house or
boarding house is distinguished from a tourist home in that the former is
designed to be occupied by longer-term residents (at least month-to-month
tenants) as opposed to overnight or weekly guests.



SCHOOLS – ELEMENTARY & SECONDARY. A public or private institution for
education or learning including athletic or recreational facilities, which
does not include lodging. This institution includes any school licensed by
the state and that meets the state requirements for elementary and secondary
education.



SEDIMENT. The solids particulate matter both mineral and organic that has
been or is being transported by water, air, gravity or ice from its site of
origin.



SEDIMENTATION. The process by which sediment resulting from accelerated
erosion has been or is being transported off the site of the land-disturbing
activity or into a lake or natural watercourse.



SEEDING. Seed, straw and tack, hydro-seed, sod, or other approved seeding
method.



SETBACK (MINIMUM). A line parallel to the front property line in front of
which no structure shall be erected. Setbacks shall be figured from the
right-of-way line.



SHOOTING RANGE, OUTDOOR. A permanently located and improved area that is
designed and operated for the use of rifles, shotguns, pistols, silhouettes,
skeet, trap, black powder or any other similar sport shooting in an outdoor
environment. Shooting range exclude any area for the exclusive use of archery
or air guns or enclosed indoor facility that is designed to offer a totally
controlled shooting environment and that includes impenetrable walls, floor
and ceiling, adequate ventilation, lighting systems and acoustical treatment
for sound attenuation suitable for the range's approved use.



SHOPPING CENTER. A collection of commercial businesses located in one or more
buildings on a site that is under common ownership or management. Shopping
centers may include outparcels.



SIGN. Any words, lettering, parts of letters, pictures, figures, numerals,
phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, design, trade names or trademarks by
which anything is made known, such as the designation of an individual, firm,
association, profession, business commodity or product, which are visible
from any public way and used to attract attention.



SIGN, AREA. (1) The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the
entire area visible from any one point, within a regular geometric form or
combinations of regular geometric forms comprising all of the display area of
the sign including latticework, wall work and individual letters and spaces
between letters comprising part(s) of the sign. (2) Computations of sign area
shall include only one side of a double-faced sign structure. If a sign has
two sides joined at an angle of greater than 60 degrees, the surface of both
sides of the sign shall be included in the computation of area.



SIGN, AWNING/CANOPY. Signs integrated into traditional storefront awnings or
canopies that may project over a sidewalk from the building façade.



SIGN, DIRECTIONAL/IDENTIFICATION. Public purpose signs designed to identify
parking areas, control traffic, and provide guidance to special areas and to
announce one's arrival into the heart of the community. These signs are
solely for the purpose of navigation and do not contain commercial messages.



SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD. An electronically generated changeable copy
message within a sign frame which does not incorporate any mechanical
movement of the sign itself.



SIGN, FLASHING. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary or constant in intensity and/or color at all times when
such is in use. For the purpose of this ordinance, any moving, illuminated
sign shall be considered a flashing sign. Such signs shall not be deemed to
include time and temperature signs or public message displays using
electronic switching.



SIGN, FREESTANDING. (1) A sign that is attached to, erected on or supported
by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame or other structure) that is
not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or other structure
having a principal function other than the support of a sign. (2) A sign that
stands without supporting elements, such as a "sandwich sign," is also a
freestanding sign.



SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign used to display only the name, address, crest or
trademark of the business, individual, family, organization or enterprise
occupying the premises, the profession of the occupant or the name of the
building on which the sign is displayed; or a permanent sign announcing the
name of a subdivision, shopping center, park, or public or quasi-public
structure, facility or development and the name of the owners or developers.



SIGN, MONUMENT. A freestanding sign where the base of the sign is on the
ground and is supported by solid structural features other than support
poles. The width of the top of the sign structure can be no more than 120%.



SIGN, NONCONFORMING. A sign legally established prior to the effective date
of this ordinance or subsequent amendment thereto, that does not conform to
the sign regulations found herein.



SIGN, OFF-PREMISES (BILLBOARDS). A sign that draws attention to or
communicates information about a business, establishment, service, commodity,
accommodation, attraction, entertainment or other activity that is conducted,
sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is
located.



SIGN, POLE. A freestanding sign that is affixed, attached or erected on a
pole.



SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign not exceeding 32 square feet in billboard area and
not permanently attached to the property on which it is located.



SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign attached to a wall and projecting away from that
wall more than 12 inches, but not more than five feet.



SIGN, ROOF. A sign which is displayed above the eaves of a building.



SIGN, TEMPORARY. A display, informational sign, banner or other advertising
device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, wood or other temporary
material, with or without a structural frame (including banners), and
intended for a limited period of display, including decorative displays for
holidays or public demonstrations.



SIGN, WALL. A sign attached to a wall and not projecting away from the wall
more than 12 inches.



SIGN, WINDOW/DOOR. Signs Flat signs or letters which are painted or attached
to the window of a building or structure.



SILTATION. Sediment resulting from accelerated erosion which can be settled
or removed by properly designed, constructed, and maintained control
measures; and which has been transported from its point of origin within the
site of a land-disturbing activity; and which has been deposited, or is in
suspension in water.



SINGLE-TIER LOT. A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a railroad,
a physical barrier, or another type of land use and to which access from the
rear is usually prohibited.



SITE PLAN. A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a
parcel of land as required by the regulations involved. It includes lot
lines, streets, building sites, reserved open space, buildings, major
landscape features, both natural and human-made, and, depending on
requirements, the location of proposed utility lines.



SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. The following defines a Solar Energy System (also known
as a Solar Farm): the components and subsystems required to convert solar
energy into electric or thermal energy suitable for use. The area of the
system includes all the land inside the perimeter of the system, which
extends to any fencing. The term applies, but is not limited to, solar
photovoltaic (PV) systems, solar thermal systems, and solar hot water systems.



SPECIAL EVENTS: Temporary, organized events that: 1) Run no longer than two
weeks; 2) Are intended to or likely to attract substantial crowds; and 3) Are
unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the
property where the special event is to be located.



SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:  (1) Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and (2) Human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.



SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  (1) Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; (2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; or 3) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.



STABILIZATION. The process of restoring a site with ground cover or armor to
resist soil erosion from the forces of air, wind, or water.



STATE MANDATE. The minimum rules adopted by the Environmental Management
Commission (EMC) for application to state's water supply watersheds, as
required by the Water Supply Watershed Protection Act. The purpose of the
Act, as stated in its opening paragraph is "…to protect and enhance the
quality of the state's surface water supplies by establishing a cooperative
program of water supply protection to be administered by local governments
consistent with statewide management requirements established by the
Environmental Management Commission (EMC)."



STORMWATER RUNOFF. The surface flow of water resulting from precipitation in
any form and occurring immediately after rainfall or melting.



STREAM. An intermittent or perennial surface water subject to US Army Corps
of Engineers (Corps) and/or NC Division of Water Resources (DWR) 404/401
jurisdiction. To confirm jurisdictional status, a formal Corps and/or DWQ
response is required (e.g. jurisdictional determination).



STOP WORK ORDER. A written order to stop work, issued by the Administrator,
upon determining that work is being conducted in violation of this ordinance.



STORAGE-OUTDOOR STORAGE YARD. The storage of various materials outside of a
structure, as a principal use. This includes salvage yards used for the
storage and/or collection of any type of equipment.



STORAGE–SELF-SERVICE. A building containing separate enclosed storage
spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis.



STORAGE-WAREHOUSE, INDOOR STORAGE.  Facilities for the storage of furniture,
household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold
storage. Does not include warehouse, storage, or mini-storage facilities
offered for rent or lease to the general public; warehouse facilities
primarily used for wholesaling and distribution; or terminal facilities for
handling freight.



STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES. The system of inlets, conduits, channels, ditches,
and appurtenances which serve to collect and convey stormwater through and
from a given drainage area.



STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE MANUAL. The Stormwater Best Management
Practice Manual approved for use in Phase II jurisdictions by the N.C.
Division of Water Resources and certified by this jurisdiction is at least as
stringent as the Stormwater Best Management Practice Manual approved for use
in Phase II jurisdictions the proper implementation of the requirements of
the federal Phase II stormwater program. All references herein to the
Stormwater Best Management Practice Manual are to the latest published
edition or revision.



STREAM CLASSIFICATION. The existing or contemplated best usage of streams,
pursuant to 15A NCAC 02B .0300, and/or subsequent clarifications,
modifications, and addenda.



STREAM BUFFER. An area of natural or planted vegetation through which
stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not
become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and
filtering of pollutants. The stream buffer is measured landward from the
normal pool elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side
of streams or rivers.



STREET. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular and
pedestrian traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property:



   (1)   ALLEY. A minor right-of-way privately or publicly owned,
primarily for the service access to the back or side of properties.



   (2)   ARTERIAL OR MAJOR STREET. A traffic artery designed primarily
to carry heavy volumes of local vehicular traffic from the intersecting minor
streets.



   (3)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street designed to carry medium volumes of
vehicular traffic, provide access to the major street system, and collect the
vehicular traffic from the intersecting minor streets.



   (4)   CUL-DE-SAC. A street intersecting another street at one end
and permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround at the other.



   (5)   LOCAL OR MINOR STREET. A street, the principal purpose of
which is to provide vehicular access to the properties abutting it.



   (6)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A local or minor (service) street
which parallels and is immediately adjacent to a major street or highway, and
which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through
traffic and control of intersections with major traffic streets.



STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, including but not limited to
buildings, which requires location on land or attachment to something having
permanent location on the land.



STUDIO – ART, DANCE, MARTIAL ARTS, MUSIC.  Small facilities for individual
and group instruction and training in the arts; production rehearsal;
photography, and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the
studio facilities; martial arts training studios; gymnastics, yoga, and
similar instruction; and aerobics and gymnastics studios with no other
fitness facilities or equipment.



SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, or corporation who subdivides or develops any
land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.



SUBDIVISION. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more
lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, or building
development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of
land involving the dedications of a new street or a change in existing
streets.



SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS. For the purposes of determining whether sufficient
progress has been made on an approved plan, one or more of the following
construction activities toward the completion of a site or subdivision plan
shall occur: obtaining a grading permit and conducting grading activity on a
continuous basis and not discontinued for more than 30 days; or installation
and approval of on-site infrastructure; or obtaining a building permit for
the construction and approval of a building foundation. SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS
for purposes of determining whether an approved plan is null and void is not
necessarily the same as "substantial expenditures" used for determining
vested rights pursuant to applicable law.



THEATER, INDOOR MOVIE OR LIVE PERFORMANCE. A specialized theater for showing
movies or motion pictures on a projection screen or a stage for live
performances. This category also includes cineplexes and megaplexes, complex
structures with multiple movie theaters, each theater capable of an
independent performance.



THEATER, OUTDOOR. An establishment for the performing arts with open-air
seating for audiences.



TOP OF BANK. The points in a cross-section where the stream channel makes a
transition to flood plain. Top of bank can be identified by a change in the
slope of the land, a transition from terrestrial to riparian vegetation,
and/or changes in the composition of substrate materials.



TOWER. Any structure designed primarily to support an antenna for receiving
and/or transmitting a wireless signal.



TRACT. All contiguous land and bodies of water being disturbed or to be
disturbed as a unit, regardless of ownership.



TRAFFIC VISIBILITY ZONE.  A sight triangle at intersections of two public
streets or a public street and private driveway with the triangle formed by
measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot
lines a distance of 25 feet along said front and side lot lines and
connecting the points so established to form a sight triangle one the area of
the lot adjacent to the street intersections. 



UNDERSTORY TREE. Small-growing trees with an expected mature height of 20 to
40 feet.



USE, ACCESSORY. A use incidental to and customarily associated with a
specific principal use located on the same lot, tract or parcel.



USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary or main use of land or structures, as
distinguished from a secondary or accessory use.



UTILITIES. Publicly or privately owned facilities or systems for the
distribution of gas, electricity, steam, or water, the collection, treatment
and disposal of sewage or refuse; the transmission of communications; of
similar functions necessary for the provision of public services. Radio
transmission facilities less than 180 feet in height for use by ham radio
operators or two-way radio facilities for business or governmental
communications shall be deemed accessory uses and not utilities. Utilities
are divided into three classes:



   (1)   CLASS 1: Transmission and collection lines (above and below
ground) including electrical, natural, gas, waste water
collection/transmission, and water distribution lines; pumping stations, lift
stations, and telephone switching facilities (up to 200 sq. ft.).



   (2)   CLASS 2: Elevated water storage tanks; water and wastewater
package treatment plants, telephone switching facilities (over 200 sq. ft.),
substations, or other similar facilities in connection with telephone,
electric, steam, and water facilities.



   (3)   CLASS 3: Generation, production, or treatment facilities such
as power plants, water and sewage plants (greater than 0.3 mgd), and
landfills.



VEHICLE USE AREA. That portion of a lot or parcel that is used by vehicles
for access, circulation, parking and loading and unloading. It comprises the
total of circulation areas, loading and unloading areas and parking areas
(spaces and aisles).



VETERINARY SERVICES. Establishments that include services by licensed
practitioners of veterinary medicine, dentistry, or surgery for animals;
boarding services for pets; and grooming.



VEHICLE RENTAL/LEASING/SALES. Establishments which may have showrooms or open
lots for selling, renting or leasing automobiles, light trucks, motorcycles,
and ATVs.



VEHICLE RENTAL/LEASING – MOVING TRUCKS. Establishments exclusively for
renting or leasing trucks, vans, and trailers for moving furniture and other
goods.



VEHICLE SERVICES – MAJOR REPAIR/BODY WORK. The repair, servicing,
alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning, or finishing of
automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, large appliances,
commercial and industrial equipment and other vehicles as a primary use,
including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an
accessory use. This includes major repair and body work which encompasses
towing, collision repair, other body work and painting services, and tire
recapping.



VEHICLE SERVICES – MINOR MAINTENANCE/REPAIR. The repair, servicing,
alteration, restoration, towing painting, cleaning, or finishing of
automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a
primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle
parts as an accessory use. Minor facilities providing limited repair and
maintenance services. Examples include: car washes, attended and
self-service; car stereo and alarm system installers; detailing services;
muffler and radiator shops; quick-lube services; tire and battery sales and
installation (not including recapping).



WETLANDS.  Wetlands are areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.  Wetlands generally include
swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. This definition of wetlands is used
by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) since the 1970s for regulatory purposes in Section
404 of the Clean Water Act.



WHOLESALING AND DISTRIBUTION. Establishments engaged in selling merchandise
to retailers; to contractors, industrial, commercial, institutional, farm or
professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or
brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or
companies. This does not include selling to the public. Examples of these
establishments include: 1) Agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and
commission merchants; 2) Assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the
cooperative marketing of farm products; 3) Merchant wholesalers; 4) Stores
primarily selling electrical plumbing, heating, and air conditioning supplies
and equipment.



WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A structure, facility or location
designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support antennas or other
transmitting or receiving devices. This includes without limit, towers of all
types, kinds and structures, including, but not limited to buildings, church
steeples, silos, water towers, signs or other structures that can be used as
a support structure for antennas or the functional equivalent of such. It
further includes all related facilities and equipment, including but not
limited to cabling, equipment shelters and other structures associated with
the site. It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or any
form or type of wireless communications or service, including but not limited
to commercial radio, television, cellular, SMR, paging, 911, Personal
Communications Services (PCS), commercial satellite services, microwave
services and any commercial wireless telecommunication service not licensed
by the FCC.



WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER) A wireless telecommunication
facility not located on a structure designed primarily to support an antenna
for receiving and/or transmitting a wireless signal.



YARD. The area between a building and the property line.



YARD, FRONT. The area between the building front and the front property line.



YARD, SIDE. The area between the side of a building and the side property
line that extends from the building front to the rear-most part of the
building.



YARD, REAR. The area between the rear of a building and the rear property
line.



(Ord. passed 2-14-2017)



Section 10.04  Definitions (Specific)



The following definitions include those applicable to both the flood damage
prevention and water supply watershed regulations of this ordinance.



ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and
storage sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds
and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be
located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.



ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.



ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce the
floodplain management regulations of this article.



APPEAL. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's
interpretation of any provision of Article X of this ordinance.



AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to
three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and
where velocity flow may be evident.



AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).



BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.



BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the Flood Insurance Study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a "Special Flood Hazard Area", it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using
FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with
the FREEBOARD, establishes the REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.



BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground
level) on all sides.



BUFFER. For purposes of the water supply watershed regulations of this
ordinance, BUFFER shall mean an area of natural or planted vegetation through
which stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not
become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and
filtering of pollutants. The buffer is measured landward from the normal pool
elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams
or rivers.



BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.



BUILT-UPON AREA. Built-upon areas shall include that portion of a development
project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover including
buildings, pavement, gravel areas, recreation facilities, etc. (Note: Wooden
slatted decks and the water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious.)



CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or
chemically reactive products.



CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. For purposes of the water supply watershed regulations
of this ordinance, CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT shall mean the grouping of buildings
in order to conserve land resources and provide for innovation in the design
of the project. This term includes nonresidential development as well as
single-family residential subdivision and multifamily developments that do
not involve the subdivision of land. Any development with 15% or greater
amount of natural open space.



CRITICAL AREA. The area adjacent to a water supply intake or reservoir where
risk associated with pollution is greater than from the remaining portions of
the watershed.  The critical area is defined as extending either one-half
mile from the normal pool elevation of the reservoir in which the intake is
located or to the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes first); or
one-half mile upstream from the intake located directly in the stream or
river (run-of-the-river), or the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes
first).  Local governments may extend the critical area as needed.  Major
landmarks such as highways or property lines may be used to delineate the
outer boundary of the critical area if these landmarks are immediately
adjacent to the appropriate outer boundary of one-half mile.



DEVELOPMENT (FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION). Any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.



DEVELOPMENT (WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED).  For purposes of the water supply
watershed regulations of this ordinance, DEVELOPMENT shall mean any land
disturbing activity which adds to or changes the amount of impervious or
partially impervious cover on a land area or which otherwise decreases the
infiltration of precipitation into the soil.



DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or
on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the
solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including ground waters.



ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts,
piers, pilings, or columns.



ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



EXISTING DEVELOPMENT (WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED). For projects that do not
require a state permit, existing development shall mean a project that, at a
minimum, has established a vested right under North Carolina zoning law as of
the effective date of the water supply watershed regulations of this
ordinance based on at least one of the following criteria: A) Substantial
expenditures of resources (time, labor, money) based on a good faith reliance
upon having received a valid local government approval to proceed with the
project; or B) Having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by
the North Carolina General Statutes (GS 153A-344.1); or C) Having an approved
site specific or phased development plan as authorized by the North Carolina
General Statutes.



EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the original effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.



FLOOD OR FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from: A) The overflow of inland or
tidal waters; and/or B) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of
surface waters from any source.



FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood
hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a
supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM).



FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The minimum area of the flood plain that, on the average,
is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1% chance of
being flooded each year) as identified by the federal insurance
administration on flood hazard area boundary maps.



FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the special
flood hazard areas have been defined as Zone A.



FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.



FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are
delineated.



FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and determination of
flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood
hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The Flood Insurance Study Report includes Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if
published.



FLOOD PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.



FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood
Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.



FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.



FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit (zoning or conditional use
permit) that is required in conformance with the provisions of this article
prior to the commencement of any development activity.



FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not
limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.



FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This article and other land development
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state
or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.



FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS. The regulations contained in Article X of this
ordinance, any other section of this ordinance, local or state building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications
of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.



FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage
to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.



FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.



FREEBOARD. The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater that
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization
on the watershed. The base flood elevation plus the freeboard establishes the
"Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation".



FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, such as a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.



HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY. As defined in G.S. Ch. 130A, Article 9, a facility
for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or
disposal of hazardous waste.



HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.



HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the
National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S.
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually
listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in communities with a
"Certified Local Government (CLG) Program"; or (d) Certified as contributing
to the historical significance of a historic district designated by a
community with a "Certified Local Government (CLG) Program". Certified Local
Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the U.S. Department of the Interior
in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources
through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having met the
requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in
1980.



LANDFILL. A disposal facility or part of a disposal facility where waste is
placed in or on land and which is not a land treatment facility, a surface
impoundment, an injection well, a hazardous waste long-term storage facility,
or a surface storage facility in accordance with G.S. § 130A-290. For the
purpose of the water supply watershed regulations of this ordinance this term
does not include composting facilities.



LOT. A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building or group
of main buildings and accessory building together with such yards, open
spaces, lot width, and lot area is required.



LOT (EXISTING LOT OF RECORD). A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of
which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds prior to the
adoption of the water supply watershed regulations of this ordinance, or a
lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so
recorded prior to the adoption of the water supply watershed regulations of
this ordinance.



LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio
slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of
the building.



LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this article.



MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may
be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost
depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash
value); or adjusted tax assessed values.



MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of this article, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)
as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to
determine datum used.



NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the effective date of the original version of the community's
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.



NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD. A lot described by a plat or a deed that was
recorded prior to the effective date of the water supply watershed
regulations of this ordinance (or its amendments) that does not meet the
minimum lot size or other development requirements of Article X of this
ordinance.



NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study Report.



NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. All development other than residential
development, agriculture, and silviculture.



POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map for the area.



PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred before the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map for the area.



PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.



PROTECTED AREA. The area adjoining and upstream of the critical area of WS-IV
watersheds.  The boundaries of the protected area are defined as within five
miles of and draining to the normal pool elevation of the reservoir or to the
ridgeline of the watershed; or within ten miles upstream and draining to the
intake located directly in the stream or river or to the ridgeline of the
watershed.



PUBLIC SAFETY AND/OR NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle, which is: (a) Built on a single
chassis; (b) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection; (c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and (d) Designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.



REFERENCE LEVEL. The portion of a structure or other development that shall
be compared to the regulatory flood protection elevation to determine
regulatory compliance. For structures within special flood hazard areas
designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, or AO, the reference level is the top
of the lowest floor or bottom of lowest attendant utility including ductwork,
whichever is lower.



REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The "Base Flood Elevation" plus the
"Freeboard". In "Special Flood Hazard Areas" where base flood elevations
(BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of
freeboard. In "Special Flood Hazard Areas" where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.



REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of
the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing
federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.



REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or
more separate occasions during any ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Buildings for residence such as attached and
detached single-family dwellings, apartment complexes, condominiums,
townhouses, cottages, and their associated outbuildings such as garages,
storage buildings, gazebos, and customary home occupations.



RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.



SALVAGE YARD. Any non-residential property used for the storage, collection,
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to
vehicles, appliances and related machinery.



SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. As defined in G.S. 130A-290(a) (35), any
facility involved in the disposal of solid waste.



SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. 130A-290(a) (36), any place at
which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or any
other method.



SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year.



START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured
home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of
piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Permanent construction does not include: (a) Land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; (b) The installation of streets and/or
walkways; (c) Excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or
the erection of temporary forms; and/or (d) The installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure.



STRUCTURE (FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION). For purposes of the Flood Damage
Prevention Regulations of this ordinance, STRUCTURE shall include but is not
limited to a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. For floodplain
management purposes, principally above ground means that at least 51% of the
actual cash value of the structure is above ground.



STRUCTURE (WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED). Anything constructed or erected,
including but not limited to buildings, which requires location on the land
or attachment to something having permanent location on the land.



SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT.



SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either: (a) Any correction of existing violations of state
or community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (b) Any alteration of
a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.



SURFACE WATER. Surface water is present if the feature is shown on either the
most recent version of the soil survey map prepared by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture or the
most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle topographic
maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS).



TOXIC SUBSTANCE. Any substance or combination of substances (including
disease causing agents), which after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion,
inhalation, or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the
environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, has the potential
to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations,
physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions or suppression in
reproduction or growth), or physical deformities in such organisms or their
off spring, or other adverse health effects.



VARIANCE (WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED). For purposes of the water supply watershed
regulations of this ordinance, VARIANCE shall mean a permission to develop or
use property granted by the Watershed Review Board relaxing or waiving a
water supply watershed management requirement adopted by the Environmental
Management Commission that is incorporated into this ordinance.



   1)   VARIANCE (MAJOR). For purposes of the water supply watershed
regulations of this ordinance, MAJOR VARIANCE shall mean a variance from the
minimum state wide water supply watershed protection rules that results in
any one or more of the following: (a) The relaxation, by a factor of more
than 10%, of any management requirement that takes the form of a numerical
standard; and/or (b) Petitions to increase built upon percentage greater than
10%.



   2)   VARIANCE (MINOR). For purposes of the water supply watershed
regulations of this ordinance, MINOR VARIANCE shall mean petitions for the
reduction of any standard by a factor of less than 10%, including residential
density or built upon percentage.



VIOLATION. For purposes of the Flood Damage Prevention Regulations of this
ordinance, VIOLATION shall mean the failure of a structure or other
development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required
in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.



WATER DEPENDENT STRUCTURE. Any structure for which the use requires access
to, proximity to, or citing within surface waters to fulfill its basic
purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, docks, and bulkheads. Ancillary
facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat supplies, parking lots, and
commercial boat storage areas are not water dependent structures.



VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in Article VI is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine
areas.



WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic
feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. WATERCOURSE
includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may
occur.



WATERSHED. The entire land area contributing surface drainage to a specific
point (e.g. the water supply intake).



APPENDIX A
OFFICIAL RECOMMENDED PLANTING LIST



The following list contains some plant species that are native to the town
area or are known to be suitable for the climate of the town area. Applicants
seeking approval shall not be required to select materials from this list,
but shall be required to select plant species that are known to be suitable
for the climate of the town area.



 



Large Deciduous Trees
 
Small Trees
 
Shrubs:


(30 ft. or larger):
 
(10 ft. to 30 ft. tall):
 
Abelia


American beech
 
American holly (many hollies
 
Anise


Bald Cypress
 
are suitable)
 
Azalea


Black gum
 
Carolina silver bell
 
Banana shrub


Catalpa
 
Chastetree
 
Barberrry


Dawn Redwood
 
Crabapple
 
Beautyberry


Elm
 
Crape myrtle
 
Boxwood


Ginkgo
 
Eastern redbud
 
Camelia


Hickory
 
Flowering apricot
 
Dwarf yaupon holly (manyhollies are suitable)


Japanese zelkova
 
Flowering dogwood
 


Live oak
 
Fringe tree
 
Gardenia


Pecan
 
Golden-rain tree
 
Hydrangea


Pin oak
 
Ironwood
 
Indian Hawthorn


Poplar
 
Japanese maple
 
Juniper


Red maple
 
Kousa dogwood
 
Loropetalum


Red oak
 
Osmanthus
 
Nandina


River birch
 
Red Cedar
 
Redtips


Southern magnolia
 
Saucer magnolia
 
Rosemary


Southern sugar maple
 
Smoketree
 
Spirea


Sycamore
 
Southern magnolia
 
Various Viburnum


Water Oak
 
Star magnolia
 
Wax myrtle


White Oak
 
Various Viburnum
 
Weigela


Willow Oak
 
Wax myrtle
 
Winterberry


Carolina cherry laurel
 
Yaupon holly
 


Cryptomeria
 
 


Eastern red cedar
 
 


Laurel oak
 
 


Live oak
 
 


White cedar
 
 




 



ZONING MAPS



ZONING MAP







 



ZONING OVERLAY MAP







 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to North Carolina General Statutes





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES



 

G.S. Section
 
Code Section




14-4
 
Section 9.10


14-210.10
 
Section 10.03


47-30
 
Section 7.02


Ch. 47A
 
Section 5.16


Ch. 89A
 
Section 6.02


89C-3(7)
 
Section 6.02


Ch. 91A
 
Section 10.03


106-581.1
 
Section 10.03


122C-3(14)
 
Section 10.03


Ch. 130A, Art. 9
 
Section 10.04


130A-290
 
Section 10.04


130A-290(a)(6)
 
Section 10.04


130A-290(a)(35)
 
Section 10.04


130A-290(a)(36)
 
Section 10.04


Ch. 131D
 
Section 10.03


Ch. 131D-2
 
Section 10.03


131D-10.2
 
Section 10.03


131E-101
 
Section 10.03


136-32
 
Section 4.05


Ch. 143, Art. 21, Part 6
 
Section 6.01


143-143.15
 
Section 6.01


143-214.5
 
Section 2.06, Section 6.03


143-318
 
Section 7.01


Ch. 153A, Art. 6, Part 121
 
Section 6.01


Ch. 153A, Art. 18, Parts 3, 4
 
Section 6.01


153A-340.b.2
 
Section 10.03


153A-344.1
 
Section 10.04


Ch. 160A
 
Section 1.02


160A, Art. 19, Part 2
 
Section 5.11


160A-175
 
Section 9.03


160A-360
 
Section 1.03


160A-360(k)
 
Section 1.03


160A-361
 
Section 7.01


160A-371
 
Section 5.02


160A-372
 
Section 5.08


160A-382
 
Section 2.03, Section 7.11


160A-383
 
Section 1.06, Section 7.10


160A-384(b)
 
Section 7.02


160A-385.1
 
Section 7.12


160A-388
 
Section 7.10


160A-393
 
Section 7.03


168-21
 
Section 10.03


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


—
 
2-14-2017
 
Section 1.01—Section 1.13, Section 2.01—Section 2.07, Section
3.01—Section 3.12, Section 4.01—Section 4.09, Section 5.01—Section
5.16, Section 6.01—Section 6.03, Section 7.01—Section 7.12, Section
8.01—Section 8.07, Section 9.01—Section 9.10, Section 10.01—Section
10.04


 
 



 



 


