
Lincolnton, NC Code of Ordinances


CITY OF LINCOLNTON, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-8 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. O-05-2019, passed 6-6-2019, and
State legislation current through 2018 A.L.S. #6



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CURRENT OFFICIALS



 




Ed Hatley




Mayor








Mary Frances White - Ward I




Dr. Jim Watson - Ward II




Dr. Martin A. Eaddy, Mayor Pro Tem - Ward III




Roby Jetton - Ward IV




Lincolnton City Council Members








T.J. Wilson, Jr.




City Attorney








Steve Zickefoose




City Manager








Richard C. Haynes




Assistant City Manager








Donna C. Flowers, MMC




City Clerk/Assistant to City Manager





 



ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE NO. O-01-11



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF LINCOLNTON, NORTH
CAROLINA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.



WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and



WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of North Carolina empower
and authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance book form;
and



WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has
authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances
of the Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and
publication of such ordinance in book form; and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date.



NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THE CITY OF LINCOLNTON:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Political subdivision as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of
Lincolnton, North Carolina.”



Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following Titles:



   LINCOLNTON, NORTH CAROLINA



   TABLE OF CONTENTS



   CHARTER



   TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS TITLE



   TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   PARALLEL REFERENCES



   INDEX



Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and ordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.



Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the City Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such
Code of Ordinances in the Office of the City Clerk.



Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision
on this 6th day of January, 2011.



                                       �
�                                               
 



                                       �
�        John O. Gilleland, Jr.



                                       �
�        Mayor



ATTEST:



                                                   



Donna C. Flowers, CMC



City Clerk



                              Approved as to
form:           



                                       �
�                                               
 



                                       �
�        Thomas J. Wilson, Jr.



                                       �
�        City Attorney



CHARTER



   Art. I.   Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries, § 1.1
through 1.3



   Art. II.   Mayor and City Council, §§ 2.1 through 2.4



   Art. III.   Elections, §§ 3.1 through 3.4



   Art. IV.   Organization and Administration, §§ 4.1 through 4.8



   Art. V.   Retirement, §§ 5.1 through 5.28



         Ch. 1. General Retirement Benefits, §§ 5.1 through 5.20



         Ch. 2. Reserved, §§ 5.21 through 5.28



   Art. VI.   Alcoholic Beverage Control, §§ 6.1 through 6.4



   Art. VII.   Special Provisions, §§ 7.1, 7.2



Editor’s note:



   The charter was ratified by the North Carolina Legislature by Chapter
341, Session Laws of1979. On March 10, 1983 the North Carolina Legislature,
by Chapter 58 of such year’s Session Laws, ratified an amendment to the
city charter deleting the mention of Board of Aldermen and inserting in lieu
thereof City Council.



ARTICLE I:  INCORPORATION, CORPORATE POWERS AND BOUNDARIES



Sec. 1.1.  Incorporation.



   The City of Lincolnton, North Carolina in the County of Lincoln, and
the inhabitants thereof, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and
corporate, under the name and style of the "City of Lincolnton," hereinafter
at times referred to as the "City."



Sec. 1.2.  Powers.



   The City of Lincolnton shall have and may exercise all of the powers,
duties, rights, privileges and immunities, which are now or hereafter may be
conferred either expressly or by implication, upon the City of Lincolnton
specifically or upon municipal corporations generally by this charter, by the
State Constitution, or by general or local law.



Sec. 1.3.  Corporate limits.



   The corporate limits of the City of Lincolnton shall be those existing
at the time of ratification of this charter, as the same are set forth on an
official map of the City, and as the same may be altered from time to time in
accordance with law. An official map showing the current boundaries of the
City, entitled "Map of the City of Lincolnton, North Carolina," or a current
metes and bounds description of the corporate limits shall be maintained in
the office of the City Clerk, and shall be available for public inspection.
Upon alteration of the corporate limits made pursuant to law, the appropriate
changes to the official map of the City shall be made.



ARTICLE II:  MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL



Sec. 2.1.  Governing body.



   The City Council, elected and constituted as herein set forth, shall be
the governing body of the City. On behalf of the City, and in conformity with
applicable laws, the City Council may provide for the exercise of all
municipal powers, and shall be charged with the general government of the
City.



Sec. 2.2.  Composition of city council length of terms.



   The City Council shall be composed of four (4) members, each of whom
shall be elected by the qualified voters of the City for a term of four (4)
years, in the manner provided by Article III of this charter.



Sec. 2.3.  Mayor; term of office; duties.



   The Mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the City to serve
for a term of four (4) years, in the manner provided by Article III of this
charter. The Mayoral seat will run for election with Ward 1 and Ward 3,
beginning in 2018. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council,
but shall vote only when there is an equal number of votes in the affirmative
and in the negative.



Sec. 2.4.  Mayor pro tempore.



   In accordance with applicable state law, the City Council shall elect
one (1) of its members to act as Mayor pro tempore to perform the duties of
the Mayor in the Mayor's absence or disability. In the event of a vacancy in
the office of the Mayor, the Mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of
the Mayor until the vacancy is filled. The Mayor pro tempore shall have no
fixed term of office, but shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the
remaining members of the council.



ARTICLE III:  ELECTIONS



Sec. 3.1.  Method of election.



   Regular municipal elections shall be held in the City every four (4)
years in even-numbered years and shall be conducted in accordance with state
law governing municipal elections. The Mayor and members of the City Council
shall be elected according to the partisan primary and election method.



Statutory reference:



   Election law, see G.S. §§ 163-279 et seq.



Sec. 3.2.  Election of the Mayor; term of office.



   At each regular municipal election in the City, a Mayor shall be
elected for a term of four (4) years by and from the qualified voters of the
City voting at large.



Sec. 3.3.  Election of the council members; term of office; ward
representation.



   (A)   The City Council shall continue to serve four-year staggered
terms of office as set forth herein. At the regular municipal election to be
held in 2018, and every four (4) years thereafter, there shall be elected two
(2) members to the City Council, one (1) member from Ward Two and one (1)
member from Ward Four, to serve terms of four (4) years each. At the regular
municipal election in 1981, and every four (4) years thereafter, there shall
be elected two (2) members to the City Council, one (1) member from Ward One
and one (1) member from Ward Three, and the Mayoral seat to serve terms of
four (4) years each.



   (B)   Every person who is a candidate for the City Council and every
person who is elected to the City Council shall reside in the ward which the
person represents or seeks to represent, but all candidates shall be voted
upon and elected by all the qualified voters of the City.



   (C)   If a member of the City Council has been elected from a ward
and during his tenure of office moves from his ward to another ward within
the City, the councilmember will not forfeit his office but will continue to
serve as councilmember for the remaining term for which he was elected.



Sec. 3.4.  Wards and ward boundaries.



   (A)   The City shall be divided into four (4) wards-Ward One, Ward
Two, Ward Three and Ward Four.



   (B)   The boundaries of the four (4) wards shall be those existing
at the time of the ratification of this charter, as the same are set forth on
an official map or written description of the City. The official map or
written description showing the current ward boundaries shall be maintained
in the office of the City Clerk, and shall be available for public
inspection. Upon alteration of the City's corporate limits, the City Council
shall have the authority to revise the ward boundaries, in accordance with
state law.



ARTICLE IV:  ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION



Sec. 4.1.  Form of government.



   The City shall operate under the Council-Manager form of government, in
accordance with Part 2 of Article 7, Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.



(Laws 1982, H.B.No. 1464, 1)



Sec. 4.2.  City Manager.



   The City Council shall appoint a City Manager to act as the chief
administrator of City government, and who is to be responsible to the City
Council for the proper administration of the affairs of the City. The City
Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and shall perform the
duties and responsibilities set forth in Part 2, Article 7, Chapter 160A of
the General Statutes, not inconsistent with this charter, and such other
duties as may be assigned by the City Council.



Sec. 4.3.  City Attorney.



   The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney who shall be licensed to
engage in the practice of law in the State of North Carolina. It shall be the
duty of the Attorney to prosecute and defend suits against the City; to
advise the Mayor, City Council and other City officials with respect to the
affairs of the City; to draft all legal documents relating to the affairs of
the City; to inspect and pass upon all agreements, contracts, franchises and
other instruments with which the City may be concerned; and to perform other
duties required by law or as the City Council may direct. The City Council
may employ other legal counsel from time to time, in addition to the City
Attorney, as may be necessary to handle adequately the legal affairs of the
City.



Sec. 4.4.  City Clerk.



   The City Manager shall appoint a City Clerk to keep a journal of the
proceedings of the Council, to maintain in a safe place all records and
documents pertaining to the affairs of the City, and to perform such other
duties as may be required by law or as the City Council may direct.



Sec. 4.5.  City Tax Collector.



   The City Manager shall appoint a City Tax Collector to collect all
taxes, licenses, fees and other moneys belonging to the City, subject to the
General Statutes, the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the
City. The City Tax Collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all the
laws of North Carolina relating to the collection of taxes by municipalities.



Sec. 4.6.  City Treasurer.



   The City Manager shall appoint a City Treasurer, or Finance Officer, to
perform the duties of the finance officer as required by the Local Government
Budget and Fiscal Control Act, and to perform such other duties as may be
required by the Council.



Sec. 4.7.  Consolidation of functions.



   The City Council may consolidate any two (2) or more positions of the
City Manager, City Clerk, City Tax Collector and City Treasurer, or may
assign the functions of any one (1) or more of these positions to the holder
or holders of any other of these positions, subject to the Local Government
Budget and Fiscal Control Act and state law.



Sec. 4.8.  Other administrative officers and employees.



   Consistent with applicable state laws, the City Council may establish
other positions, provide for the appointment of other administrative officers
and employees, and generally organize the City government in order to promote
the orderly and efficient administration of the affairs of the City.



ARTICLE V:  RETIREMENT



CHAPTER 1:  GENERAL RETIREMENT BENEFITS



Sec. 5.1.  Retirement benefits for city employees.



   (A)   Employees of the City, retired employees of the City and
former employees of the City who contributed to the retirement benefit fund
established for the City of Lincolnton by Chapter 199 of the Session Laws of
1967, shall be refunded such moneys as he or she has paid into the fund
without interest, during the year 1974-1975.



   (B)   The City Council is hereby authorized to appropriate, from
nontax revenues of the City, funds for retirement benefits to be granted any
qualified employee, former employee or retired employee of the City. All such
benefits shall be in addition to any retirement benefits the employee may
receive from the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees' Retirement
System or any other retirement benefits received from any other source.



   (C)   The City Council shall create a separate fund, to be known as
the Retirement Fund, and to be disbursed by voucher drawn by the City
Treasurer and countersigned by the Mayor. Such retirement funds are to be
accumulated out of nontax moneys of the City.



   (D)   Should the Retirement Fund, at any time, be insufficient to
make the monthly payment, the City shall place in the Retirement Fund the
amount sufficient to make the monthly payments, the funds to be paid out of
nontax moneys.



   (E)   Employees of the City, whether paid wages or salary, including
the City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Attorney, and any and all other
employees of the City, may voluntarily file notice with the City Clerk to be
entered on the roll of pension.



   (F)   Employees at age sixty-two (62) or over and with twenty-five
(25) years of accumulated employment with the City will receive retirement
pay of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month.



   (G)   An employee who has an accumulated employment with the City
for ten (10) years or more and who becomes disabled or unable to work (while
an employee of the City) shall be entitled to retirement benefits of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per month.



   (H)   The provisions of G.S. 160A-163 shall not apply to the
retirement benefits authorized by this act.



Secs. 5.2—5.20.  Reserved.



CHAPTER 2:  RESERVED



Secs. 5.21—5.28.  Reserved.



Editor’s note:



   Pursuant to Session Law 2002-41, H.B. 1607, ratified July 29, 2002, Ch.
2 of Art. V has been repealed. Former Ch. 2 pertained to the Lincolnton
Firemen’s Supplemental Retirement Fund and derived from Section 1 of
Chapter 341 of the 1979 Session Laws.



ARTICLE VI:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL



Sec. 6.1.  Board of Alcohol Control.



   There shall continue to be a City Board of Alcohol Control to be
composed of a chairman and two (2) other members, appointed by the Mayor and
City Council, who shall be well known for their character, ability and
business acumen. The Board shall be known and designated as "The City of
Lincolnton Board of Alcohol Control." The chairman and the other two (2)
members of the Board shall continue to serve three-year staggered terms.
After their terms shall have expired, their successors in office shall serve
for a period of three (3) years. Their successors or any vacancy occurring on
the Board shall be named or filled by the Mayor and the City Council.



Sec. 6.2.  Powers and duties of Board.



   The City of Lincolnton Board of Alcoholic Control shall have all of the
powers and duties imposed by section 18A-17 [18B-701] of the General Statutes
on County Boards of Alcoholic Control and shall be subject to the powers and
authority of the State Board of Alcoholic Control the same as County Boards
of Alcoholic Control, except that no city liquor store authorized under this
Article shall be located or operated within four hundred fifty (450) feet of
any school or church in the City. The City of Lincolnton Board of Alcoholic
Control and the operation of any city liquor store authorized under the
provisions of this article shall be subject to the provisions of Article 2 of
Chapter 18A [Article 8 of Chapter 18B] of the General Statutes, except to the
extent which the same may be in conflict with the provisions of this Article.
Whenever the word "County" Board of Alcoholic Control appears in Article 2 of
Chapter 18A [Article 8 of Chapter 18B], it shall include the City of
Lincolnton Board of Alcoholic Control.



Sec. 6.3.  ABC officers.



   The City of Lincolnton Board of Alcohol Control may appoint one (1) or
more persons to serve as ABC officers. Such officers shall have the same
power and authority as granted county ABC officers in G.S. 18A-20 [18B-501]
and shall have jurisdiction throughout Lincoln County.



Sec. 6.4.  Distribution of revenue.



   The Board of Alcohol Control shall, out of the gross revenues derived
from the operation of Alcohol Beverage Control Stores, pay all salaries,
costs, and operating expenses, and retain a sufficient and proper working
capital. The remaining net revenues, as determined by quarterly audit, shall
be distributed quarterly by the Board of Alcohol Control as follows: Fifteen
(15) percent to the General Fund of Lincoln County; eighty-five (85) percent
to the General Fund of the City of Lincolnton to be expended for any
governmental purpose for which the City may expend tax and nontax revenues.



ARTICLE VII:  SPECIAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 7.1.  Assessments for street and sidewalk improvements; petition
unnecessary.



   (A)   In addition to any authority which is now or may hereafter be
granted by general law to the City for making street improvements, the City
Council is hereby authorized to make street improvements and to assess the
cost thereof against abutting property owners in accordance with the
provisions of this section.



   (B)   The City Council may order street improvements and assess the
cost thereof against the abutting property owners, exclusive of the costs
incurred at street intersections, according to one (1) or more of the
assessment bases set forth in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the North
Carolina General Statutes without the necessity of a petition, upon the
finding by the City Council as a fact:



      (1)   That the street improvement project does not exceed one
thousand two hundred (1,200) linear feet; and



      (2)   That such street or part thereof is unsafe for vehicular
traffic, and it is in the public interest to make such improvement; or



      (3)   That it is in the public interest to connect two (2)
streets, or portions of a street already improved; or



      (4)   That it is in the public interest to widen a street, or
part thereof, which is already improved; provided, that assessments for
widening any street, or portion of the street, without a petition shall be
limited to the cost of widening and otherwise improving such street in
accordance with the street classification and improvement standards
established by the City's thoroughfare or major street plan for the
particular street or part thereof to be widened and improved under the
authority granted by this section.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the term "street
improvement" shall include grading, regrading, surfacing, resurfacing,
widening, paving, repaying, the acquisition of rights-of-way and the
construction or reconstruction of curbs, gutters and street drainage
facilities.



   (D)   In addition to any authority which is now or may hereafter be
granted by general law to the City for making sidewalk improvements, the City
Council is hereby authorized without the necessity of a petition, to make or
to order to be made sidewalk improvements or repairs according to standards
and specifications of the City, and to assess the total cost thereof against
abutting property owners, according to one (1) or more of the assessment
bases set forth in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General
Statutes; provided, however, that regardless of the assessment basis or bases
employed, the Council may order the cost of sidewalk improvements made only
on one (1) side of a street to be assessed against property owners abutting
both sides of such street.



   (E)   In ordering street and sidewalk improvements without a
petition and assessing the cost thereof under authority of this section, the
City Council shall comply with the procedure provided by Article 10, Chapter
160 A of the General Statutes, except those provisions relating to the
petition of property owners and the sufficiency thereof.



   (F)   The effect of the act of levying assessments under the
authority of this section shall for all purposes be the same as if the
assessments were levied under authority of Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the
General Statutes.



Sec. 7.2.  Power of eminent domain.



   The procedures provided in Article 9 of Chapter 136 of the General
Statutes, as specifically authorized by G.S. 136-66.3(c), shall be applicable
to the City in the case of acquisition of lands, easements, privileges,
rights-of-way and other interests in real property for any purpose authorized
by law through the exercise of the power of eminent domain. The City, when
seeking to acquire such property or rights or easements therein or thereto,
shall have the right and authority, at its option and election, to use the
provisions and procedures as authorized and provided in G.S. 136-66.3(c) and
Article 9 of Chapter 136 of the General Statutes for any of such purposes
without being limited to streets constituting a part of the State highway
system; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not
apply with regard to properties owned by public service corporations as
defined in G.S. 160A-243(c) [Chapter 40A], unless (1) the exercise of such
power of eminent domain is either consented to by the owner of the property
to be acquired by the City or (2) it is first adjudicated after notice and a
hearing that such acquisition will not prevent or unreasonably impair the
continued devotion to the public use of such properties and the operation by
such public service corporation.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time; computing time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances



   10.17   Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances



   10.18   Section histories; section headings; statutory references



   10.19   Altering code



   10.20   Liability for violations by corporations and other
associations



   10.21   Police power extended to city property



   10.22   Supplementation of code



   10.23   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances



   10.24   Official code



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Lincolnton shall
be designated as the Code of Ordinances, City of Lincolnton, North Carolina
and may be so cited.  The code may also be cited Lincolnton Code or city
code.



(Prior Code, § 1-1)



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



(Prior Code, § 1-3)



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY.  The City of Lincolnton, North Carolina.



      CHARTER.  The Charter of the City of Lincolnton, North Carolina.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This  municipal
code as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters
or sections.



      COMPUTATION OF TIME.  The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and the last day; and if the last
day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.



      COUNCIL.  The Mayor and Council, or governing body, of the City
of Lincolnton, North Carolina.



      COUNTY.  The County of Lincoln, North Carolina.



      G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES.  The latest edition of the GENERAL
STATUTES of North Carolina, as amended.



      GENDER.  Words importing the masculine gender shall include the
feminine and neuter.



      GOVERNOR.  The Governor of North Carolina.



      JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving a joint authority to three or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a
majority of persons or officers.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      NUMBER.  Words used in the singular include the plural, and the
plural includes the singular number.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this municipality
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD.  Whenever certain hours are named in
this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in this city.



      OWNER.  Applied to any property, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of the property.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Every species of property except real
property.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY.  Includes real and personal property.



      REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIDEWALK.  Any portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of North Carolina.



      STREET.  Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches
thereto within the city and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way
between abutting property lines.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT.  When applied to a building or land, shall
include any person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land,
whether alone or with others.



      TENSE.  Words used in the past or present tense include the
future as well as the past and present.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



      ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  One designated by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 1-2)



Statutory reference:



   Computation of time, see G.S. § 1-593



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   ANDorOR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of an act by
an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



(Prior Code, § 1-4)



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall
be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following:



      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before
the effective date of this code;



      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of
the city or any evidence of the city’s indebtedness;



      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the city;



      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or
employee;



      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the city;



      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving and the like, any street or
public way in the city;



      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;



      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for
a stated or limited term;



      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and
assessing taxes therefor;



      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;



      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision
plat;



      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of
the city;



      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the
city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;



      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included
herein;



      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades
in the city; and/or



      (16)   Any personnel ordinance.



   (C)   Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance
or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is
repealed by this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at
length herein.



(Prior Code, § 1-12)



Statutory reference:



   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication shall
take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



(Prior Code, §§ 1-5, 1-6)



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.



   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection, or any portion thereof,
the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by omission from
reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or
omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the
city.



   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made
by amending provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in language substantially similar to the following: “Section      
        of the Code of Ordinances, City of Lincolnton, North Carolina, is
hereby amended as follows:  . . . .” The new provisions shall then be set
out in full as desired.



   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be
added, language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The
Code of Ordinances, City of Lincolnton, North Carolina, is hereby amended by
adding a section, to be numbered               , which section shall
read as follows:  . . . .” The new section shall then be set out in full
as desired.



   (D)   All sections, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed
must be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may
be.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; SECTION HEADINGS; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance and any and all amending ordinances
are listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord.
25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. 
Example:  (G.S. § 160A-11)



      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of
ordinances of the city, the prior code section number shall be indicated in
the history by “(Prior Code, §       ).”  The history notes
following sections and the references scattered throughout the code are not
part of the code, but are merely for the benefit for the user of the code.



§ 10.19  ALTERING CODE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or
delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in
§ 10.99 hereof.



(Prior Code, § 1-7)



Cross-reference:



   Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, see Title XIII



Statutory reference:



   Abatement of health nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-193



   Authority of city to enforce ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175



   Violation of ordinances constitutes a misdemeanor punishable by fine
not exceeding $50 or imprisonment for not exceeding 30 days, see G.S. § 14-4



§ 10.20  LIABILITY FOR VIOLATIONS BY CORPORATIONS AND OTHER ASSOCIATIONS.



   (A)   Any violation of this code by any officer, agent or other
person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated
association or organization, while acting within the scope of the
officer’s, agent’s or other person’s office or employment, shall in
every case also be deemed to be a violation by the corporation, association
or organization.



   (B)   Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by
any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be
subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated
association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this
code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act,
omission or order, of any person.



(Prior Code, § 1-10)



§ 10.21  POLICE POWER EXTENDED TO CITY PROPERTY.



   The police power of the city is hereby extended to include all lands
and property owned or leased by the city or any agency of the city, and the
general ordinances of the city shall be applicable on the land and property.



(Prior Code, § 1-11)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to so provide, see G.S. § 160A-176



§ 10.22  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.



   (A)   By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this
code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the
governing body. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered
by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a
supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and
will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially
obsolete; the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.



   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the
code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.



   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier
(meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts
of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
divisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
sections and other divisions of the code printed in the supplement and make
changes in the catchlines, headings and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;



      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the
same meaning to “this chapter,” “this section,” “this division,”
and the like, as the case may be, or to “sections _____ to _____”
(inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the code which embody
the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code); and



      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted in the code; but in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.



(Prior Code, § 1-13)



§ 10.23  PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as
ordinances adopted prior to this code and included herein, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.



(Prior Code, § 1-14)



§ 10.24  OFFICIAL CODE.



   This code shall be the official code of the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-15)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or division of this code of ordinances for which no other penalty is
provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine as
set forth in the fee schedule or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each
day that any of the provisions of this code of ordinances are violated shall
constitute a separate offense.



(G.S. § 14-4(a))  (Prior Code, §§ 1-8, 1-9)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. §
160A-175



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   CITY COUNCIL



      32.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      33.   CIVIL EMERGENCY



      34.   PERSONNEL



      35.   TAXATION



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   30.01   Compensation of Council members and Mayor



   30.02   Disqualification of Council members and Mayor for
nonresidence



   30.03   Resignation of Council member or Mayor



Auxiliary Police Division



   30.15   Established



Charter reference:



   Elections, see §§ 3.1 through 3.4



   Mayor and City Council, see §§ 2.1 through 2.4



   Organization and administration, see §§ 4.1 through 4.8



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS AND MAYOR.



   The compensation of the Mayor and Council members of the city shall be
set by the adoption of the annual budget ordinance pursuant to G.S. §
160A-64.



(Prior Code, § 2-1)  (Ord. O-34-90, passed 5-3-1990)



Statutory reference:



   Compensation of governing board members, see G.S. § 160A-64



§ 30.02  DISQUALIFICATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS AND MAYOR FOR NONRESIDENCE.



   If any member of the City Council or the Mayor shall move the
person’s residence from the city, the office shall at once be declared
vacant, and shall be filled as provided by G.S. § 160A-63.



(Prior Code, § 2-2)



Statutory reference:



   Disqualifications for office, see Constitution, Article VI, § 8



§ 30.03  RESIGNATION OF COUNCIL MEMBER OR MAYOR.



   Resignation of any member of the City Council or the Mayor shall be in
writing. The resignation shall lie on the table until the next regular
meeting unless considered by unanimous consent.



(Prior Code, § 2-3)



AUXILIARY POLICE DIVISION



§ 30.15  ESTABLISHED.



   An Auxiliary Police Division is hereby established within the City of
Lincolnton Police Department. The Auxiliary Police Division shall be a
volunteer organization whose members shall serve without compensation,
composed of as many members as may from time to time be determined by the
Chief of Police and approved by the City Manager.



(Ord. O-07-10, passed 12-2-2010)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY COUNCIL



Section



   31.01   Time, day and place of regular meetings



   31.02   Adjourned meetings



   31.03   Rules of procedure



   31.04   Effective time of ordinance



§ 31.01  TIME, DAY AND PLACE OF REGULAR MEETINGS.



   There shall be a regular meeting of the City Council held the first
Thursday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers of the Lincolnton
City Hall, 114 West Sycamore Street, unless otherwise posted.



(Prior Code, § 2-20)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to fix time and place, see G.S. § 160A-71



   Open meetings law, see G.S. §§ 143-318.9 et seq.



§ 31.02  ADJOURNED MEETINGS.



   If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the
Council, or if for any reason the meeting shall fail to complete transaction
of the business before the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date
prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members
present.



(Prior Code, § 2-21)



Statutory reference:



   Notice of meetings, see G.S. § 143-318.12



§ 31.03  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   Except as otherwise provided by resolution the procedure of the Council
shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order.



(Prior Code, § 2-22)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to adopt rules, see G.S. § 160A-71(c)



§ 31.04  EFFECTIVE TIME OF ORDINANCE.



   Every ordinance shall be in force immediately upon its passage, except
as otherwise hereinafter provided, or as provided by applicable provision of
the General Statutes.



(Prior Code, § 2-23)



Statutory reference:



   Voting, see G.S. § 160A-75



CHAPTER 32:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Planning Board



   32.01   Creation



   32.02   Membership and vacancies; attendance



   32.03   Organization; rules; meetings; records



   32.04   General powers and duties



   32.05   Studies; cooperation of officials; right of entry



   32.06   Comprehensive plans



   32.07   Zoning amendment



   32.08   Subdivisions



   32.09   Public facilities



   32.10   Public hearings; publicity



   32.11   Annual report; analysis of expenditures; budget request



PLANNING BOARD



§ 32.01  CREATION.



   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-361, there is hereby created a Planning Board
of the city, to perform the functions and duties herein prescribed.



(Prior Code, § 2-30)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



Cross-reference:



   Zoning, see Unified Development Ordinance codified in Title XV



§ 32.02  MEMBERSHIP AND VACANCIES; ATTENDANCE.



   (A)   The Planning Board shall consist of five members, who shall be
residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the City Council. The
members of the Planning Board shall serve for three-year terms, initially to
be staggered as follows and to be appointed effective January 1, 1987; one
member for a term of one year, term expiring January 1, 1988; two members for
a term of two years, term expiring January 1, 1989; two members for a term of
three years, term expiring January 1, 1990. Vacancies occurring for reasons
other than expiration of term shall be filled as they occur for the unexpired
remainder of the term.



   (B)   Faithful attendance at meetings of the Board is to be
considered a prerequisite to continued membership. The City Council may
remove and replace any member continually delinquent in his or her duty to
attend.



(Prior Code, § 2-31)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



§ 32.03  ORGANIZATION; RULES; MEETINGS; RECORDS.



   The Planning Board shall elect a Chairperson and create and fill other
offices as it may determine. The term of the Chairperson and other officers
shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. The Board shall adopt
rules for transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its
members’ attendance and of its resolutions, discussions, findings and
recommendations, which record shall be a public record. The Board shall hold
at least one meeting monthly. All of its meetings shall be open to the
public. There shall be a quorum of three members for the purpose of taking
any official action.



(Prior Code, § 2-32)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



§ 32.04  GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Planning Board, in general:



   (A)   To make studies of the area within its jurisdiction;



   (B)   To determine objectives to be sought in the development of the
study area;



   (C)   To prepare and adopt plans for achieving these objectives;



   (D)   To develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative
procedures and other means for carrying out plans that the City Council may
direct;



   (E)   To advise the City Council the use and amendment of means for
carrying out plans;



   (F)   To exercise any functions in the administration and
enforcement of various means for carrying out plans that the City Council may
direct; and



   (G)   To perform any other related duties that the City Council may
direct.



(Prior Code, § 2-33)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



§ 32.05  STUDIES; COOPERATION OF OFFICIALS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   As background for its comprehensive plans and any ordinance it
may prepare, the Planning Board may gather maps and aerial photographs of
manmade and natural physical features of the area, statistics on past trends
and present conditions with respect to population, property values, the
economic base of the community, land use and other information as is
important or likely to be important in determining the amount, direction and
kind of development to be expected in the area and its various parts.



   (B)   In addition, the Planning Board may make, cause to be made or
obtain special studies on the location, condition and adequacy of special
facilities, which may include, but be not limited to, studies of housing,
commercial and industrial facilities, parks, playgrounds and recreational
facilities, public and private utilities, and traffic, transportation and
parking facilities.



   (C)   All officials of the city shall, upon request, furnish to the
Planning Board available records or information as it may require in its work.



   (D)   The Board or its agent may, in the performance of its official
duties, enter upon lands and make examination or surveys and maintain
necessary monuments thereon.



(Prior Code, § 2-34)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



§ 32.06  COMPREHENSIVE PLANS.



   (A)   The comprehensive plans, with the accompanying maps, plats,
charts and descriptive matter, shall be and show the Planning Board’s
recommendation to the City Council for the development of the area,
including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of
streets, bridges, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation
fields and other public ways, grounds and open spaces; the general location
and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately
owned or operated, for water, power, gas, sanitation, transportation,
communication and other purposes; and the removal, relocation, widening,
narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the
foregoing ways, buildings, grounds, open space, properties, utilities or
terminals.



   (B)   The comprehensive plans and any ordinances or other measures
to effectuate the plans shall be made with the general purposes of guiding
and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the
city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future
needs, best promote health, safety, morals and the general welfare, as well
as efficiency and economy in the process of development, including, among
other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from
fire and other dangers, adequate provisions for light and air, the promotion
of the healthful and convenient distributions of population, the promotion of
good civic design and arrangement, the wise and efficient expenditure of
public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities, services and
other public requirements.



(Prior Code, § 2-35)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



§ 32.07  ZONING AMENDMENT.



   The Planning Board may initiate from time to time proposals for
amendment of the zoning regulations and map, based upon its studies and
plans. In addition, it shall review and make recommendations to the City
Council concerning all proposed amendments to the zoning regulations and map.



(Prior Code, § 2-36)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



§ 32.08  SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   The Planning Board shall review, from time to time, the
existing regulation for the control of land subdivision in the area and
submit to the City Council its recommendations, if any, for the revision of
the regulations.



   (B)   The Planning Board shall review and make recommendations to
the City Council concerning all proposed plats of land subdivision.



(Prior Code, § 2-37)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



§ 32.09  PUBLIC FACILITIES.



   The Planning Board shall review with the City Manager and City
Council/officials and report its recommendations to the City Council upon the
extent, location and design of all public structures and facilities, on the
acquisition and disposal of public properties, on the establishment of
building lines, mapped street lines and proposals to change existing street
lines. However, whether or not there is a recommendation from the Planning
Board, the City Council may, if it deems wise, take final action on any
matter at any time.



(Prior Code, § 2-38)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



§ 32.10  PUBLIC HEARINGS; PUBLICITY.



   (A)   The Planning Board may conduct public hearings as may be
required to gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment and
maintenance of the plans. Before recommending any plans to the City Council,
the Planning Board shall hold at least one public hearing thereon.



   (B)   The Planning Board shall have power to promote public interest
in and an understanding of its recommendations, and to that end, it may
publish and distribute copies of its recommendations and may employ other
means of publicity and education as it may determine.



(Prior Code, § 2-39)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



§ 32.11  ANNUAL REPORT; ANALYSIS OF EXPENDITURES; BUDGET REQUEST.



   The Planning Board shall, in May of each year, submit in writing to the
City Manager and City Council a report of its activities, and an analysis of
the expenditures to date for the current fiscal year; and shall submit to the
City Manager and City Council for budget consideration its requested budget
of funds needed for operation during the ensuing fiscal year.



(Prior Code, § 2-40)  (Ord. O-04-86, passed 11-6-1986)



CHAPTER 33:  CIVIL EMERGENCY



Section



   33.01   Proclamation imposing prohibitions and restrictions



   33.02   Curfew



   33.03   Restrictions on possession, consumption or transfer of
intoxicating liquor



   33.04   Restrictions on possession, transportation and transfer of
dangerous weapons and substances



   33.05   Restrictions on access to areas



   33.06   Proclamation imposing restrictions on assemblies



   33.07   Dispersal of prohibited assemblies



   33.08   Amendments of the proclamation



   33.09   Removal of prohibitions and restrictions



   33.10   Separate and superseding proclamations



Statutory reference:



   Authority to tax, see G.S. § 160A-209(c)(9)



   County and municipal emergency management, see G.S. § 166A-7



§ 33.01  PROCLAMATION IMPOSING PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   The Mayor by proclamation may impose the prohibitions and
restrictions specified in §§ 33.02 through 33.05 in the manner described in
those sections. The Mayor may impose as many of those specified prohibitions
and restrictions as he or she finds are necessary, because of an emergency,
to maintain an acceptable level of public order and services, and to protect
lives, safety and property. The Mayor shall recite findings that a state of
emergency exists in the proclamation.



   (B)   The proclamation shall be in writing. The Mayor shall take
reasonable steps to give notice of the terms of the proclamation to those
affected by it and shall post a copy of it in the City Hall. The Mayor shall
retain a text of the proclamation and furnish upon request certified copies
of it for use as evidence.



(Prior Code, § 2-50)



§ 33.02  CURFEW.



   (A)   The proclamation may impose a curfew prohibiting in certain
areas and during certain periods the appearance in public of anyone who is
not a member of an exempted class. The proclamation shall specify the
geographical areas and the period during each 24-hour day to which the curfew
applies. The Mayor may exempt from some or all of the curfew restrictions
classes of people whose exemption the Mayor finds necessary for the
preservation of the public health, safety and welfare. The proclamation shall
state the exempted classes and the restrictions from which each is exempted.



   (B)   Unless otherwise specified in the proclamation, the curfew
shall apply during the specified period each day until the Mayor by
proclamation removes the curfew.



(Prior Code, § 2-51)



§ 33.03  RESTRICTIONS ON POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION OR TRANSFER OF
INTOXICATING LIQUOR.



   (A)   The proclamation may prohibit the possession or consumption of
any intoxicating liquor, including beer and wine, other than on one’s own
premises, and may prohibit the transfer of any intoxicating liquor. The
prohibition, if imposed, shall apply to transfers of intoxicating liquor by
employees of alcoholic beverage control stores as well as by anyone else
within the city.



   (B)   If imposed, the restrictions shall apply throughout the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-52)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to tax therefor, see G.S. § 160A-209(c)(9)



   County and municipal emergency management, see G.S. § 166A-7



§ 33.04  RESTRICTIONS ON POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION AND TRANSFER OF
DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   The proclamation may prohibit the possession of any dangerous
weapon or substance unless it remains in a place of storage within the
possessor’s premises, or, if the weapon or substance cannot be readily
stored in the possessor’s premises, unless it remains in a customary place
of storage not readily available to the possessor. The proclamation may also
prohibit the sale or other transfer or the transportation of any dangerous
weapon or substance. The Mayor may exempt from some or all of the
restrictions classes of people whose possession, transfer or transportation
of certain dangerous weapons or substances is necessary to the preservation
of the public health, safety or welfare. The proclamation shall state the
exempted classes and the restrictions from which each is exempted.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DANGEROUS WEAPON OR SUBSTANCE.



         (a)   Any deadly weapon, ammunition, incendiary device
or other instrument or substance designed for a use that carries a threat of
serious bodily injury or destruction of property;



         (b)   Any other instrument or substance that is capable
of being used to inflict serious bodily injury or property destruction, when
the circumstances indicate that there is some probability that the instrument
or substance will be so destructively used; or



         (c)   Any part or ingredient in any instrument or
substance included above.



   (C)   If imposed, the restrictions shall apply throughout the
jurisdiction of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-53)



§ 33.05  RESTRICTIONS ON ACCESS TO AREAS.



   (A)   The proclamation may prohibit obtaining access or attempting
to obtain access to any area, designated in the manner described in this
section, in violation of any order, clearly posted notice, or barricade
indicating that access is denied or restricted.



   (B)   Areas to which access is denied or restricted shall be
designated by the Chief of Police and the Chief’s subordinates when
directed in the proclamation to do so by the Mayor. When acting under this
authority, the Chief of Police and the Chief’s subordinates may restrict or
deny access to any area, street or location within the city if that
restriction or denial of access or use is reasonably necessary to promote
efforts being made to overcome the emergency or to prevent further
aggravation of the emergency.



(Prior Code, § 2-54)



§ 33.06  PROCLAMATION IMPOSING RESTRICTIONS ON ASSEMBLIES.



   (A)   The proclamation may prohibit assemblies of three or more
persons in specified geographic areas of the city after the Mayor finds that
any assemblies constitute a clear and present danger of prolonging or
aggravating an existing emergency which endangers lives, safety and property.
The proclamation shall be in writing and state the Mayor’s findings. The
Mayor shall take reasonable steps to give notice of the terms of the
proclamation to those affected by it, and shall post a copy of it in the City
Hall. The Mayor shall retain a text of the proclamation and upon request
shall furnish certified copies of it for use as evidence.



   (B)   The proclamation shall specify the geographical areas in which
the restrictions apply.



   (C)   The Mayor may amend the proclamation from time to time, making
modifications in the geographical areas to which it applies as he or she
determines to be necessary to maintain the purposes of the prohibition.



   (D)   The Mayor shall by proclamation remove the prohibition when
the emergency no longer requires it, or when directed to do so by City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-55)



§ 33.07  DISPERSAL OF PROHIBITED ASSEMBLIES.



   Any police officer may order any assembly prohibited by a proclamation
authorized by this chapter to disperse, and any individual member of an
assembly who fails to disperse after being so ordered shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 2-56)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.08  AMENDMENTS OF THE PROCLAMATION.



   The Mayor may amend the proclamation from time to time, making
modifications as he or she would have been authorized to include in the
original proclamation.



(Prior Code, § 2-57)



§ 33.09  REMOVAL OF PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.



   The Mayor shall by proclamation remove the prohibitions and
restrictions as the emergency no longer requires them, or when directed to do
so by City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-58)



§ 33.10  SEPARATE AND SUPERSEDING PROCLAMATIONS.



   The Mayor in his or her discretion may invoke the restrictions
authorized by this chapter in separate proclamations, and may amend any
proclamation by means of a superseding proclamation.



(Prior Code, § 2-59)



CHAPTER 34:  PERSONNEL



Section



   34.01   Adoption of position classification plan



   34.02   Coverage of the plan



   34.03   Maintenance of position classification plan



   34.04   Adoption of compensation plan



Charter reference:



   Administrative officers and employees, see § 4.8



   Retirement, see § 5.1



§ 34.01  ADOPTION OF POSITION CLASSIFICATION PLAN.



   The position classification plan adopted on July 1, 1986, by City
Council and maintained on file at City Hall is hereby continued in effect as
the official position classification plan for the city.



(Prior Code, § 11-1)



§ 34.02  COVERAGE OF THE PLAN.



   The position classification plan shall include all full-time permanent
and part-time classes of positions in the municipal service of the city. The
City Manager shall allocate each position covered by the position
classification plan to its appropriate class.



(Prior Code, § 11-2)



§ 34.03  MAINTENANCE OF POSITION CLASSIFICATION PLAN.



   The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration and
maintenance of the position classification plan. Accordingly, the City
Manager shall make or cause to be made, position classification studies of
individual positions or groups of positions whenever the duties and
responsibilities of existing positions have undergone significant changes, or
whenever new positions are to be created. The studies shall determine the
nature of the duties and responsibilities assigned to the positions, and
whether the positions should be assigned to existing classes or new classes
(which must be created). Any changes in the position classes shall be
approved by City Council.



(Prior Code, § 11-3)



§ 34.04  ADOPTION OF COMPENSATION PLAN.



   The schedule of salary grades and ranges and listings of class
assignments to the grades adopted on July 1, 1986, by City Council and
maintained on file at City Hall are hereby continued in effect as the
official pay plan for the city.



(Prior Code, § 11-4)



CHAPTER 35:  TAXATION



Section



Room Occupancy Tax



   35.01   Establishment



   35.02   Administration



   35.03   Distribution and use of tax revenue



   35.04   Collection of tax



   35.05   Effective date



Municipal Vehicle Tax



   35.15   Establishment



 



   35.99   Penalty



ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX



§ 35.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby established a room occupancy tax, which shall
be in an amount of 3% of the gross receipts, which are derived from the
rental of any room, lodging or accommodations furnished by a hotel, motel,
inn tourist camp or similar place or facility, within the corporate limits of
the city.



   (B)   This tax is not applicable to accommodations furnished by
non-profit, charitable, educational or religious organizations, when
furnished in furtherance of their non-profit purpose.



(Ord. O-02-02, passed 5-2-2002; Ord. O-05-03, passed 6-5-2003)



§ 35.02  ADMINISTRATION.



   The tax levied under this section will be levied, administered,
collected and repealed as provided in G.S. § 160A-215. The penalties proved
in G.S. § 160A-215 apply to the tax. The room occupancy taxes will be due
and payable to the City Finance Officer in monthly installments on or before
the fifteenth day of the month following the month in which the tax accrues.
Every person, firm, corporation or association liable for the tax will, on or
before the fifteenth day of each month, prepare and render a return on a form
which will be prescribed by the city. The return will state the total gross
receipts derived in the preceding month from rentals upon which the tax is
levied. The room occupancy tax return filed will not be public record.



(Ord. O-02-02, passed 5-2-2002)



§ 35.03  DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF TAX REVENUE.



   (A)   On a quarterly basis, the taxes will be remitted in the net
amount of the occupancy to the Lincolnton Tourism Development Authority. The
Authority will make use of at least two-thirds of the funds remitted to it to
promote travel and tourism in the city and will use the remainder for
tourism-related expenditures.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      NET PROCEEDS. Gross proceeds less the cost to the city of
administering and collecting the tax, as determined by the City Finance
Officer, not to exceed 3% of the first $500,000 of gross proceeds collected
each year, and 1% of the remaining gross proceeds collected each year.



      PROMOTE TRAVEL AND TOURISM. To advertise or market an area or
activity, publish and distribute pamphlets and other materials, conduct
market research, or engage in similar promotional activities that attract
tourists or business travelers to the area. The term includes administrative
expenses incurred in engaging in the listed activities.



      TOURISM-RELATED EXPENDITURES. Expenditures that, in the judgment
of the Lincolnton Tourism Development Authority, are designed to increase the
use of lodging facilities in the city or to attract tourist or business
travelers to the city. The term includes tourism-related capital expenditures.



(Ord. O-02-02, passed 5-2-2002)



§ 35.04  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   Every operator of a business subject to the room occupancy tax will
collect the tax. This tax will be collected as a part of the charge for
furnishing a taxable accommodation. The tax will be stated and charged
separately from the sales records and will be paid by the purchaser to the
operator of the business as trustee for and on account of the city. An
operator of business who collects a room occupancy tax may deduct from the
amount remitted to the city a discount equal to the discount that the state
allows the operator for state sales and use taxes.



(Ord. O-02-02, passed 5-2-2002)



§ 35.05  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The beginning date of the levy and the date upon which the taxes must
be paid and collected is July 1, 2003.



(Ord. O-02-02, passed 5-2-2002; Ord. O-05-03, passed 6-5-2003)



MUNICIPAL VEHICLE TAX



§ 35.15  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby levied a municipal vehicle tax of $30 per registered
and tagged vehicle in the city.



(Ord. O-03-16, passed 6-2-2016)



§ 35.99  PENALTY.



   A person, firm, corporation or association who fails or refuses to file
a room occupancy tax return or pay a room occupancy tax as required, is
subject to the civil and criminal penalties as are set forth in G.S. §
105-236 for failure to pay or file a return for state sales and use taxes.
The city, by its City Council, may, if deemed appropriate and equitable,
waive the penalties for a room occupancy tax.



(Ord. O-02-02, passed 5-2-2002)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



      51.   WATER



      52.   SEWERS



      53.   WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS AND AVAILABILITY CHARGES



      54.   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS



      55.   ELECTRICITY



CHAPTER 50:  SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Waste required to be deposited in approved containers



   50.03   Burning or burying garbage and refuse regulated



   50.04   Accumulation of garbage and refuse to be in containers



   50.05   Containers required; specifications; cleanliness



   50.06   Precollection practices



   50.07   Location of containers; collection times



   50.08   Unlawful to damage containers



   50.09   Placement of tree trimmings



   50.10   Construction and demolition debris; hazardous waste; animal
waste



   50.11   Collection of solid waste fee as it pertains to the city fee
schedule



 



   50.99   Penalty



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING MATERIAL SCRAPS.  Scrap building material from the
construction, reconstruction, remodeling or repair of a building, walkway,
driveway, sign and other structure, including but not limited to, excavated
earth, tree stumps, rocks, gravel, bricks, plaster, concrete, lumber or any
other similar material used in construction or the containers or wrappings
therefor.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS.  Building material from the
construction, reconstruction, remodeling or repair of a building, house,
walkway, driveway, sign and other structure, including but not limited to,
excavated earth, tree stumps, rocks, gravel, bricks, plaster, concrete,
shingles, metal, carpet, lumber or any other similar material used in
construction or the containers or wrappings thereof.



   ELECTRONIC.  Small appliances, computers, printers, stereos, TV's,
monitors, microwaves, VCR/DVD, and the like.



   GARBAGE.  All putrescible wastes, including animal and vegetable
matter, animal offal and carcasses and recognizable industrial by-products,
but excluding sewage and human wastes.



   REFUSE.  All nonputrescible wastes. (Not decayable, putrefiable or
spoilable).



   SOLID WASTE.  Garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash and other discarded
solid materials, including solid waste materials resulting from homes,
businesses, industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and from
community activities, but does not include solids or dissolved materials in
domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources, such as
silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial wastewater effluents,
dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or other common water
pollutants.



   TREE TRIMMINGS.  Tree limbs, leaves, shrubbery trimmings and cuttings
and all other trimmings from the natural growth of trees, shrubbery, weeds,
plants or grass.



(Prior Code, § 8-150)  (Ord. O-02-05, passed 6-2-2005; Ord. O-07-17, passed
6-29-2017)



§ 50.02  WASTE REQUIRED TO BE DEPOSITED IN APPROVED CONTAINERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any
garbage or refuse of any kind on any public or private property except in
approved containers or as otherwise provided in this code.



(Prior Code, § 8-151)  Penalty, see § 50.99



Cross-reference:



   Garbage in cemeteries, see § 91.02



   Unlawful accumulations, littering and the like, see §§ 93.045 through
93.051



§ 50.03  BURNING OR BURYING GARBAGE AND REFUSE REGULATED.



   It shall be unlawful to burn or set fire to or bury any garbage for the
purpose of disposal. In addition, it shall be unlawful to bury any refuse for
the purpose of disposal unless a permit therefor has been granted by the
State Environmental Management Commission.



(Prior Code, § 8-152)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE TO BE IN CONTAINERS.



   All garbage and refuse shall be collected and placed in containers as
required by this chapter and it shall be unlawful for any person to permit
garbage or refuse to accumulate or remain on any premises longer than is
reasonably necessary to remove and deposit same in approved containers as
required herein.



(Prior Code, § 8-153)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  CONTAINERS REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS; CLEANLINESS.



   (A)   (1)   The city will issue one 96 gallon solid waste roll
out cart to all residentially metered addresses.  All solid waste collected
must be placed in the new cart.  Bags, boxes or other smaller containers
outside of the cart will not be picked up.



      (2)   If your solid waste exceeds the 96 gallon city issued
cart, you have the option of purchasing another cart that must meet the
operating standards of the city's solid waste vehicles. The city may provide
carts for purchase if sufficient inventory is on hand.  Otherwise, this must
be done through business providers.  The city will not be able to collect
waste stored in containers not meeting these standards. Any questions you may
have regarding the purchase of a proper cart may be directed to the city
public works department at (704) 736-8940.  All containers shall be kept in
a reasonably clean manner.



      (3)   Commercial and nonprofit accounts must comply with
requirements within Chapter 50 to be eligible for service.



      (4)   The city will provide city will issue and service up to
six roll outs per parcel for eligible commercial and nonprofit accounts. 



      (5)   Downtown commercial and nonprofit solid waste services
shall be determined on an individual basis considering site limitations for
automated pickup.



      (6)   Parcels such as shopping centers, apartments, and the
like will be evaluated on a case by case basis considering accessibility,
liability and size concerns subject to the following criteria:



         (a)   Apartments - maximum of six roll outs per parcel
or one roll out per two doors (maximum of 20) in an area designated by the
city. Complex with over 40 units not eligible for service. 



         (b)   Shopping centers - Class A (under 10,000 square
feet)- maximum of six roll outs per parcel or one roll out per door (max of
ten) in an area designated by the city.



         (c)   Shopping centers - Class B (10,000 - 50,000 square
feet)or C-6 (over 10,000) - maximum of six roll outs per parcel or one roll
out per door (maximum of 15) in an area designated by the city.



         (d)   Shopping centers - Class C (over 50,000 sqare
feet) - no service provided.



      (7)   Collection is limited to one day per week for roll out
containers.



   (B)   City-provided containers.  When the city provides a container
to a residentially metered address, only solid waste in the container shall
be collected. Solid waste that is not in the containers shall not be placed
at curbside for pickup. Solid waste must be placed in a plastic bag prior to
being placed in the container. Construction, demolition, dirt, rocks, bricks,
yard waste or hot ashes shall not be placed into the container. Residents may
purchase another container that must be equipped with the appropriate tipper
connection mechanism, that must be approved by the city. All containers shall
be kept in a reasonably clean manner.



   (C)   Violations.  Any violation of this section is subject to a
penalty as provided in § 50.99.



(Prior Code, § 8-154)  (Ord. O-02-05, passed 6-2-2005; Ord. O-11-14, passed
12-5-2014; Ord. O-07-17, passed 6-29-2017)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.06  PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES.



   All garbage and refuse shall have the liquid drained therefrom and
shall be wrapped in paper or other like material before it is placed in the
container for collection. No ashes shall be deposited in any container until
they are cold. Containers which fail to have a top as required in this
chapter or which become rusted or broken and therefore are unable to contain
garbage and refuse in a satisfactory manner will not be used.



(Prior Code, § 8-155)  (Ord. O-11-14, passed 12-5-2014)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.07  LOCATION OF CONTAINERS; COLLECTION TIMES.



   Containers shall not be placed adjacent to the street or sidewalk
except on the days on which garbage is to be collected. Carts must be three
feet from another cart, parked car, mailbox, pole, and the like. A schedule
of collection shall be kept on file at the office of the Public Works and
Electric Utilities Director. When collection schedules are altered from time
to time, notice of the change shall be given by publishing the new schedule
in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. Garbage containers
shall be placed at curb side by 7:00 a.m. and removed before midnight on the
day of collection; provided, that at places of business or manufacturing,
empty containers shall not be left on the street for more than 12 hours.



(Prior Code, § 8-156)  (Ord. O-11-14, passed 12-5-2014; Ord. O-07-17,
passed 6-29-2017)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.08  UNLAWFUL TO DAMAGE CONTAINERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, displace or otherwise
interfere with garbage containers or its contents except the owner or upon
permission or at the request of the owner.



(Prior Code, § 8-157)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.09  PLACEMENT OF TREE TRIMMINGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed any
tree or shrubbery trimmings on any street or sidewalk in the city so as to
obstruct free passage of persons and vehicles thereon. Tree trimmings shall
not exceed six feet in length or eight inches in diameter. The city will only
collect bundles of tree trimmings that do not exceed six feet in length or
six feet in depth or five feet in height. Leaves shall be separated from
other tree trimmings. Disposal of tree trimmings generated by a contractor,
defined as someone who works for pay, is the responsibility of the homeowner
or contractor.



(Prior Code, § 8-158)  (Ord. O-02-05, passed 6-2-2005)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.10  CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS; HAZARDOUS WASTE; ANIMAL WASTE.



   (A)   Construction and demolition debris, as defined in § 50.01,
will not be collected by the city.



   (B)   Hazardous waste, including but not limited to tires,
batteries, petroleum cans and tanks and paint cans, will not be collected by
the city.



   (C)   Animal waste will not be collected by the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-159)  (Ord. O-02-05, passed 6-2-2005)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.11  COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE FEE AS IT PERTAINS TO THE CITY FEE
SCHEDULE.



   The solid waste fee will be collected first from the monthly utility
(water, sewer and electric) account billed by the city; delinquency of
payment shall result in the discontinuation of utilities.



(Ord. O-04-13, passed 7-11-2013)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Violations of § 50.05.  Any violation of § 50.05 is subject
to a $20 fine for the first through third offense. The fourth and subsequent
violation is subject to a $50 fine. All violations will include an additional
$5 fee if not paid within 15 days.



(Ord. O-11-14, passed 12-5-2014)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Water connection required



   51.02   Separate connections and meters required



   51.03   Applications for connections



   51.04   City to tap main and make connections



   51.05   All service pipes to connect with main



   51.06   Sprinkler connections



   51.07   Taking water from public hydrant



   51.08   Shutting water off for repair and the like



   51.09   No damages in case of accident or failure of water supply



   51.10   Turning water on after turn-off for nonpayment



   51.11   Tampering with or obstructing waterlines



Water Conservation



   51.25   Definition; curtailment of use required



   51.26   Declaration of water shortage condition



   51.27   Guidelines during Stage I water shortage condition



   51.28   Illegal acts during Stage II water shortage condition



   51.29   Illegal acts and restrictions during Stage III water
shortage condition



   51.30   Lifting restrictions imposed during a water shortage



   51.31   Discontinuance of service



   51.32   Schedule



Backflow and Cross-Connections



   51.45   Purpose



   51.46   Responsibility



   51.47   Notice of Appointment of Water Supervisor (form)



   51.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Publicly Owned Treatment Works, see Chapter 54



Statutory reference:



   Meter tampering, see G.S. § 14-151



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  WATER CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   All owners of improved property located within the corporate limits
shall connect his or her premises to the city water system.



(Prior Code, § 8-20)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.02  SEPARATE CONNECTIONS AND METERS REQUIRED.



   Each individual business or residential building or structure shall
install a separate water connection, and each shall have separate water
meters.



(Prior Code, § 8-21)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.03  APPLICATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS.



   Parties desiring connections with the water main shall, in every case,
make application in writing to the Finance Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-22)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.04  CITY TO TAP MAIN AND MAKE CONNECTIONS.



   The city reserves the privilege of tapping the water main for all
domestic connections, and will extend all service pipes to a point inside the
city right-of-way, and the closest point to established property line and to
the convenience of the city. No person shall be allowed to turn the water on
or off at the meter valve, except the Director of Public Works and Utilities,
the Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Maintenance Waterworks or his or
her designated employee.



(Prior Code, § 8-23)



§ 51.05  ALL SERVICE PIPES TO CONNECT WITH MAIN.



   In no case will service pipes be allowed to run across lots; that is,
from one lot to another, but must be taken directly from the main at some
point adjacent thereto. The Water Division shall have authority to have
service pipes extended to houses not located on main line.



(Prior Code, § 8-24)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.06  SPRINKLER CONNECTIONS.



   All sprinkler connections shall have a double check valve with one
valve having an indicator meter to measure water flow and backflow
preventions as required.



(Prior Code, § 8-25)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.07  TAKING WATER FROM PUBLIC HYDRANT.



   No person, except the authorized city personnel shall take any water
from any public hydrant, plug, street-washer, draw-cock, hose, pipe or
fountain except for the fire purposes; nor shall anyone, in any way use, or
take water for private use unless the person shall pay for the privilege and
receive the usual permit to do so.



(Prior Code, § 8-26)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Statutory reference:



   Meter tampering, see G.S. § 14-151



§ 51.08  SHUTTING WATER OFF FOR REPAIR AND THE LIKE.



   The city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water in the
mains in case of accident, or for the purpose of making connections or
repairs.



(Prior Code, § 8-27)



§ 51.09  NO DAMAGES IN CASE OF ACCIDENT OR FAILURE OF WATER SUPPLY.



   It is expressly stipulated by and between the city and the water takers
and users that no claim shall be made against the city on account of the
breaking of any main or service pipe, or any attachment to the water system
or for any accidental failure in the supply of water.



(Prior Code, § 8-28)



§ 51.10  TURNING WATER ON AFTER TURN-OFF FOR NONPAYMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut the city water back on when
the same has been cut off by the city official for the nonpayment of any
water bill or account due the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-29)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.11  TAMPERING WITH OR OBSTRUCTING WATERLINES.



   No person shall, without authority from the city, tamper with or in any
manner manipulate or turn the cutoffs on the water mains forming a part of
the water system of the city, nor shall any person tamper with or harm in any
manner whatsoever any waterline, main or any appurtenance thereto. No person
shall throw or deposit any material or substance in any waterline that will
in any manner obstruct the line.



(Prior Code, § 8-30)  Penalty, see § 51.99



WATER CONSERVATION



§ 51.25  DEFINITION; CURTAILMENT OF USE REQUIRED.



   A water shortage shall be deemed to exist when water demand by
customers connected to the city water system reaches the point where
continued or increased demand will equal or exceed the system supply and
transmission capabilities. When demand results in the condition whereby
customers cannot be supplied with water to protect his or her health and
safety, then the demand must be substantially curtailed to relieve the water
shortage.



(Prior Code, § 8-36)  (Ord. passed 11-6-1986)



§ 51.26  DECLARATION OF WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.



   In the event it appears that water demand on the water system may
exceed supply and transmission capabilities, the Utilities Director may
recommend to the City Manager that voluntary water conservation measures be
implemented. The City Manager, following consultation with the City Council,
may declare a Stage I water shortage condition advisory requesting voluntary
water conservation by consumers. In the event that voluntary conservation
measures fail to relieve the demand on the system, the city may advance to
Stage II or Stage III water shortage condition. The City Manager, following
consultation with the City Council, may with or without the recommendation of
the Utilities Director declare that a Stage II or Stage III water shortage
condition exists.



(Prior Code, § 8-37)  (Ord. passed 11-6-1986)



§ 51.27  GUIDELINES DURING STAGE I WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.



   (A)   In the event that a Stage I water shortage condition is
declared, the following guidelines shall apply:



      (1)   An extensive publicity campaign will be initiated using
public media and specialized methods to inform the public of an impending or
existing water shortage; and



      (2)   Conservation measures will be encouraged and recommended.



   (B)   In the event a Stage I water shortage condition is declared,
the following guidelines shall apply and the public shall be encouraged to
adhere to the following:



      (1)   Limit car washing to the minimum;



      (2)   Limit lawn and garden watering to that which is
necessary for plants to survive;



      (3)   Do not wash down outside areas such as sidewalks,
patios, parking lots, service bays or aprons and the like;



      (4)   Do not leave faucet running while shaving or rinsing
dishes;



      (5)   Water shrubbery to minimum required reusing household
water when possible;



      (6)   Limit use of clothes washers and dishwashers and when
used, operate fully loaded;



      (7)   Use of showers for bathing, rather than bathtub, and
limit showers to no more than four minutes;



      (8)   Limit flushing of toilets by multiple usage;



      (9)   The use of disposable and biodegradable dishes is
encouraged;



      (10)   The use of flow restrictive and water saving devices;



      (11)   Limit hours of operation of water cooled air
conditioners; and



      (12)   All residents, businesses and institutions are
requested to temporarily delay new landscape work until the water shortage
has ended.



(Prior Code, § 8-38)  (Ord. passed 11-6-1986)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.28  ILLEGAL ACTS DURING STAGE II WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.



   (A)   In the event the City Manager issues a declaration of a Stage
II water shortage condition, then it shall be unlawful for any person to use
or permit the use of water from the city water system for any purpose
hereinafter set forth until a time as the declaration of water shortage has
been rescinded. In exercising the authority for declaring a water shortage
condition, consideration shall be given to water storage levels and available
sources of supply, available usable storage on hand, drawdown rates and
projected supply capability, outlook for precipitation, daily water use
patterns and availability of water from other sources.



   (B)   In the event a Stage I water shortage condition is in effect,
it shall be unlawful to use water supplied by the city water system in the
following manner:



      (1)   To water lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, flowers and
vegetable gardens except in accordance with the following schedule set forth
in § 51.32 for specific areas of the city. Watering shall be done by
hand-held hose or container or drip irrigation system only;



      (2)   To fill newly constructed swimming and/or wading pools
or refill swimming and/or wading pools which have been drained;



      (3)   To wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes
or any other type of mobile equipment, including commercial washing;



      (4)   To wash down outside areas such as streets, driveways,
service station aprons, parking lots, office buildings, exteriors of existing
or newly constructed homes or apartments, sidewalks, or patios or to use
water for other similar purposes;



      (5)   To use water from public or private fire hydrants for
any purpose other than fire suppression or other public emergency;



      (6)   To operate or induce water into any ornamental fountain,
pool or pond or other structure making similar use of water;



      (7)   To serve drinking water in restaurants, cafeterias or
other food establishments, except upon request;



      (8)   To operate water cooled air conditioners or other
equipment that does not recycle cooling water, except when health and safety
are adversely affected; and



      (9)   To use water for any unnecessary purpose or to
intentionally waste water.



(Prior Code, § 8-39)  (Ord. passed 11-6-1986)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.29  ILLEGAL ACTS AND RESTRICTIONS DURING STAGE III WATER SHORTAGE
CONDITION.



   (A)   In the event the City Manager issues a declaration of Stage
III water shortage condition, then it shall be unlawful for any person to use
or permit the use of water from the city water system for any purpose
hereinafter set forth until a time as the declaration water shortage has been
rescinded. In exercising the authority for declaring a water shortage
condition consideration shall be given to water storage levels and available
sources of supply, available usable storage on hand, drawdown rates, the
projected supply capability, outlook for precipitation, daily water use
patterns and availability of water from other sources.



   (B)   In the event a Stage III water shortage condition exists, the
following restrictions shall also apply:



      (1)   To induce water into any pool is prohibited;



      (2)   To use water outside a structure for any use other than
an emergency involving a fire is prohibited;



      (3)   Fire protection is to be maintained by drafting of
ponds, rivers and the like, wherever possible;



      (4)   The use of throw-away utensils and plates is encouraged
and recommended at all eating establishments; and



      (5)   To operate an evaporative air conditioner which recycles
water except during operating hours of business is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 8-40)  (Ord. passed 11-6-1986)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.30  LIFTING RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED DURING A WATER SHORTAGE.



   (A)   Water shortage conditions will expire when the City Manager,
after consultation with the City Council and upon recommendation of the
Utilities Director, deems that the condition which caused the alert has
abated.



   (B)   The expiration or cancellation of a water shortage declaration
shall be promptly and extensively publicized.



(Prior Code, § 8-41)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.31  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, service may be temporarily
discontinued for willful disregard of this subchapter and a reconnect fee as
set forth in the fee schedule may be imposed before restoration of service.
In the event of continued gross noncompliance of this division the removal of
meter will be deemed proper and service will be discontinued and all tap fees
and deposits forfeited. Reconnection will only be made by payment of current
due amounts, and new tap fees and deposits shall be paid.



(Prior Code, § 8-43)  (Ord. passed 11-6-1986)



§ 51.32  SCHEDULE.



 



Phase I
 
Voluntary conservation
 
Nonessential


 
Water use
 
8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.


Phase II
 
Mandatory conservation
 
Nonessential


 
Water use
 
10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.


Phase III
 
Mandatory conservation
 
No nonessential water use


 
First violation
 
Warning ticket


 
Second violation
 
Fine


Phase IV
 
Mandatory conservation
 


 
Domestic use only
 


 
Industrial and business use by allocation
 


 
Increased fine for violators
 


Phase V
 
Mandatory conservation
 


 
Domestic use only
 


 
No industrial or business use
 


 
Increased fine and cutoff of water supply at meter for violators




 



(Prior Code, § 8-44)  (Ord. passed 11-6-1986)  Penalty, see § 51.99



BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS



§ 51.45  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is:



   (A)   To protect the public potable water supply of the city from
the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the
consumer’s internal distribution system(s) or the consumer’s private
water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could back-flow into
the public water systems;



   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing
cross-connections, actual or potential, between the consumer’s in-plant
potable water system(s) and non-potable water system(s), plumbing fixtures
and industrial piping systems; and



   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of
cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent
the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 51.46  RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The city shall be responsible for the protection of the public
potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the
backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection.
If, in the judgment of the city, an approved backflow prevention assembly is
required (at the consumer’s water service connection, or within the
consumer’s private water system) for the safety of the water system, the
city or a designated agent shall give notice in writing to the consumer to
install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at a specific
location(s) on his or her premises. The consumer shall immediately install
the approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at the consumer’s own expense;
and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install,
have tested and maintained the assembly(s) shall constitute grounds for
discontinuing water service to the premises until these requirements have
been satisfactorily met.



   (B)   (1)   Policy of use.  Hydrants are part of the
distribution system. No one will operate hydrants or valves (other than in
the event of a fire) without written permission from the Public Works
Director or the Superintendent of Distribution & Collections Department. All
flushing will be coordinated with Public Works and Water Plant. Flushing
schedule must be presented to Public Works and Water Plant at least five
working days in advance and done only at off-peak hours or at night.



      (2)   Fill station policy. All fill stations must be approved
by the NC Department of Environment and Natural Resources for construction
and use. All stations must be approved by Public Works and Distribution &
Collections Department. An approved backflow or air gap will be installed.
Meter records will be kept and bills will be mailed monthly. Filling pools,
tanks and takers from hydrants is prohibited.



   (C)   The policy of use, backflow and cross-connections, and fill
station policy are two important steps to insure quality of water and the
safety of the city’s system. Unauthorized persons operating city valves and
hydrants are a direct threat to city equipment and water system. Only
certified operators are allowed by law to maintain the city’s distribution
system.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.47  NOTICE OF APPOINTMENT OF WATER SUPERVISOR (FORM).



   NOTICE OF APPOINTMENT OF  WATER SUPERVISOR



   In accordance with the provisions of the NC Department of Environment
and



Natural Resources__________________________has been appointed Water
Supervisor.



                  (Name)



He/She will be responsible for maintaining the water system on the property
located at:



      ___________________________________________________________________
__



      ___________________________________________________________________
__



      ___________________________________________________________________
__



free from unprotected cross-connections and other sanitary defects, as
required by the plumbing code, regulations and laws.



      ___________________________________________________________________
__



   (Firm or Company



By:   ___________________________________________________________________



            (Signature)
                              (Title)



      ___________________________________________________________________
__



(Address)



   Phone: (    ) ____________________



   Date: _________________________



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Water conservation.  Any violation of the provisions of §§
51.25 through 51.32 shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable upon
conviction as provided in § 10.99, and in addition thereto the violation may
be enjoined and restrained as provided in G.S. § 160A-175.



(Prior Code, § 8-42)  (Ord. passed 11-6-1986)



CHAPTER 52:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   52.001   Purpose and policy



   52.002   Definitions and abbreviations



General Sewer Use Requirements



   52.015   Prohibited discharge standards



   52.016   National categorical pretreatment standards



   52.017   Industrial waste survey and local limits



   52.018   State requirements



   52.019   Right of revision



   52.020   Dilution



   52.021   Pretreatment of wastewater



   52.022   Accidental discharge/slug control plans



   52.023   Hauled wastewater



   52.024   Use of public sewers



   52.025   Regulations concerning building of sewers and connections



Fees



   52.040   Purpose



   52.041   User charges



   52.042   Surcharges



   52.043   Pretreatment program administration charges




Wastewater Discharge Permit Application and Issuance




   52.055   Wastewater dischargers



   52.056   Wastewater permits




Reporting Requirements




   52.070   Baseline monitoring reports



   52.071   Compliance schedule progress reports



   52.072   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline



   52.073   Periodic compliance reports



   52.074   Reports of changed conditions



   52.075   Reports of potential problems



   52.076   Reports from unpermitted users



   52.077   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting



   52.078   Notification of the discharge of hazardous wastes



   52.079   Analytical requirements



   52.080   Grab and composite sample collection



   52.081   Timing



   52.082   Record keeping



   52.083   Electronic reporting




Compliance Monitoring




   52.095   Monitoring facilities



   52.096   Inspection and sampling



   52.097   Search warrants




Confidential Information




   52.110   Public information; request for confidentiality



   52.111   Government access to information



   52.112   Availability of records




Enforcement




   52.125   Administrative remedies



   52.126   Other available remedies



   52.127   Remedies nonexclusive




Annual Publication of Significant Noncompliance




   52.140   Public disclosure




Affirmative Defense to Discharge Violations




   52.155   Upset



   52.156   Prohibited discharge standards defense



   52.157   Bypass




Administrative




   52.170   Severability



   52.171   Conflict



   52.172   Effective date




Enforcement Response Plan (ERP)




   52.185   Introduction



   52.186   Enforcement actions available to the POTW



   52.187   Investigation of noncompliance



   52.188   Types of violation



   52.189   Responses: timeframes, responsible officials, escalated
actions



 



   52.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the City of Lincolnton, hereafter referred to as “the city” and enables
the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 C.F.R. pt. 403).



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater
discharges into the municipal wastewater system that will interfere with the
operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater
discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the
system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the state or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;



      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludges from the municipal system;



      (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected
by  sewage, sludge and effluent in the course of their employment as well as
protecting the general public;



      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES
or nondischarge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and
any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is
subject.



   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the
issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.



   (D)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the municipal
wastewater system, as authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-312 and/or 153A-275. The
city shall designate an administrator of the publicly owned treatment works
or POTW and pretreatment program hereafter referred to as the “POTW
Director.” Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW Director shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be delegated by the POTW
Director to other city personnel.



   (E)   By discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater
system, industrial users located outside the city limits agree to comply with
the terms and conditions established in this chapter, as well as any permits,
enforcement actions or orders issued hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 8-50)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



Cross-reference:



   Publicly Owned Treatment Works, see Chapter 54



§ 52.002  DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY.   The Director of the Division of Water
Resources of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources or his or her designee.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.



         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation,
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean:



            1.   The president, secretary or a vice-president
of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the
corporation; or



            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter
1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively.



         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or
local government facility, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility or his or her
designee.



         (d)   The individuals described in divisions (a)–(c)
of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or
position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
city.



         (e)   If the designation of an authorized representative
is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to POTW
Director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g. mg/l).



      BUILDING SEWER.  A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.



      BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user’s treatment facility.



      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.  National categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment standard.



      CONTROL AUTHORITY.   Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW
organization’s pretreatment program approval has not been withdrawn.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of the
agency.



      GRAB SAMPLE.   A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a
one-time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a
period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.



      HOLDING TANK WASTE.   Any waste from holding tanks, including
but not limited to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE.   The discharge or the
introduction from any nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or
(d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank
waste discharged into the system).



      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER.   Any person who is a source of
indirect discharge.



      INTERFERENCE.   The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW
collection system, treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process,
use or disposal, which causes or contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the POTW’s NPDES, collection system or nondischarge permit
or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified
applicable state and federal statutes, regulations or permits.  The term
includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345), or any criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) or more
stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the
method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



      MEDICAL WASTE.   Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human
blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory
wastes and dialysis wastes.



      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD.   Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated
by EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which apply to a specific category of industrial users, and which appear in
40 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N, pts. 405 through 471.



      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT or NPDES
PERMIT.  A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342),
or pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.



      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD.  Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 52.015 and are developed under
the authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation
from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to the source
if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307(c),
provided that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source
is located results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of divisions (a)2. or 3., above, but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a
NEW SOURCE has commenced if the owner or operator has either:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a
continuous on-site construction program:



               a.   Any placement, assembly or installation
of facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Significant site preparation work
including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering and design studies, do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this definition.



      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.



      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.   Water used for cooling which does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product,
waste product or finished product.



      NONDISCHARGE PERMIT.   A permit issued by the state pursuant to
G.S. § 143-215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged directly to surface
waters of the state or for a wastewater treatment works which does not
discharge directly to surface waters of the state.



      PASS THROUGH.   A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges
from other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation, of the POTW’s NPDES collection
system, or nondischarge permit, or a downstream water quality standard even
if not included in the permit.



      PERSON.   Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state and local government entities.



      pH.   A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the
reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter
of solution.



      POLLUTANT.   Any waste as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18) and
dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color,
metals, BOD, COD, toxicity and odor).



      POTW DIRECTOR.   The city administrator designated with the
responsibility for the pretreatment program and enforcement of this sewer use
chapter.



      POTW TREATMENT PLANT.  That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.



      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing the pollution into a POTW. The reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process
changes or other means, except by diluting the concentration of the
pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM.  The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from nondomestic sources which was developed by the
city in compliance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8 and approved by the approval
authority as authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40
C.F.R. § 403.11.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.   Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical standards and local limits which apply to an industrial user.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
SYSTEM.  A treatment works as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §
1292) that is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes
any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.
It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this chapter,
POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, or
in any other way, users of the city’s POTW.



      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the user’s treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE
PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  



         (a)   An industrial user that discharges wastewater into
a publicly owned treatment works and that:



            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per
day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters);



            2.   Contributes process wastewater which makes up
5% or more of the NPDES or nondischarge permitted flow limit or 5% of more of
the maximum allowable headworks loading of the POTW treatment plant for any
POTW pollutant of concern;



            3.   Is subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under 40 C.F.R. pt. 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N,
pts. 405 through 471; or



            4.   Is designated as such by the city on the
basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW’s effluent
limitations and conditions in its NPDES or nondischarge permit, or for
contributing to violations of the POTW’s receiving stream standard, or for
limiting the POTW’s sludge disposal options.



         (b)   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC 02H
.0907(b), the city may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria
in divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this definition has no reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any
pretreatment standards or requirement, or for contributing to violations of
the POTW’s effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or nondischarge
permit, or for contributing to violations of the POTW’s receiving stream
standard, or for limiting the POTW’s sludge disposal options, and thus is
not a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER .



         (c)   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC 02H
.0907(b), the city may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria
in division (a)(3) of this definition meets the requirements of 40 C.F.R. pt.
403.3(v)(2) and thus is a NONSIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER .



         (d)   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC 02H
.0907(b), the city may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria
in division (a)(4) of this definition meets the requirements of 40 C.F.R. pt.
403.12(e)(3) and thus is a MIDDLE TIER SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER . Sampling
and inspection requirements may be cut in half as per 40 C.F.R. pts.
403.8(f)(2)(v)(C) and 403.12(e)(3).



      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or SNC.   The status of noncompliance
of a significant industrial user when one or more of the following criteria
are met. Additionally, any industrial user which meets the criteria in
(a)(3), (a)(4), or (e) shall also be SNC .



         (a)   Violations of wastewater discharge limits.



            1.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge
limits, defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a
six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. pt.
403.3(l);



            2.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations,
defined here as those in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. pt. 403.3(l) multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, 1.2 for all
other pollutants except flow and pH);



            3.   Any other violation of a pretreatment
standard or requirement as defined by 40 C.F.R. pt. 403.3(l) (daily maximum,
long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the city
and/or POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of
POTW personnel or the general public); or



            4.   Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater
that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the
environment or has resulted in either the city’s or the POTW’s, if
different from the city, exercise of its emergency authority under 40 C.F.R.
pt. 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and § 52.125(E) of this chapter to halt or prevent
such a discharge;



         (b)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones,
contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting
construction, completing construction and attaining final compliance by 90
days or more after the schedule date;



         (c)   Failure to provide reports for compliance
schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day
compliance reports and periodic compliance reports within 45 days from the
due date;



         (d)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and



         (e)   Any other violation or group of violations that
the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.



      SLUG LOAD OR DISCHARGE.   Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violates the POTW’s regulations, local limits
or industrial user permit conditions. This can include, but is not limited
to, spills and other accidental discharges; discharges of a nonroutine,
episodic nature; a noncustomary batch discharge; or any other discharges that
can cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in § 52.015.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).   A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.



      STORMWATER.   Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



      SUPERINTENDENT.   The person designated by the city to supervise
the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or his or her duly
authorized representative.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS.   The total suspended matter that floats on
the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.



      UPSET.   An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An UPSET does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



      WASTEWATER.   The liquid and water-carried industrial or
domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities,
mobile sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the
POTW.



      WASTEWATER PERMIT.   As set forth in § 52.056 of this chapter.



      WATERS OF THE STATE.   All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps,
sounds, tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all
other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the state or any portion thereof.



   (B)   This chapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall
include the feminine and vice versa. SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive or
discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the
plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context
of its use.



   (C)   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall
have the designated meanings.



 



BOD
 
Biochemical oxygen demand


C.F.R.
 
Code of Federal Regulations


COD
 
Chemical oxygen demand


EPA
 
Environmental Protection Agency


gpd
 
Gallons per day


G.S.
 
North Carolina General Statutes


l
 
Liter


mg
 
Milligrams


mg/l
 
Milligrams per liter


NPDES
 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System


O & M
 
Operation and maintenance


POTW
 
Publicly owned treatment works


RCRA
 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act


SIC
 
Standard industrial classification


SWDA
 
Solid Waste Disposal Act


TSS
 
Total suspended solids


TKN
 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen


U.S.C.
 
United States Code




 



(Prior Code, § 8-52)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



§ 52.015  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions.  No user shall contribute or cause to
be contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which causes interference or pass through. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a
significant industrial user or subject to any national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions.  No user shall contribute or cause to
be contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or
wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash
point of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
C.F.R. § 261.21;



      (2)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case
solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension including wood, glass,
ashes, sand, cinders, nonshredded garbage and the like;



      (3)   Any ground paper products;



      (4)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products
of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through;



      (5)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than
12.0, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage to the POTW or equipment;



      (6)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including
oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD and the like) in sufficient quantity (flow
or concentration), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to
cause interference with the POTW;



      (7)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F
(66°C) or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F
(40°C);



      (8)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;



      (9)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the POTW Director in accordance with § 52.023 of this
chapter;



      (10)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids or
other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair;



      (11)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or
any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits
issued under § 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used;



      (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (13)   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW Director;



      (14)   Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l unless authorized by the POTW Director;



      (15)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (16)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the POTW Director in a wastewater discharge permit;



      (17)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts or other
chelating agents that will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the
municipal wastewater system;



      (18)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous
waste according to 40 C.F.R. pt. 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as
may be specifically authorized by the POTW Director;



      (19)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to
violate state water quality standards for toxic substances as described in
15A NCAC 2B .0200;



      (20)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (21)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy;



      (22)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents
or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal
wastewater system;



      (23)   At no time shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any
point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the
lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter; or



      (24)   At no time shall any sanitary wastewater be discharged
or allowed to be discharged into the storm sewer system without exception.



   (C)   Processing or storage.  Pollutants, substances, wastewater or
other wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that they could be discharged to the municipal wastewater
system. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must
discharge to the industrial user’s pretreatment facility before connecting
with the system.



   (D)   POTW Director action.  When the POTW Director determines that
a user(s) is contributing to the POTW any of the above-enumerated substances
in such amounts which may cause or contribute to interference of POTW
operation or pass through, the POTW Director shall:



      (1)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the
contribution on the POTW in accordance with § 52.125; and



      (2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §§ 52.055
and 52.056 for the user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through.



(Prior Code, § 8-60)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.016  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to
comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, pts. 405 through 471 and incorporated herein.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).



   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW
Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream
formula in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.



   (E)   A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.



(Prior Code, § 8-61)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



§ 52.017  INDUSTRIAL WASTE SURVEY AND LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to implement
the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in this chapter.
Industrial user-specific local limits will be developed ensuring that the
POTW’s maximum allowable headworks loading is not exceeded for particular
pollutants of concern for each industrial user. Where specific local limits
are not contained for a given parameter or pollutant in an industrial user
permit, the following average discharge limits will apply to all users.



 


Average Discharge Limit

 

Pollutant






250 mg/l

 

BOD




250 mg/l

 

TSS




40 mg/l

 

oil and grease




500 mg/l

 

COD




40 mg/l

 

TKN




0.003 mg/l

 

arsenic




0.003 mg/l

 

cadmium




0.061 mg/l

 

copper




0.015 mg/l

 

cyanide




0.049 mg/l

 

lead




0.0003 mg/l

 

mercury




0.021 mg/l

 

nickel




0.050 mg/l

 

molybdenum




0.025 mg/l

 

selenium




4.00 mg/l

 

phosphorus




0.050 mg/l

 

phenol




0.005 mg/l

 

silver




0.05 mg/l

 

total chromium




0.175 mg/l

 

zinc




10 mg/l

 

ammonia





 



   (B)   Industrial user-specific local limits for appropriate
pollutants of concern shall be included in wastewater permits and are
considered pretreatment standards. The POTW Director may impose mass limits
in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limits above.



(Prior Code, § 8-62)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.018  STATE REQUIREMENTS.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations
or those in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-63)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



§ 52.019  RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements
which are more stringent than those required by either state or federal
regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
52.001 of this chapter or the general and specific prohibitions in § 52.015
of this chapter, as is allowed by 40 C.F.R. § 403.4.



(Prior Code, § 8-64)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



§ 52.020  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the national categorical pretreatment standards, unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific
limitation developed by the city or state.



(Prior Code, § 8-65)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.021  PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Pretreatment facilities.  Users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits
issued under § 52.056 of this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all
national categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the
prohibitions set out in § 52.015 of this chapter within the time limitations
as specified by EPA, the state or the POTW Director, whomever is more
stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
city for review, and shall be approved by the POTW Director before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the
city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
approved by the POTW Director prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.



   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.



      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.



      (2)   The POTW Director may require any person discharging
into the POTW to install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or
her expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.



      (3)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or
sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential
users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the
POTW Director and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. The interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at his or her expense.



      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter.



      (5)   The POTW Director may require a grinder to be installed
as necessary for the proper handling of excessive amounts of trash, rags and
the like, in a discharge.



(Prior Code, § 8-66)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.022  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user (SIU) needs a plan or other action to control and prevent
slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined in § 52.002(A). All
SIUs must be evaluated within one year of being designated an SIU. The POTW
Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval and implement
such a plan or other specific action. Alternatively, the POTW Director may
develop such a plan for any user.



   (B)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge or a slug load. Also see §§ 52.074 and 52.075.



   (C)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director
of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 52.075 of this
chapter; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



(Prior Code, § 8-67)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



Cross-reference:



   Reports of changed conditions, see § 52.074



   Reports of potential problems, see § 52.075



§ 52.023  HAULED WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the POTW Director, and at such times as are
established by the POTW Director. The waste shall not violate §§ 52.015
through 52.025 of this chapter or any other requirements established by the
city. The POTW Director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain
wastewater discharge permits.



   (B)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to
obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require generators
of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW
Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this chapter.



   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any
load prior to discharge.



   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form
for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address
of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



(Prior Code, § 8-68)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.024  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.



   (A)   Reasonable accessibility.  A property owner is considered to
have reasonable access to the public sewer collection system when the
property is located within 200 feet of the public sewer. Property owners
meeting this criteria are required to connect to the public sewer system in
the time described in division (B) below.



   (B)   Compliance time.  Property owners meeting the reasonable
accessibility requirement will receive proper notice that they are being
requested to provide a connection to the public sewer. Allowable compliance
time, a reasonable time allowance for completion of the work, to make a
proper connection shall not exceed 60 days.



(Prior Code, § 8-69)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.025  REGULATIONS CONCERNING BUILDING OF SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.



   Regulations for building/construction of public sewers and connections
are properly covered in the State Plumbing and Building Codes and shall be
followed. A copy of these regulations is attached as part of the sewer use
ordinance codified herein, and are incorporated by reference herein.



(Prior Code, § 8-70)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



FEES



§ 52.040  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the city’s wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or
fees shall be set forth in the city’s schedule of charges and fees.



(Prior Code, § 8-71)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



§ 52.041  USER CHARGES.



   A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited
to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge,
cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.



   (A)   The user charge shall reflect at least the cost of debt
service, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.



   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of
flow.



   (C)   The city shall review annually the sewage contributions of
users, the total costs of debt service, operation and maintenance of the POTW
and will make recommendations to the city for adjustments in the schedule of
charges and fees as necessary.



   (D)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the
users shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume
of flow of the users.



(Prior Code, § 8-72)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.042  SURCHARGES.



   (A)   (1)   All industrial users of the POTW are subject to
industrial waste surcharges on discharges that exceed the following levels:



 

BOD
 
250 mg/l


TSS
 
250 mg/l


COD
 
500 mg/l


Oil and grease
 
40 mg/l



 



      (2)   The amount of surcharge will be based upon the mass
emission rate (in pounds per day) discharged above the levels listed above.
The amount charged per pound of excess will be set forth in the schedule of
charges and fees.



   (B)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the
following:



      (1)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of
meter readings maintained by the city;



      (2)   If required by the city or at the individual
discharger’s option, other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual
volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be
accessible and safely located, and the measuring system shall be installed in
accordance with plans approved by the city. The metering system shall be
installed and maintained at the users’ expense according to arrangements
that may be made with the city; or



      (3)   Where any user procures all or part of his or her water
supply from sources other than the city, the user shall install and maintain
at his or her own expense a flow-measuring device of a type approved by the
city.



   (C)   The character and concentration of the constituents of the
wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples
collected and analyzed by the city. Samples shall be collected in such a
manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed
using procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136.



   (D)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his or her
duly appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.



(Prior Code, § 8-73)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.043  PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION CHARGES.



   The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the city may include
charges and fees for:



   (A)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
pretreatment program;



   (B)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;



   (C)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug
load discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications;



   (D)   Permitting; and



   (E)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the pretreatment program.



(Prior Code, § 8-74)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE



§ 52.055  WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW
without first obtaining the permission of the city. When requested by the
POTW Director, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The POTW
Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.



(Prior Code, § 8-81)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.056  WASTEWATER PERMITS.



   All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial
user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW. Existing
industrial users who are determined by the POTW Director to be significant
industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within 180
days of receiving notification of the POTW Director’s determination.
Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may
at the discretion of the POTW Director be required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit for nonsignificant industrial users.



   (A)   Significant industrial user determination.  All persons
proposing to discharge nondomestic wastewater, or proposing to change the
volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of nondomestic wastewater
shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user
determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed
discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria, he or she will
require that a significant industrial user permit application be filed.



   (B)   Significant industrial user permit application.  Users
required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and
file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the POTW
Director, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in
the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply
for a significant industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of
the POTW Director’s determination in division (A) above. The application
shall include, at a minimum:



      (1)   Name of industrial user;



      (2)   Address of industrial user;



      (3)   Standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s) or
expected classification and industrial user category;



      (4)   Wastewater flow;



      (5)   Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants
contained in discharge;



      (6)   Major products manufactured or services supplied;



      (7)   Description of existing on-site pretreatment facilities
and practices;



      (8)   Locations of discharge points;



      (9)   Raw materials used or stored on-site;



      (10)   Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user;



      (11)   Number of employees;



      (12)   Operation and production schedules;



      (13)   Description of current and projected waste reduction
activities in accordance with G.S. § 143-215.1(g); and



      (14)   Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW
Director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.



   (C)   Application signatories and certification.  All wastewater
discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current
authorized representative of the user on file with the city as defined in §
52.002 and contain the following certification statement:



      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



   (D)   Application review and evaluation.  The POTW Director will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information.



      (1)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications
for the city and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review
and evaluation.



      (2)   Within 60 days of receipt, the POTW Director shall
acknowledge and accept the complete application, or if not complete, shall
return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional
information is required.



   (E)   Tentative determination and draft permit.



      (1)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application
and an on-site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any
pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative
determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit.



      (2)   If the staff’s tentative determination in division
(E)(1) above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations
shall be made in writing:



         (a)   Proposed discharge limitations for those
pollutants proposed to be limited;



         (b)   Proposed schedule of compliance, including interim
dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and



         (c)   A brief description of any other proposed special
conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in
the application.



      (3)   The staff shall organize the determinations made
pursuant to divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2) above and the city’s general permit
conditions into a significant industrial user permit.



   (F)   Permit supporting documentation.  The city staff shall
prepare the following documents for all significant industrial user permits.



      (1)   An allocation table (“AT”) listing permit
information for all significant industrial users, including but not limited
to permit limits, permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of
total permitted flows and loads with Division-approved maximum allowable
loadings of the POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the
Division. The AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as
permits are modified where the permitted limits or other AT information is
revised.



      (2)   The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment
limitations, including the following:



         (a)   Documentation of categorical determination,
including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical
pretreatment standards; and



         (b)   Documentation of the rationale of any parameters
for which monitoring has been waived under 40 C.F.R. pt. 403.12(e)(2).



   (G)   Final action on significant industrial user permit
applications.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all
applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete
application.



      (2)   The POTW Director is authorized to:



         (a)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1;



         (b)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements;



         (c)   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days
notice and pursuant to division (I) below of this section;



         (d)   Revoke any permit pursuant to § 52.125 of this
chapter;



         (e)   Suspend a permit pursuant to § 52.125 of this
chapter; and



         (f)   Deny a permit application when in the opinion of
the POTW Director the discharge may cause or contribute to pass through or
interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to
effectuate the purposes of G.S. § 143-215.1.



   (H)   Hearings.



      (1)   Initial adjudicatory hearing.  An applicant whose
permit is denied, or is granted subject to conditions he or she deems
unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under § 52.999, or
one issued an administrative order under § 52.125 shall have the right to an
adjudicatory hearing before a hearing officer designated by the POTW Director
upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested,
to the POTW Director within 30 days following receipt of the significant
industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment or administrative order.
Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the
action shall be final and binding. The hearing officer shall make a final
decision on the contested permit, penalty or order within 45 days of the
receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The POTW Director shall transmit
a copy of the hearing officer’s decision by registered or certified mail.



         (a)   New permits.  Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the general courts of justice, of the terms or conditions of a
newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed
and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial
review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.



         (b)   Renewed permits.  Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the general courts of justice, of the terms or conditions of a
renewed permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in
effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.



      (2)   Final appeal hearing.  Any decision of a hearing
officer made as a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under division
(H)(1) above may be appealed to the City Council upon filing a written demand
within ten days of receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings held under
this division shall be conducted in accordance with procedures adopted by the
City Council. Failure to make written demand within the time specified herein
shall bar further appeal. The City Council shall make a final decision on the
appeal within 90 days of the date the appeal was filed and shall transmit a
written copy of its decision by registered or certified mail.



      (3)   Official record.  When a final decision is issued under
division (H)(2) above, the City Council shall prepare an official record of
the case that includes:



         (a)   All notices, motions and other like pleadings;



         (b)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;



         (c)   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if
testimony is transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a
narrative summary of any testimony taken; and



         (d)   A copy of the final decision of the City Council.



      (4)   Judicial review.  Any person against whom a final order
or decision of the City Council is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted
under division (H)(2) above, may seek judicial review of the order or
decision by filing a written petition within 30 days after receipt of notice
by registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter,
with the Superior Court of Lincoln County along with a copy to the city.
Within 30 days after receipt of the copy of the petition of judicial review,
the City Council shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a
certified copy of the official record.



   (I)   Permit modification.



      (1)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same
procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed below.
Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.



         (a)   Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no
other change in the permit is indicated;



         (b)   A single modification of any compliance schedule
not in excess of four months; and



         (c)   Modification of compliance schedules (construction
schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to
discharge until control facilities are operational.



      (2)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national
categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with that
standard within the time frame prescribed by that standard. Where a user,
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by
division (B) above, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard.



      (3)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall
constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. § 143-215.1(b) for
modifications.



   (J)   Permit conditions.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a
permit with such conditions attached as he or she believes necessary to
achieve the purpose of this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater permits
shall contain, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Statement of duration (in no case more than five
years);



         (b)   Statement of nontransferability;



         (c)   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical
standards or local limits or both;



         (d)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law;



         (e)   Requirements for notifying the POTW in the event
of an accidental discharge or slug load as defined in § 52.002;



         (f)   Requirements to implement a plan or other controls
for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in §
52.002, if determined by the POTW Director to be necessary for the user;



         (g)   Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of
any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharges, or slug load as defined in § 52.002 (also see §§
52.074 and 52.075); and



         (h)   A statement of applicable civil and/or criminal
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any
applicable compliance schedule.



      (2)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited
to, the following:



         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly
average and/or maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified
wastewater pollutants or properties;



         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, and the like,
designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the treatment works;



         (d)   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the
municipal wastewater system;



         (e)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system;



         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



         (g)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and
standards for tests, and reporting schedules;



         (h)   Requirements for immediate reporting of any
instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within
30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s);



         (i)   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment
standards and requirements;



         (j)   Requirements for submission of periodic
self-monitoring or special notification reports;



         (k)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans
and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in § 52.082 and
affording the POTW Director or his or her representatives access thereto;



         (l)   Requirements for prior notification and approval
by the POTW Director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of
any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to
introduction in the system;



         (m)   Requirements for the prior notification and
approval by the POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or
pretreatment process used by the permittee;



         (n)   A statement that compliance with the permit does
not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those that
become effective during the terms of the permit; and



         (o)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW
Director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws,
rules and regulations.



   (K)   Permit duration.  Permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period
less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.



   (L)   Permit transfer.  Wastewater permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation.



   (M)   Permit reissuance.  A significant industrial user shall apply
for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in
accordance with this section a minimum of 120 days prior to the expiration of
the existing permit.



(Prior Code, § 8-82)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



Cross-reference:



   Reports of changed conditions, see § 52.074



   Reports of potential problems, see § 52.075



REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



§ 52.070  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.



      (1)   Identifying information.  The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



      (2)   Environmental permits.  A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



      (3)   Description of operations.  A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of
the operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.



      (4)   Flow measurement.  Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the POTW Director/Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The
sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in § 52.079 of this chapter.



         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 52.080 of this chapter and 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)
and (g), including 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(g)(4).



      (6)   Certification.  A statement, reviewed by the user’s
current authorized representative as defined in § 52.002 and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.



      (7)   Compliance schedule.  If additional pretreatment and/or
O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O
& M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in § 52.071 of this chapter.



      (8)   Signature and certification.  All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 52.056(C) of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-86)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.071  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 52.070(B)(7) of this chapter:



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the POTW Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-87)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.072  REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
POTW Director a report containing the information described in §§
52.070(B)(4) through (B)(6) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent
mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 52.056(C) of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-88)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.073  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the POTW Director but in no case less than once every six
months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
applicable flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be
performed in accordance with procedures set out in §§ 52.079 and 52.080 of
this chapter. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 52.056(C) of this chapter.



   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (C)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director,
using the procedures prescribed in §§ 52.070 and 52.071 of this chapter,
the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.



(Prior Code, § 8-89)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.074  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant
changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. The
permittee shall not begin the changes until receiving written approval from
the city. See § 52.075(D) for other reporting requirements.



   (A)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 52.056 of this chapter.



   (B)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 52.056 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge
permit under § 52.056 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.



   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, SIGNIFICANT CHANGES include,
but are not limited to, flow or pollutant increases of 20% or greater; the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants; increases or decreases to
production; increases in discharge of previously reported pollutants;
discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the city; new or changed
product lines; new or changed manufacturing processes and/or chemicals; or
new or changed customers.



(Prior Code, § 8-90)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



Cross-reference:



   Other reporting requirements, see § 52.075(D)



§ 52.075  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in § 52.002, that
may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately
telephone and notify the POTW Director of the incident. This notification
shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of
any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that
all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



   (D)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in § 52.002.



(Prior Code, § 8-91)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.076  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may
require. All users classified as nonsignificant categorical industrial users
under § 52.002 shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the
POTW Director may require. At a minimum, this shall include the annual
certification of continuing to meet the nonsignificant categorical industrial
user criteria as required under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(q).



(Prior Code, § 8-92)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.077  NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   (A)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the
user must notify the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation.  The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation.  If allowed by the POTW Director, the user
is not required to resample if:



      (1)   The POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility at
least once a month; or



      (2)   The POTW Director samples between the user’s initial
sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.



   (B)   If the POTW Director does not require the user to perform any
self-monitoring and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a violation, the
POTW Director shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results of the repeat
analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violations, unless one of
the following occurs:



      (1)   The POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility at
least once a month;



      (2)   The POTW Director samples the user between their initial
sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or



      (3)   The POTW Director requires the user to perform sampling
and submit the results to the POTW Director within the 30-day deadline of the
POTW becoming aware of the violation.



(Prior Code, § 8-93)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.078  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTES.



   It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge any hazardous waste as
defined in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261 without first having obtained written permission
or a special permit, pursuant to §§ 52.055 and 52.056 of this chapter, from
the POTW Director. If permission to discharge hazardous waste is granted by
the POTW Director, the following procedures shall apply.



   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and
state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW
of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 C.F.R. pt. 261. The notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the user
discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the
POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the
extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharge during the calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days
after the discharge commences. Any notification under this division need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under § 52.074 of this
chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§ 52.070, 52.072 and
52.073 of this chapter.



   (B)   In the case of any new regulation under § 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days
of the effective date of such regulations.



   (C)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (D)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



(Prior Code, § 8-94)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.079  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed by a laboratory certified by the state to perform the wastewater
analysis in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard
or unless otherwise performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA
or the city. If 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA and the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-95)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.080  GRAB AND COMPOSITE SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   Wastewater samples.  All wastewater samples must be
representative of the user’s discharge.  Wastewater monitoring and flow
measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained
in good working order at all times.  The failure of a user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user
to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (B)   Grab samples.  Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds and any
other pollutants as required by 40 C.F.R. pt. 136.  The POTW shall determine
the number of grabs necessary to be representative of the user’s
discharge.  See 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number
requirements for BMR and 90-day compliance reports.  Additionally, the POTW
Director may allow collection of multiple grabs during a 24-hour period which
are composited prior to analysis as allowed under 40 C.F.R. pt. 136.



   (C)   Composite samples.  All wastewater composite samples shall be
collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there
is a discharge.  All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using
flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW Director. 
When authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be
representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be
documented.



(Prior Code, § 8-96)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.081  TIMING.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Prior Code, § 8-97)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.082  RECORD KEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements.  Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time
of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of the analyses.  These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years.  This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the city or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the POTW Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-98)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.083  ELECTRONIC REPORTING.



   The POTW Director may develop procedures for receipt of electronic
reports for any reporting requirements of this chapter.  Such procedures
shall comply with 40 C.F.R. pt. 3.  These procedures shall be enforceable
under §§ 52.125 through 52.127 and 52.999 of this chapter.



(Ord. O-03-07, passed 9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty,
see § 52.999



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 52.095  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   The city requires the user to provide and operate at the
user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and
flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but
the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles.



   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.



   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
city’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-101)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.096  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   The city will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether
the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being
complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created
or discharged shall allow the city, approval authority and EPA or their
representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The city’s approval
authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user’s property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in
force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry
into his or her premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with his
or her security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to
enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities. Denial of the city’s, approval authority’s or EPA’s
access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access.



(Prior Code, § 8-102)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.097  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the city, approval authority or EPA has been refused access to a
building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the city, approval authority or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant
from the Superior Court of the General Court of Justice in the county.



(Prior Code, § 8-103)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION



§ 52.110  PUBLIC INFORMATION; REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIALITY.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such request must be asserted at
the time of submission of the information or data.



(Prior Code, § 8-107)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.111  GOVERNMENT ACCESS TO INFORMATION.



   (A)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
chapter, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit,
nondischarge permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that
such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any
state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report.



   (B)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.



(Prior Code, § 8-108)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.112  AVAILABILITY OF RECORDS.



   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the approval authority and EPA upon request.



(Prior Code, § 8-109)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 52.125  ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Notification of violation.  Whenever the POTW Director finds
that any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter,
wastewater permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained
therein or any other pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director may serve
upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
Within 30 days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the
city by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.



   (B)   Consent orders.  The POTW Director is hereby empowered to
enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for
the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by
the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect
as an administrative order issued pursuant to division (D) below.



   (C)   Show cause hearing.  The POTW Director may order any
industrial user who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge,
has violated this chapter or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge
permit to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
In the event the POTW Director determines that a show cause order should be
issued, a notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place
for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action
and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or
by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at
the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is
appropriate.



      (2)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a
prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under § 52.999 nor is any
action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this section subject to
an administrative appeal under § 52.056(H).



   (D)   Administrative orders.  When the POTW Director finds that an
industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, permits or
orders issued hereunder or any other pretreatment requirement, the POTW
Director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and
direct those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements;



      (2)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set
forth in the order;



      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the
event of a continuing or threatened violation; or



      (4)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices
or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a
specified time period.



   (E)   Emergency suspensions.



      (1)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment
service and/or wastewater permit when the suspension is necessary in order to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or
the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any
condition of its NPDES or nondischarge permit.



      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the
notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the
user’s waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take
such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment
to any individuals. The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit
and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date
of the above-described hearing.



   (F)   Termination of permit or permission to discharge.



      (1)   The POTW Director may revoke a wastewater discharge
permit or permission to discharge for good cause, including, but not limited
to, the following reasons.



      (2)   Any user who violates the following conditions of this
chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having
its permit terminated:



         (a)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge;



         (b)   Failure to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



         (d)   Violation of conditions of the permit or
permission to discharge, conditions of this chapter or any applicable state
and federal regulations.



      (3)   Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the
proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an
opportunity to show cause under this section why the proposed action should
not be taken.



(Prior Code, § 8-111)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



§ 52.126  OTHER AVAILABLE REMEDIES. 



   (A)   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this
chapter or in § 52.999, are available to the POTW Director, who may use any
single one or combination against a noncompliant user.



   (B)   Additional available remedies include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Criminal violations.  The District Attorney for the 278
Judicial District may, at the request of the city, prosecute noncompliant
users who violate the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B.



      (2)   Injunctive relief.  Whenever a user is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the
POTW Director, through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
Justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and
permanent injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question.



      (3)   Water supply severance.  Whenever an industrial user is
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service
will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated ability to comply.



      (4)   Public nuisances.  Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued
hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing,
abating or remedying the nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 8-113)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.127  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The POTW
Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be
in accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan. However, the POTW
Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(Prior Code, § 8-114)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE



§ 52.140  PUBLIC DISCLOSURE.



   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish, in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a list of those industrial users which
were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable
noncompliance, in 15A NCAC 2H .0903(b)(34), with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.



(Prior Code, § 8-119)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS



§ 52.155  UPSET.



   (A)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (B) below are met.



   (B)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs or other relevant evidence, that:



      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;



      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and



      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the
POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days.



         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause
of noncompliance;



         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and



         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



   (C)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



   (D)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.



   (E)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.



(Prior Code, § 8-121)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.156  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS DEFENSE.



   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
52.015(A) of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in § 52.015(B)(2),
(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6) through (B)(8) and (B)(10) through (B)(24) of this
chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that
its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources,
would cause pass through or interference, and that either:



   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



(Prior Code, § 8-122)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.157  BYPASS.



   (A)   Generally.  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does
not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if
it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of divisions (B) and (C) of this
section.



   (B)   Notification of bypass by user.



      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director, at least ten days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.



      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within five days of this time the user becomes aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24
hours.



   (C)   Criteria for nonenforcement action or approval of bypass.



      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under
division (B) above of this section.



      (2)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that
it will meet the three conditions listed in division (C)(1) above of this
section.



(Prior Code, § 8-123)  (Ord. O-12-01, passed 9-6-2001; Ord. O-03-07, passed
9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



ADMINISTRATIVE



§ 52.170  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision, division, word, section or subchapter of this chapter
is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions, divisions, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected
and shall continue in full force and effect.



(Ord. O-03-07, passed 9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



§ 52.171  CONFLICT.



   All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency or conflict.



(Ord. O-03-07, passed 9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14, passed 7-10-2014)



§ 52.172  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter is effective September 13, 2007.



(Ord. O-03-07, passed 9-13-2007)



ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN (ERP)



§ 52.185  INTRODUCTION.



   It is the responsibility of city (NPDES Permit Number: NC0025496) to
enforce all applicable federal, state, and local pretreatment regulations.
These regulations are outlined in federal regulation 40 CFR 403 and state
regulation 15A NCAC 2H .0900, and this chapter. This Enforcement Response
Plan (ERP) has been established as an element of the Public Owned Treatment
Works (POTW) pretreatment program. The purpose of the ERP is to provide for
fair and equitable treatment of all users for anticipated enforcement
situations. In general, enforcement actions will be taken in accordance with
this enforcement response plan. However, the enforcement actions available
are not exclusive as outlined in § 52.999(D), (NC Model SUO Section 8.4).
Therefore, any combination of the enforcement actions can be taken against a
non-compliant user.



(Ord. passed 7-29-2008)



§ 52.186  ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE POTW.



   (A)   The Director of the POTW is empowered through G.S. §
143-215.6A and this chapter to take a wide variety of enforcement actions.
The following is a list of those actions and the corresponding section of
this chapter that describes each corresponding sections from the NC model SUO
are listed as well.



 



 

Local SUO Section

 

NC Model SUO Section





Notice of violation
 

52.125(A)

 

8.1(a)



Consent orders
 

52.125(B)

 

8.1(b)



Show cause hearing
 

52.125(C)

 

8.1(c)



Administrative orders
 

52.125(D)

 

8.1(d)



Emergency suspensions
 

52.125(E)

 

8.1(e)



Termination of permit
 

52.125(F)

 

8.1(f)



Civil penalties
 

52.999

 

8.2



Injunctive relief
 

52.126(B),(C)

 

8.3(b)



Water supply severance
 

52.126(C)(3)

 

8.3(c)





 



   (B)   In addition to the actions in division (A), a user who
violates the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B may be referred by the Director
to the District Attorney for possible criminal prosecution.



   (C)   In determining the amount of civil penalties for a particular
violation, the Director shall consider the following factors outlined in §
52.999, (NC model SUO Section 8.2):



      (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural
resources, to the public health, or to public or private property resulting
from the violation;



      (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



      (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or
quality or on air quality;



      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



      (5)   The amount of money saved by non-compliance;



      (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or
intentionally;



      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing
to comply;



      (8)   The costs of enforcement to the POTW.



   (D)   Adjudicatory hearing procedures regarding permit decisions,
civil penalties, and administrative orders may be found in § 52.056(H), (NC
Model SUO Section 4.2(h)).



(Ord. passed 7-29-2008)



§ 52.187  INVESTIGATION OF NONCOMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The staff of the POTW will generally investigate user
compliance with permits or the provisions of the this chapter in three ways:



      (1)   On-site inspections of the user to include scheduled and
unscheduled visits;



      (2)   Scheduled and unscheduled sampling of the users effluent;



      (3)   Review of self-monitoring data, if required, from the
user.



   (B)   The compliance status of significant industrial users will be
evaluated at a minimum once every six months.



(Ord. passed 7-29-2008)



§ 52.188  TYPES OF VIOLATION.



   The following is a list of different types of violations, by category.
This list is not inclusive, but serves as a general list of anticipated types
of noncompliance. The user’s permit, this chapter, and state and federal
regulations serve as additional references for pretreatment requirements.



   (A)   Unpermitted discharges. Users are responsible for obtaining
and renewing permits, if required.



   (B)   Permit limits. Users are responsible for maintaining
compliance with all effluent limits. The POTW will evaluate the extent of the
limits violation(s). In determining the extent of violation(s), significant
non-compliance (SNC) as defined by state and EPA regulations will be
determined.



   (C)   Self-monitoring violations. A user who fails to adequately
conduct all the monitoring required in the permit, including monitoring
frequencies and sampling methods specified, is in violation. This includes a
user who does not resample per their permit when a limit violation occurs.



   (D)   Reporting violations. A user who fails to provide information
(such as, self monitoring reports) required in their permit or this chapter
in the required time frame is in violation. Late or incomplete reports will
also be considered violations. A SIU who submits a report more than 30 days
late is possibly considered in SNC.



   (E)   Permit conditions. Failure to apply or reapply for a permit is
considered a violation. Users who violate the general or other conditions
(such as, slug loading, dilution prohibition) outlined in their permits or
this chapter shall be considered to be in violation.



   (F)   Enforcement orders. Failure to meet the requirements of an
order (such as, interim limits, milestone dates), whether the order was
entered into voluntarily or mandated by the POTW, shall be considered a
violation. Missing a scheduled compliance milestone by more than 90 days is
considered SNC.



(Ord. passed 7-29-2008)



§ 52.189  RESPONSES: TIMEFRAMES, RESPONSIBLE OFFICIALS, ESCALATED ACTIONS.



   (A)   The following chart further outlines types of violations and
specifies POTW actions (initial and escalated), timeframes, and the officials
responsible for completing the actions. This chart shall be considered a part
of the enforcement response plan.



   (B)   Responses to violations affecting the operation of the POTW,
resulting in POTW NPDES violations, or resulting in environmental harm or
endangerment to human health will be taken immediately or as soon as possible
following discovery.



   (C)   A user may be sent a notice of violation (NOV) or notice of
noncompliance (NNC) for each individual violation. Alternatively, violations
over a period of time may be summarized. In general, NOVs in response to
violations will be issued within 30 days of discovery of the violations.
Users found to be in SNC for two consecutive six-month periods will be issued
an enforceable order to return to compliance. In all cases, escalated or
continuing enforcement action will be taken against users who do not return
to compliance in a timely manner.



   (D)   Cases of falsifying reports, tampering with monitoring or
sampling equipment, or otherwise preventing the collection of representative
data may be referred to the District Attorney for possible criminal
investigation.



   (E)   Show cause hearings may be held at the Director’s discretion
prior to taking enforcement actions.



 


Type of Violation

 

POTW Action

 

Timeframe

 

Responsible Official

 

Expected Action From User

 

Escalated Action if Needed





Unpermitted Discharges


Unpermitted discharge
 
Notice of violation
 
Within 30 days of discovery of discharge
 
Pretreatment Coordinator
 
File permit application
 
Suspend service until permit is issued


Unaware of requirements


Unpermitted discharge
 
Notice of violation with penalty assessed
 
Within 30 days of discovery of discharge
 
Director
 
File permit application
 
Suspend service until permit is issued


Aware of requirement


Unpermitted discharge results in NPDES or other state issued permit or state
general statute violations
 
Order to cease process causing violation notice of violation within
recommended minimum of $1,000 and up to $25,000/day per violation penalty
 
Order to cease immediately
 
Director
 
File permit application
 
Suspend service until permit is issued


Notice of violation within seven days
 
Steps taken to avoid violation


Unpermitted discharge results in endangerment
 
Suspend service
 
Suspend service immediately
 
Director
 
File permit application
 


Notice of violation with recommended minimum $1,000 and up to $25,000 per day
per violation penalty
 
Notice of violation within seven days
 
Steps taken to avoid future endangerment


Permit Limits Violations


Permit limits violation
 
Notice of non- compliance or notice of violation with $0 to $25,000 penalty
 
Within 30 days of receiving data
 
Pretreatment Coordinator
 
Conduct additional monitoring and return to compliance
 
Notice of violation with penalty


Single event minor


Permits limits violation
 
Notice of violation with $0 to $25,000 penalty
 
Within 30 days of receiving data
 
Pretreatment Coordinator
 
Conduct additional monitoring and return to compliance
 
Second notice of violation with increased penalty


Technical Review Criteria (CRC)


Permit limits violation
 
Notice of violation with $0 to $25,000 penalty
 
Within 30 days of receiving data
 
Pretreatment Coordinator
 
Report cause of non- compliance and steps taken to prevent violation
 
Enforceable schedule (AO) if not resolved by end of second six- month period


Significant non-compliance


Permit limits violation results in NPDES or other state issued permit or
state general statute violations
 
Order to cease process causing violation notice or violation with recommended
minimum $1,000 and up to $25,000/day per violation penalty
 
Order to cease immediately
 
Director
 
Report cause of non- compliance and steps taken to prevent violation
 
Suspend service until resolved


Notice of violation within seven days of discovering violation
 
Enforceable schedule (AO) if not resolved by end of second six- month period


Permit limits violation results in endangerment
 
Suspend service
 
Suspend service immediately
 
Director
 
File for reissuance of permit
 


Notice of violation with a recommended minimum $1,000 and up to $25,000 per
day per violation penalty
 
Notice of violation within seven days


Other violations


Self monitoring violations
 
Notice of violation with a recommended minimum penalty equal or greater than
cost of missed testing
 
Within 30 days of discovery
 
Pretreatment Coordinator
 
Conduct missed sampling
 
Second notice of violation with penalty equal to twice cost of missed testing


Reporting violations
 
Notice of non- compliance
 
Within 30 days of the report due date
 
Pretreatment Coordinator
 
Submit report
 
Notice of violation


Late report
 
Penalty assessed


Possible SNC if over 30 days


Reporting violations
 
Notice of non- compliance
 
Within 30 days of the report submission
 
Pretreatment Coordinator
 
Submit revised report
 
Notice of violation


Incomplete or inaccurate reports
 
Penalty assessed


Reporting violations
 
Referred to District Attorney
 
As soon as suspected
 
Director
 
 


Intentional falsification


Violation of permit conditions
 
Notice of violation with penalty up to $25,000 per day per violation
 
Within 30 days of discovery
 
Pretreatment Coordinator or Director
 
Varies
 
Second notice of violation within increased penalty


Violation of permit
 
Suspend service
 
Suspend service immediately
 
Director
 
Steps taken to avoid reoccurrence
 


Conditions results in NPDES or other state issued permits or state general
statute violations or endangerment
 
Notice of violation with up to $25,000 per day per violation penalty
 
Notice of violation within seven days


Violations of enforcement order
 
Notice of violation assess stipulated penalty and actions listed for same
violation type in ERP
 
Within timeframe listed in enforcement order or for the same type of
violation in ERP
 
Pretreatment Coordinator or Director
 
Additional monitoring and steps taken to avoid recurrence
 
Same as escalated action for same type of violation


Conditions or limits
 
Possible revocation of order


Failure to meet a milestone date in an enforcement order (does not affect
other dates)
 
Notice of violation and assess penalty stipulated in order
 
Within 14 days of discovery
 
Pretreatment Coordinator
 
Submit a schedule to complete the requirement
 
Show cause hearing


Failure to meet a milestone date in an enforcement order (affects other dates)
 
Show cause hearing and assess stipulated penalties
 
Within 30 days of discovery
 
Director
 
Negotiate new order and abide by new conditions
 
Possible termination of service


Failure to meet final compliance date
 
Notice of violation and assess stipulated penalties
 
Within 14 days of discovery
 
Director
 
Document compliance
 
Possible termination of service




 



(Ord. passed 7-29-2008)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with
any provision of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty of up to $25,000 per day
per violation.



      (2)   Penalties between $10,000 and $25,000 per day per
violation may be assessed against a violator only if:



         (a)   For any class of violation, only if a civil
penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five years preceding
the violation; or



         (b)   In the case of failure to file, submit or make
available, as the case may be, any documents, data or reports required by
this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder,
only if the POTW Director determines that the violation was intentional and a
civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five years
preceding the violation.



   (B)   Any user who is found to have conducted malicious damage to
the public sewer system, treatment works and/or all appurtenances shall be
subject to punitive action and penalties.



   (C)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW
Director shall consider the following:



      (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural
resources, to the public health, or to public or private property resulting
from the violation;



      (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



      (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or
quality or on air quality;



      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



      (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



      (6)   Whether the violation was committed wilfully or
intentionally;



      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing
to comply with the pretreatment program; and



      (8)   The costs of enforcement to the city.



   (D)   Actions for any unpaid civil penalties shall be referred to
the City Attorney for collection.



   (E)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this
section shall be as provided in § 52.056(H).



(Prior Code, § 8-112)  (Ord. O-03-07, passed 9-13-2007; Ord. O-06-14,
passed 7-10-2014)



CHAPTER 53:  WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS AND AVAILABILITY CHARGES



Section



   53.01   General principles of water and sewer line extension



   53.02   Explanation of terms and requirements



   53.03   Extension policies within city’s service areas



   53.04   Planning and extension of water and sewer systems



   53.05   Initiation of projects within the primary service area



   53.06   Initiation of projects within the secondary service area



   53.07   Extensions made by other governmental entity



   53.08   Oversized improvements/reimbursement



Editor’s note:



   Ord. 0-72-99, adopted July 1, 1999, amended this chapter in its
entirety to read as herein set out. The former chapter pertained to the same
subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted August 23, 1988.



§ 53.01  GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF WATER AND SEWER LINE EXTENSION.



   (A)   No sewer line or water main may be connected to the city’s
water or sewer system unless the line or main is:



      (1)   Properly designed and constructed to service the
properties intended to be served directly by the line or main; and



      (2)   Of a size and design sufficient to accommodate any
necessary expansion of the water and sewer system to serve other properties,
including fire protection.



   (B)   The city shall own and control any and all water mains, sewer
lines and related facilities connected to and serviced by its water or sewer
system, except for those water mains, sewer lines or facilities of other
public bodies connected to and serviced by the city’s water or sewer system
under contracts approved by the Council between the city and other public
bodies.



   (C)   To comply with municipal obligations imposed by state
statutes, or in cases of emergency where it is found to be in the public
interest or necessary to protect the public health, the city may authorize
extensions of water and/or sanitary sewer into specific areas.



   (D)   All extensions, expansions and new facilities must be
economically feasible and must be constructed in accordance with city
engineering criteria, standards and specifications and in conformity with any
existing or future policies and plans which are adopted by the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-200)  (Ord. O-72-99, passed 7-1-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 53.02  EXPLANATION OF TERMS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES.  Assessment procedures as outlined in the
General Statutes will be received for review by City Council.



   AVAILABILITY FEE.  An established charge for connection to an existing
water distribution or sewer collection system. The availability shall be
effective for all water taps greater than three-quarter inch and all sewer
taps greater than four inches. The availability fee for single-family
residential properties shall be based on the front footage of the lot, not to
exceed 100 linear feet (LF). The availability for all other properties shall
be based on the front footage of the property. The charges per front foot
shall be based on the installation of an eight-inch sewer line (with all
apparatus) and/or an eight-inch water line (with all apparatus), as
determined by the Director of Public Works and Utilities.



   BASIC LEVEL OF SERVICE FOR ALL LAND USES OTHER THAN SINGLE-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL WITHIN THE PRIMARY SERVICE AREA.  A level of surface including a
two-inch water meter and a four-inch sewer connection. At the basic level of
service, facilities will be provided in publicly maintained streets or
rights-of-way existing at the date of the adoption of Ordinance O-72-99. For
properties requiring sewerage pumping facilities, the basic level of service
shall be that required for a single-family detached dwelling. The city will
share in the cost of installation of services larger than those provided at
the basic level of service.



   BASIC LEVEL OF SERVICE WITHIN THE SECONDARY SERVICE AREA.  No basic
level of service is provided within secondary service areas. Any service
provided to any use in the secondary service area shall be installed at the
expense of the property developer and/or owner and shall meet the applicable
basic level of service standards listed in definitions for basic level of
service for all land uses other than single-family residential within the
primary service area and basic level of single-family residential service
within the primary service area. The city may participate at its option in
the costs incurred in the installation of oversized water and sewer mains.



   BASIC LEVEL OF SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL SERVICE WITHIN THE PRIMARY
SERVICE AREA.  A level of service including a three-quarter-inch water meter
and a four-inch sewer connection. At the basic level of service, facilities
will be provided in publicly maintained streets or rights-of-way existing at
the date of the adoption of Ord. O-72-99. For properties requiring sewerage
pumping facilities, the basic level of service shall be that required for a
single-family detached dwelling. The city will share in the cost of
installation of services up to those provided at the basic level of service.



   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE PRIMARY SERVICE AREA.  The city may
extend facilities for economic development purposes when in the view of the
City Council there is reason to believe that it is in the best interest of
the city and its systems to do so.



   EXTENSION.  Any water main or sewer line lengthening required to
connect a water service to a large main or sewer lateral to an outfall sewer
or major trunk sewer.



   EXTENSION POLICIES WITHIN THE PRIMARY SERVICE AREA.  The city will
install water and sewer lines in publicly maintained streets and
rights-of-way existing as of the adoption date of Ordinance O-72-99 for the
purpose of providing the basic level of service to individual parcels. Owners
of parcels not along, or abutting, publicly maintained streets will be
responsible for extending services to the parcel. Owners of newly subdivided
parcels shall be responsible for extending services to the parcels. Parcel
owners shall provide the city with a recorded easement for any facilities
they intend to dedicate to the city. All water meters shall be placed in the
street right-of-way or at the end of the dedicated water line. All sewer
connections shall be placed in the street right-of-way.



   EXTENSION POLICIES WITHIN THE SECONDARY SERVICE AREA.  Applicants will
be required to install all facilities within the secondary service area. The
city may participate at its option in the costs incurred for the installation
of oversized water and sewer mains.



   FIRE HYDRANTS.  Must be placed in accordance with the city fire
protection standards.



   INCREASE IN SIZE OF FACILITIES IN THE PRIMARY SERVICE AREA.  The
city’s basic water main size shall be a minimum of six inches when in a
looped system and eight inches when extending into a nonlooped or dead-end
system. The city, at its option, may participate in the cost of increasing
the size of the main above this level when in the interest of the city. The
basic sewer main size shall be eight inches. The city at its option may
participate in increasing the size of these facilities.



   INSTALLATION OF FACILITIES BY OTHERS THAN CITY FORCES.  All lines
installed and dedicated to the city for maintenance will be installed
according to city standards, using city specified material(s).



   LARGE MAIN.  Any water main larger than eight inches in diameter,
serving an area, sized and located so that additional service connections
beyond the limits of any associated development can be made without lowering
the level of service.



   LOCATION OF WATER METERS AND SEWER CONNECTIONS.  Water meters will be
located in the publicly maintained streets and rights-of-way. The customer
will connect to the meter and be responsible for all lines beyond the meter.
The sewer connection will be on the publicly maintained sewer line itself. It
will be the responsibility of the customer to make the connection to the
line. The city will provide access to the opposite side of the road when
sewer is located on the opposite side of a city or NCDOT maintained street.
All lines from and including the connection point to the structure served
will be the responsibility of the property owner.



   MAJOR TRUNK SEWER.  A gravity sewer line extending directly from an
outfall which is located and sized so that additional gravity sewer lines can
be connected thereto.



   NUMBER OF METERS/CONNECTIONS FOR EACH PARCEL WITHIN THE PRIMARY AND
SECONDARY SERVICE AREA.  Each individual dwelling unit should have its own
meter. Each meter should be assessed an individual tap fee. In the case of
sewer connections where more than one living unit is served by the same
connection, each living unit should be assessed a tap fee.



   OUTFALL.  Any sewer line serving a drainage area, located and sized so
that additional lateral connections beyond the limits of any associated
development can be made without lowering the level of service.



   PRIMARY SERVICE AREA.  All areas within the boundary of the corporate
limits.



   PRIVATE FIRE SYSTEMS.  These should be made at the expense of the
property owner. There should be a detection meter installed on all fire
systems. Backflow prevention should be in place on all fire systems. All fire
system facilities beyond, and including, the connection point to the publicly
maintained facilities will be the responsibility of the private system. There
should be a disconnect valve at the point the private system connects to the
publicly maintained system.



   SECONDARY SERVICE AREA.  All service areas outside the corporate
limits.



(Prior Code, § 8-201)  (Ord. O-72-99, passed 7-1-1999)



§ 53.03  EXTENSION POLICIES WITHIN CITY’S SERVICE AREAS.



   The city will provide the following basic water and sewer facilities
within the city’s service areas utilizing bond funds, grant funds, current
revenues, user charges, special assessments, availability fees and other
available funds:



   (A)   Water treatment works;



   (B)   Water pumping stations;



   (C)   Water storage tanks;



   (D)   Large water mains;



   (E)   Outfall sewers;



   (F)   Major trunk sewers;



   (G)   Sewage pumping stations designed and intended to serve more
than one property;



   (H)   Sanitary sewer force mains serving basic facility pumping
stations; and



   (I)   Sewage treatment plants.



(Prior Code, § 8-202)  (Ord. O-72-99, passed 7-1-1999)



§ 53.04  PLANNING AND EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS.



   The planning and extension of the water and sewer systems shall be
accomplished in accordance with the following general policies except in
cases where the basic level of service is provided:



   (A)   Each developer of land, whether subdivided or not, shall be
responsible for all costs associated with the extension of water and sewer
service including rights-of-way costs;



   (B)   All water and sewer service extensions costs in and to
subdivisions shall be borne by the subdivider in accordance with the city’s
subdivision regulations;



   (C)   All water and sewer extension plans and installations shall
meet the specifications of the city. The city shall be authorized to inspect
at any time the installation of all water and sewer extensions which are to
be connected to the city’s facilities and all fees for the inspections
shall be borne by the owner or developer;



   (D)   All water and sewer lines and appurtenances connected to the
city’s facilities shall be dedicated to the city and accepted by the city
immediately upon approval of the same by the City Engineer after adoption by
the City Council;



   (E)   The city shall be responsible for the maintenance, operation
and control of all water and sewer facilities when dedicated to the city; and



   (F)   All water discharge into the sewer system must be purchased
from the city or public water provider with whom the city has a binding
contract outlining specific conditions whereby sewer service would be made
available.



(Prior Code, § 8-203)  (Ord. O-72-99, passed 7-1-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 53.05  INITIATION OF PROJECTS WITHIN THE PRIMARY SERVICE AREA.



   There are three methods by which water and sewer extensions can be
accomplished. Regardless of method used, all facilities, once completed, must
be dedicated to the city.



   (A)   On petition by residents.



      (1)   Water and/or sewer line extensions may be made upon
receipt of a petition requesting the improvements. The petition shall be
signed by at least 50% in number of the owners of property who also own at
least 50% of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting the proposed
improvements. One hundred percent of the improvements shall be financed by
special assessments against the benefitted property utilizing the procedures
set forth in G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10.



      (2)   The city shall assess 100% of the full cost of the water
and/or sewer improvements against the abutting property owner. City property
shall be assessed just like any other property. The city shall adopt from
time to time a maximum price per foot for water and/or sewer lines which
shall be assessed against abutting property. Where the size of the property
exceeds the normal building lot size in a particular zoning district, the
city may adopt an acreage fee to assess the benefitted property owner in
addition to the front foot rate. In any event, the maximum front foot rate
and the acreage fee shall be applied uniformly to all projects approved by
the City Council. These fees shall be in addition to normal tap fees, usage
charges or impact fees which the city may have already adopted.



      (3)   The city by action of the City Council may amend, modify
or repeal the maximum assessment rate and the acreage fee at any time.



      (4)   All petitions for improvements shall specify that the
assessments shall be paid in three years plus interest to be determined by
the City Council.



   (B)   On application by property owners.



      (1)   Any property owner, owners or developer desiring to have
water or sanitary sewer services extended to and along any public streets or
other public way shall apply in writing to the city requesting the water
and/or sewer service. The application shall contain plans in sufficient
detail in order to allow the City Council to determine the adequate size of
facilities necessary for the proposed extension.



      (2)   Upon approval of the extension plans by the City
Council, the property owner or developer shall be responsible for providing
100% of the full cost of the water and/or sewer improvements including all
approved pump stations, lift stations and fire hydrants between the owner’s
property and the city’s water and/or sewer system.



      (3)   If public right-of-way is not available, the property
owner or developer shall obtain the necessary rights-of-way and/or easements
in favor of the city.



      (4)   All contracts for the installation of water and/or sewer
lines and the construction and installation of the same shall be subject to
the inspection and approval by the city and its engineer and the fee for the
inspection shall be borne by the owner or developer.



   (C)   Action by City Council.



      (1)   In the event that the City Council determines that a
proposed water and/or sewer project is both necessary and in the public
interest of the citizens of the city, the city may undertake the proposed
extension of services on its own motion.



      (2)   In this case, no assessments will be levied against
abutting property; however, all owners of the property abutting the
improvements shall be required to pay a fee equivalent to the amount which
would have been assessed as a condition to connection to the water and/or
sewer improvements.



      (3)   The fee charged shall be a maximum price per front foot.
Where the size of the property exceeds the normal building lot size in a
particular zoning district, the city may require the payment of an acreage
fee in addition to the maximum front foot rate.



      (4)   These fees shall be in addition to the normal tap on
fees and usage charges or impact fees which the city has already adopted.



(Prior Code, § 8-204)  (Ord. O-72-99, passed 7-1-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 53.06  INITIATION OF PROJECTS WITHIN THE SECONDARY SERVICE AREA.



   The city may permit extension of water and/or sewer service outside the
city’s corporate limits. The following provisions shall apply.



   (A)   All requests for extension of water and/or sewer service shall
be in writing.



   (B)   The applicant shall agree to the provisions of §§ 53.04 and
53.05 above.



   (C)   The application or request for service shall include a
petition from the owner requesting annexation or, if not practical, a
statement setting forth the reasons why annexation would not be practical.
The City Council shall have the authority to waive this requirement when, in
its opinion, annexation would not be practical, legally possible or would not
be in the best interest of the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-205)  (Ord. O-72-99, passed 7-1-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 53.07  EXTENSIONS MADE BY OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY.



   (A)   In the event that the city shall permit an extension of its
water and/or sewer line at the request of and expense of any other
governmental unit, including the county, the extensions shall be at the sole
expense of the party requesting the extensions. Expenses are to include but
not be limited to all labor and materials, engineering fees, any and all sums
required for rights-of-way and/or easements and any and all cost incidental
to the extensions.



   (B)   Upon completion of the water and/or sewer lines, the
improvements shall be dedicated to the city. The city shall charge the user
the normal tap fee, using charges or impact fees which the city may have
already adopted.



(Prior Code, § 8-206)  (Ord. O-72-99, passed 7-1-1999)



§ 53.08  OVERSIZED IMPROVEMENTS/REIMBURSEMENT.



   (A)   When it is in the best interest of the citizens of the city
that oversized water and/or sewer lines be extended from the existing
municipal system, the City Council may agree to pay the additional cost to
construct oversized lines. If any oversized facility is feasible, then a
reimbursement agreement shall be entered into between the city and each party
installing water and/or sewer facilities. Only those water and sewer lines,
fire hydrants, lift stations and pumping stations as may be expressly
referred to and covered by a written contract between the party(ies) and the
city shall be considered.



   (B)   The cost of installing lines served by the oversized lines or
any other existing city lines shall be borne by the owner, developer or party
being so connected.



   (C)   Oversized improvement costs subject to reimbursement shall be:



      (1)   The actual cost of water lines larger than six inches,
sewer lines larger than eight inches, all approved fire hydrants, pumping
stations and lift stations between the property being developed and the
facilities of the city. The extent of the extra cost incurred by the city
shall be only that incurred by installing lines larger than needed to serve
the property developed;



      (2)   The cost of water lines larger than six inches and sewer
lines larger than eight inches within the property being developed but which
will serve other properties. However, the costs shall only be to the extent
to cover the extra cost incurred from installing lines larger than needed to
serve the property developed; and



      (3)   The proportionate cost of lines of any size to which
direct service connections may be made to property other than that of the
initial developer.



   (D)   All reimbursements for oversized improvement costs set forth
in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above, shall be made from water and/or sewer
charges collected by the city from properties served by lines installed under
a reimbursement agreement. Reimbursement costs shall be paid by the city to
the developer no more than 30 days after the end of each quarter. The source
of the payments shall be from fees received from oversized improvements. All
reimbursement for costs for division (C)(3) above shall be made only from
appropriate front foot charges.



   (E)   Only actual costs of the lines together with all necessary
fire hydrants, pumping stations and lift stations shall be included in the
calculations of costs subject to reimbursement. No interest on cost pending
reimbursement shall be permitted.



   (F)   No reimbursement of any costs shall be made more than ten
years after the day of acceptance by the city of the lines installed under an
oversized improvement agreement.



   (G)   Acreage charges collected from properties served by lines
installed under reimbursement agreement shall be applied so as to satisfy any
claims under the different agreements in the order in which the agreements
were executed.



(Prior Code, § 8-207)  (Ord. O-72-99, passed 7-1-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 54:  PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS



Section



General Provisions



   54.001   Purpose, policy and objectives



   54.002   Definitions and abbreviations



   54.003   Prohibited discharge standards



   54.004   National categorical pretreatment standards



   54.005   Industrial waste survey and local limits



   54.006   State requirements



   54.007   Right of revision



   54.008   Dilution



   54.009   Pretreatment of wastewater



   54.010   Accidental discharge/slug control plans



   54.011   Hauled wastewater



Fees



   54.025   Purpose



   54.026   User charges



   54.027   Surcharges



   54.028   Pretreatment program administration charges



Wastewater Discharge Permit



   54.040   Required



   54.041   Wastewater permits



Monitoring and Reporting



   54.055   Baseline monitoring reports



   54.056   Compliance schedule progress reports



   54.057   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline



   54.058   Periodic compliance reports



   54.059   Reports of changed conditions



   54.060   Reports of potential problems



   54.061   Reports from unpermitted users



   54.062   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting



   54.063   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste



   54.064   Analytical requirements



   54.065   Sample collection



   54.066   Timing



   54.067   Record keeping



   54.068   Monitoring facilities



   54.069   Inspection and sampling



   54.070   Search warrants



   54.071   Confidential information



Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations



   54.085   Upset



   54.086   Prohibited discharge



   54.087   Bypass



 



   54.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Sewers generally, see Ch. 52



Editor’s note:



   Ord. O-32-94, adopted March 3, 1994, enacted provisions pertaining to
publicly owned treatment works. These provisions did not specify manner of
inclusion in the code, but have been codified as superseding this chapter,
which pertained to the same subject matter. Formerly, §§ 54.001, 54.002,
54.011, 54.055, 54.056 and 54.065 through 54.070, being the substantive
sections of Chapter 54, were derived from Ord. O-32-90, adopted March 8,
1990. Additionally, the user’s attention is directed to Chapter 52, and in
the event of conflict between Chapters 52 and 54, it is presumed the more
recent provisions will prevail.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 54.001  PURPOSE, POLICY AND OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the City of Lincolnton, hereafter referred to as the city, and enables the
city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 C.F.R. pt. 403).



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipality wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately
treated, into any waters of the state or otherwise be incompatible with the
system;



      (3)    To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludges from the municipal system;



      (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected
by sewage, sludge and effluent in the course of his or her employment as well
as protecting the general public;



      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES
or nondischarge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and
any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is
subject.



   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the
issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.



   (D)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the municipal
wastewater system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW Director
shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any
powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be delegated by the
POTW Director to other city personnel. By discharging wastewater into the
municipal wastewater system, industrial users located outside the city limits
agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this chapter, as
well as any permits, enforcement actions or orders issued hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 8-221)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)



§ 54.002  DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Director of the Division of
Environmental Management of the North Carolina Department of Environment,
Health and Natural Resources or his or her designee.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.



         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation,
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean:



            1. The president, secretary or vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person
who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation;
or



            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter
1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively.



         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or
local government facility, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or its designee.



         (d)   The individuals described in divisions (a) through
(c) above may designate another authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or
position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
city.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g. mg/l).



      BUILDING SEWER.  A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.



      BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user’s treatment facility.



      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.  National categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment standard.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of the
agency.



      GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a
one-time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a
period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.



      HOLDING TANK WASTE.  Any waste from holding tanks, including but
not limited to holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE.  The discharge or the
introduction of nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste
discharged into the system).



      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER.  Any person who is a source of indirect
discharge.



      INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW
treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process, use or disposal,
which causes or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s
NPDES or nondischarge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations
or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by
the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary
Act (MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA)
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



      MEDICAL WASTE.  Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and
dialysis wastes.



      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD.  Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated
by EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears
in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N, pts. 405 through 471.



      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES
PERMIT.  A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342),
or pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.



      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD.  Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 54.003 and are developed under
the authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation
from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to the source
if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307(c),
provided that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source
is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of division (a)2. or 3. above but otherwise
alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.



         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a
NEW SOURCE has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or causes to begin, as part of a
continuous on-site construction program:



               a.   Any placement, assembly or installation
of facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Significant site preparation work
including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation
of new source facilities or equipment.



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts
for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this definition.



      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.



      NONDISCHARGE PERMIT.  A disposal system permit issued by the
state pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1.



      PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges
from other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation, of the POTW’s NPDES or nondischarge
permit or a downstream water quality standard.



      PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state and local government entities.



      pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the
reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter
of solution.



      POLLUTANT.  Any waste as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18) and
dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color,
BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).



      POTW DIRECTOR.  The city’s Director of Public Works and
Utilities.



      POTW TREATMENT PLANT.  The portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.



      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing pollution into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can
be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes
or other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM.  The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from nondomestic sources which was developed by the
city in compliance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8 and approved by the approval
authority as authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40
C.F.R. § 403.11.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical standards and local limits.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
SYSTEM.  A treatment works as defined by § 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. §
1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes
any devices or systems used in collection, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It
also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this chapter,
POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, or
in any other way, users of the city’s POTW.



      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the user’s treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE
PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any industrial user of the
wastewater disposal system who:



         (a)   Has an average daily process wastewater flow of
25,000 gallons or more;



         (b)   Contributes more than 5% of any design or
treatment capacity (i.e., allowable pollutant load) of the wastewater
treatment plant receiving the indirect discharge;



         (c)   Is required to meet a national categorical
pretreatment standard; or



         (d)   Is found by the city, the division of
environmental management of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to
have the potential for impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industrial users, on the wastewater treatment system, the
quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality, or compliance with any
pretreatment standards or requirements.



      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE OR REPORTABLE NONCOMPLIANCE.  A status
of noncompliance defined as follows.



         (a)   Violations of wastewater discharge limits.



            1.   Chronic violations.  Sixty-six percent or
more of the measurements exceed (by any magnitude) the same daily maximum
limit or the same average limit in a six-month period.



            2.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations. 
Thirty-three percent or more of the measurements are more than the TRC times
the limit (maximum or average) in a six-month period.



 

There are two groups of TRCs:
 
TRC


For conventional pollutants, BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease
 
=
 
1.4


For all other pollutants
 
=
 
1.2



 



            3.   Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit
(average or daily maximum) that the control authority believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
or endangered the health of the sewage treatment plant personnel or the
public.



            4.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has
resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or
prevent a discharge.



         (b)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones,
contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting
construction, completing construction and attaining final compliance by 90
days or more after the scheduled date.



         (c)   Failure to provide reports for compliance
schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day
compliance reports and periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the
due date.



         (d)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.



         (e)   Any other violation or group of violations that
the control authority considers to be significant.



      SLUG LOAD.  Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in § 54.003.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.



      STORMWATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



      SUPERINTENDENT.  The person designated by the city to supervise
the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter or his or her duly
authorized representative.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



      UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An UPSET does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



      WASTEWATER.  The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile
sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the
POTW.



      WASTEWATER PERMIT.  As set forth in § 54.041.



      WATERS OF THE STATE.  All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.



   (B)   General rules.  This chapter is gender neutral and the
masculine gender shall include the feminine and vice-versa. Shall is
mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. The use of the singular shall
be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular
as indicated by the context of its use.



   (C)   Abbreviations.  The following abbreviations, when used in
this chapter, shall have the designated meanings:



 



BOD
 
Biochemical oxygen demand


C.F.R.
 
Code of Federal Regulations


COD
 
Chemical oxygen demand


EPA
 
Environmental Protection Agency


gpd
 
Gallons per day


G.S.
 
North Carolina General Statutes


l
 
Liter


mg
 
Milligrams


mg/l
 
Milligrams per liter


NPDES
 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System


O & M
 
Operation and maintenance


POTW
 
Publicly owned treatment works


RCRA
 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act


SIC
 
Standard Industrial Classification


SWDA
 
Solid Waste Disposal Act


TSS
 
Total suspended solids


TKN
 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen


U.S.C.
 
United States Code




 



(Prior Code, § 8-222)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)



§ 54.003  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions.  No user shall contribute or cause to
be contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which causes interference or pass through. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a
significant industrial user or subject to any national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions.



      (1)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into
the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:



         (a)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard
in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less, than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in
40 C.F.R. § 261.21;



         (b)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will
cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no
case solids greater than one-half-inch in any dimension;



         (c)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or
products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through;



         (d)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more
than 10 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage to the POTW or equipment;



         (e)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including
oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD and the like) in sufficient quantity, (flow
or concentration) either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to
cause interference with the POTW;



         (f)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than
150°F (66°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which
causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104°F (40°C);



         (g)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of
toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems;



         (h)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at
discharge points designated by the POTW Director in accordance with § 54.011;



         (i)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids
or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair;



         (j)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s
effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW
cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations
or permits issued under § 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable
to the sludge management method being used;



         (k)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes
or isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



         (l)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian
well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage,
condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted
industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW Director;



         (m)   Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable
origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l;



         (n)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



         (o)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically
authorized by the POTW Director in a wastewater discharge permit;



         (p)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts or
other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere
with the municipal wastewater system;



         (q)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous
waste according to 40 C.F.R. pt. 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as
may be specifically authorized by the POTW Director;



         (r)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant
effluent to violate state water quality standards for toxic substances as
described in 15A NCAC 2B.0200;



         (s)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with
other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



         (t)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal
anatomy;



         (u)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active
agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal
wastewater system; and



         (v)   At no time, shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any
point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the
lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.



      (2)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater or other wastes
prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in a manner that
they could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains
located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the
industrial user’s pretreatment facility before connecting with the system.



      (3)   When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in amounts
which may cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass
through, the POTW Director shall:



         (a)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the
contribution on the POTW in accordance with § 54.999(A); and



         (b)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §§
54.040 and 54.041 for the user to protect the POTW from interference or pass
through.



(Prior Code, § 8-223)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.004  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to
comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, pts. 405 through 471 and incorporated herein.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).



   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW
Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream
formula in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.



(Prior Code, § 8-224)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.005  INDUSTRIAL WASTE SURVEY AND LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to implement
the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in this chapter.
Industrial user-specific local limits will be developed ensuring that the
POTW’s maximum allowable headworks loading is not exceeded for particular
pollutants of concern for each industrial user. Where specific local limits
are not contained for a given parameter or pollutant in an industrial user
permit, the following limits will apply to all users.



 


Pollutant

 

Limit





BOD
 
250 mg/l


COD
 
500 mg/l


Oil and grease
 
40 mg/l


TKN
 
40 mg/l


TSS
 
250 mg/l


Ammonia
 
10 mg/l


Arsenic
 
0.003 mg/l


Cadmium
 
0.003 mg/l


Copper
 
0.061 m/l


Cyanide
 
0.041 mg/l


Lead
 
0.049 mg/l


Mercury
 
0.0003 mg/l


Molybdenum
 
0.050 mg/l


Nickel
 
0.021 mg/l


Phenol
 
0.050 mg/l


Phosphorus
 
4.00 mg/l


Selenium
 
0.025 mg/l


Silver
 
0.005 mg/l


Total chromium
 
0.05 mg/l


Zinc
 
0.175 mg/l




 



   (B)   Industrial user-specific local limits for appropriate
pollutants of concern shall be included in wastewater permits and are
considered pretreatment standards. The POTW Director may impose mass limits
in addition to, or in place of, the concentration based limits above.



(Prior Code, § 8-225)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.006  STATE REQUIREMENTS.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations
or those in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-226)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)



§ 54.007  RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements
which are more stringent than those required by either state or federal
regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
54.001 or the general and specific prohibitions in § 54.003, as allowed by
40 C.F.R. § 403.4.



(Prior Code, § 8-227)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)



§ 54.008  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the national categorical pretreatment standards, unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific
limitation developed by the city or state.



(Prior Code, § 8-228)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.009  PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Pretreatment facilities.  Users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits
issued under § 54.041 and shall achieve compliance with all national
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out
in § 54.003 within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the state or
the POTW Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance be provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the POTW
Director before construction of the facility. The review of the plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to
the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
approved by the POTW Director prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.



   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.



      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams and any other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW
and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   The POTW Director may require any person discharging
into the POTW to install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or
her expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.



      (3)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or
sand; except that the interceptors shall not be required for residential
users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the
POTW Director and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. The interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at his or her expense.



      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter.



(Prior Code, § 8-229)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.010  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   At least once every two years, the POTW Director shall evaluate whether
each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control
plan. The POTW Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval,
and implement a plan. Alternatively, the POTW Director may develop a plan for
any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:



   (A)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;



   (B)   Description of stored chemicals;



   (C)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 54.060; and



   (D)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. The procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading
and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment
for emergency response.



(Prior Code, § 8-230)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.011  HAULED WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the POTW Director, and at times as are established by
the POTW Director. The waste shall not violate §§ 54.003 through 54.010 or
any other requirements established by the city. The POTW Director may require
septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.



   (B)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to
obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require generators
of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW
Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this chapter.



   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any
load prior to discharge.



   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form
for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address
of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



(Prior Code, § 8-231)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



FEES



§ 54.025  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the city’s wastewater disposal system for the implementation
of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be
set forth in the city’s schedule of charges and fees.



(Prior Code, § 8-241)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)



§ 54.026  USER CHARGES.



   A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited
to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge,
cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.



   (A)   The user charge shall reflect at least the cost of debt
service, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.



   (B)   Each user shall pay his, her or its proportionate cost based
on volume of flow.



   (C)   The city shall review annually the sewage contributions of
users, the total costs of debt service, operation and maintenance of the POTW
and will make recommendations to the city for adjustments in the schedule of
charges and fees as necessary.



   (D)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the
users shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume
of flow of the users.



(Prior Code, § 8-242)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.027  SURCHARGES.



   (A)   All industrial users of the POTW are subject to industrial
waste surcharges on discharges which exceed the following levels:



 


BOD

 

250 mg/l




COD

 

500 mg/1




Oil and grease

 

40 mg/1




TSS

 

250 mg/l




 



   (B)   The amount of surcharge will be based upon the mass emission
rate (in pounds per day) discharged above the levels listed above. The amount
charged per pound of excess will be set forth in the schedule of charges and
fees.



      (1)   The volume of flow used in determining the total
discharge of wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be
based on the following:



         (a)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records
of meter readings maintained by the city;



         (b)   If required by the city, or at the individual
discharger’s option, other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual
volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer. The devices shall be accessible
and safely located and the measuring system shall be installed in accordance
with plans approved by the city. The metering system shall be installed and
maintained at the user’s expense according to arrangements that may be made
with the city; and



         (c)   Where any user procures all or part of his or her
water supply from sources other than the city, the user shall install and
maintain at his or her own expense a flow measuring device of a type approved
by the city.



      (2)   The character and concentration of the constituents of
the wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples
collected and analyzed by the city. Samples shall be collected in a manner as
to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed using
procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136.



      (3)   The determination of the character and concentration of
the constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his or
her duly appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.



(Prior Code, § 8-243)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.028  PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION CHARGES.



   The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the city may include
charges and fees for:



   (A)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
pretreatment program;



   (B)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;



   (C)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug
load discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications;



   (D)   Permitting; and



   (E)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the pretreatment program.



(Prior Code, § 8-244)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)



WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT



§ 54.040  REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW
without first obtaining the permission of the city. When requested by the
POTW Director, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The POTW
Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.



(Prior Code, § 8-251)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.041  WASTEWATER PERMITS.



   All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial
user (SIU) permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW.
Existing industrial users who are determined by the POTW Director to be
significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user
permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW Director’s
determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial
user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW Director be required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit for nonsignificant industrial users.



   (A)   Significant industrial user determination.  All persons
proposing to discharge nondomestic wastewater, or proposing to change the
volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of nondomestic wastewater
shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user
determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed
discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria, the Director will
require that a significant industrial user permit application be filed.



   (B)   Significant industrial user permit application.  Users
required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and
file with the city, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW
Director, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in
the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply
for a significant industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of
the POTW Director’s determination in division (A) above. In support of the
application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:



      (1)   Name, address and location (if different from the
address);



      (2)   Standard industrial classification (SIC) codes for
pretreatment, the industry as a whole, and any processes for which
categorical pretreatment standards have been promulgated;



      (3)   Analytical data on wastewater constituents and
characteristics including, but not limited to those mentioned in §§ 54.003
through 54.011, any of the priority pollutants (§  307(a) of the Act) which
the applicant knows or suspects are present in the discharge as determined by
a reliable analytical laboratory; and any other pollutant of concern to the
POTW; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40
C.F.R. pt. 136, as amended;



      (4)   Time and duration of the indirect discharge;



      (5)   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans
and details to show all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, direction of
flow and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;



      (7)   Description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be
accidentally or intentionally discharged;



      (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards;



      (9)   If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required
to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule:



         (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in
the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading
to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No increment in the
schedule shall exceed nine months; and



         (b)   No later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the POTW Director including, at a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the progress
reports to the POTW Director.



      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production;



      (11)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



      (12)   Number and type of employees and hours of operation of
plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;



      (13)   If subject to a categorical standard, a baseline
monitoring report in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b) and 15A NCAC
2H.0908(a), as outlined in § 54.055; and



      (14)   Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW
Director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.



   (C)   Application signatories and certification.  All wastewater
discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification
statement:



      I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.



   (D)   Application review and evaluation.  The POTW Director will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information.



      (1)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications
for the city and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review
and evaluation.



      (2)   Within 30 days of receipt the POTW Director shall
acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall
return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional
information is required.



   (E)   Tentative determination and draft permit.



      (1)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application
and an on-site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any
pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative
determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit.



      (2)   If the staff’s tentative determination in division
(E)(1) above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations
shall be made in writing:



         (a)   Proposed discharge limitations for those
pollutants proposed to be limited;



         (b)   A proposed schedule of compliance, including
interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and



         (c)   A brief description of any other proposed special
conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in
the application.



      (3)   The staff shall organize the determinations made
pursuant to divisions (E)(1) and (2) above and the city’s general permit
conditions into a significant industrial user permit.



   (F)   Permit synopsis.  A fact sheet providing a brief synopsis of
the application shall be prepared by the POTW staff for submission to the
applicant and the approval authority and shall be made available to the
public upon request. The contents of the fact sheets shall include at least
the following information:



      (1)   A sketch and detailed description of the industrial
facilities and pretreatment facilities including the location of all points
of discharge to the POTW and all established compliance monitoring points;



      (2)   A quantitative description of the discharge described in
the application which includes at least the following:



         (a)   The rate or frequency of the proposed discharge;
if the discharge is continuous, the average daily flow;



         (b)   The actual average daily discharge in pounds per
day of any limited pollutant and any pollutant identified in the application
as known or suspected present; and



         (c)   The basis for the pretreatment limitations
including the documentation of any calculations in applying categorical
pretreatment standards.



   (G)   Final action on significant industrial user permit
applications.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all
applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete
application.



      (2)   The POTW Director is authorized to:



         (a)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1;



         (b)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements;



         (c)   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days’
notice and pursuant to division (I) below of this section;



         (d)   Revoke any permit pursuant to § 54.999(A);



         (e)   Suspend a permit pursuant to § 54.999(A); and



         (f)   Deny a permit application when in the opinion of
the POTW Director the discharge may cause or contribute to pass through or
interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to
effectuate the purposes of G.S. § 143-215.1.



   (H)   Hearings.



      (1)   Initial adjudicatory hearing.  An applicant whose
permit is denied, or is granted subject to conditions he or she deems
unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under § 54.999(B),
or one issued an administrative order under § 54.999(A) shall have the right
to an adjudicatory hearing before a hearing officer designated by the POTW
Director upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be
contested, to the POTW Director within 30 days following receipt of the
significant industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment or
administrative order. Unless written demand is made within the time specified
herein, the action shall be final and binding. The hearing officer shall make
a final decision on the contested permit, penalty or order within 45 days of
the receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The POTW Director shall
transmit a copy of the hearing officer’s decision by registered or
certified mail.



         (a)   New permits.  Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the general courts of justice, of the terms or conditions of a
newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed
and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial
review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.



         (b)   Renewed permits.  Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the general courts of justice, of the terms or conditions of a
renewed permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in
effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.



      (2)   Final appeal hearing.  Any decision of a hearing
officer made as a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under division
(H)(1) above may be appealed, to the City Council upon filing a written
demand within ten days of receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings held
under this division shall be conducted in accordance with procedures adopted
by the City Council. Failure to make written demand within the time specified
herein shall bar further appeal. The City Council shall make a final decision
on the appeal within 90 days of the date the appeal was filed and shall
transmit a written copy of its decision by registered or certified mail.



      (3)   Official record.  When a final decision is issued under
division (H)(2) above, the City Council shall prepare an official record of
the case that includes:



         (a)   All notices, motions and other like pleadings;



         (b)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;



         (c)    A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if
testimony is transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a
narrative summary of any testimony taken; and



         (d)   A copy of the final decision of the City Council.



      (4)   Judicial review.  Any person against whom a final order
or decision of the City Council is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted
under division (H)(2) above, may seek judicial review of the order or
decision by filing a written petition within 30 days after receipt of notice
by registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter,
with the Superior Court of the county along with a copy to the city. Within
30 days after receipt of the copy of the petition of judicial review, the
City Council shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a
certified copy of the official record.



   (I)   Permit modification.



      (1)   (a)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to
the same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as follows:



            1.   Changes in the ownership of the discharge
when no other change in the permit is indicated;



            2.   A single modification of any compliance
schedule not in excess of four months; and



            3.   Modification of compliance schedules
(construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will
not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational.



         (b)   Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.



      (2)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national
categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to the standards shall be revised to require compliance with the
standard within the time frame prescribed by the standard. Where a user,
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by
division (B) above, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard.



      (3)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall
constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. § 143-215.1(h) for
modifications.



   (J)   Permit conditions.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a
permit with conditions attached as he or she believes necessary to achieve
the purpose of this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall
contain, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five
years);



         (b)   A statement of nontransferability;



         (c)   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical
standards or local limits or both;



         (d)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law;



         (e)   Notification requirements for slug loads; and



         (f)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any
applicable compliance schedule.



      (2)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited
to, the following:



         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly
average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified
wastewater pollutants or properties;



         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology or construction of appropriate containment devices and the like,
designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the treatment works;



         (d)   Development and implementation of spill control
plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine discharges;



         (e)   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the
municipal wastewater system;



         (f)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system;



         (g)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



         (h)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedules;



         (i)   Requirements for immediate reporting of any
instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within
30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s);



         (j)   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment
standards and requirements;



         (k)   Requirements for submission of periodic
self-monitoring or special notification reports;



         (l)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans
and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in § 54.067 and
affording the POTW Director, or his or her representatives, access thereto;



         (m)   Requirements for prior notification and approval
by the POTW Director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of
any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to
introduction in the system;



         (n)   Requirements for the prior notification and
approval by the POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or
pretreatment process used by the permittee;



         (o)   Requirements for immediate notification of
excessive, accidental or slug discharges or any discharge which could cause
any problems to the system;



         (p)   A statement that compliance with the permit does
not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the terms of the permit; and



         (q)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW
Director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws,
rules and regulations.



   (K)   Permit duration.  Permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period
less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.



   (L)   Permit transfer.  Wastewater permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation.



   (M)   Permit reissuance.  A significant industrial user shall apply
for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in
accordance with this section a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the existing permit.



(Prior Code, § 8-252)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



MONITORING AND REPORTING



§ 54.055  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of its discharge, new sources and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below:



      (1)   Identifying information.  The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner;



      (2)   Environmental permits.  A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility;



      (3)   Description of operations.  A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of
the operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes;



      (4)   Flow measurement.  Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the POTW Director/superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term
average concentrations or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample
shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in § 54.064.



         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 54.065.



      (6)   Certification.  A statement, reviewed by the user’s
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards
and requirements;



      (7)   Compliance schedule.  If additional pretreatment and/or
O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide additional pretreatment and/or O & M.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance
schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in §
54.056; and



      (8)   Signature and certification.  All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 54.041(C).



(Prior Code, § 8-261)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.056  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 54.055(B)(7):



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (the events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the
progress reports to the POTW Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-262)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.057  REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW
Director a report containing the information described in § 54.055(B)(4)
through (B)(6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
54.041(C).



(Prior Code, § 8-263)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994)  Penalty, see §
54.999



§ 54.058  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the POTW Director but in no case less than twice per year (in
June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards
and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 54.041(C).



   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
nonrepresentative of its discharge.



   (C)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director,
using the procedures prescribed in § 54.064, the results of this monitoring
shall be included in the report.



(Prior Code, § 8-264)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.059  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant
changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.



   (A)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit information
as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under § 54.041.



   (B)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 54.041 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
54.041 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include,
but are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater and the discharge of
any previously unreported pollutants.



(Prior Code, § 8-265)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.060  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
POTW Director of the incident. This notification shall include the location
of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following the discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. The notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall the notification relieve the user of
any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that
all employees, who may cause a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



(Prior Code, § 8-266)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.061  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may
require.



(Prior Code, § 8-267)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.062  NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days after becoming
aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the POTW
Director monitors at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the
POTW Director samples between the user’s initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.



(Prior Code, § 8-268)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.063  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge any hazardous waste as
defined in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261 without first having obtained written permission
or a special permit, pursuant to §§ 54.040 and 54.041, from the POTW
Director. If permission to discharge hazardous waste is granted by the POTW
Director, the following procedures shall apply.



   (A)   (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous
waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge
into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. pt. 261. The notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261, the EPA
hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other).



      (2)   If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of the
waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the
following information to the extent the information is known and readily
available to the user:



         (a)   An identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes;



         (b)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of the
constituents in the wastestream discharge during the calendar month; and



         (c)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this section need be submitted only once
for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under § 54.059. The notification requirement in
this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject
to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements
of §§ 54.055, 54.057 and 54.058.



   (B)   In the case of any new regulation under § 3001 of the RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of the substance within 90 days
of the effective date of the regulations.



   (C)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (D)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



(Prior Code, § 8-269)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.064  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.



(Prior Code, § 8-270)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.065  SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   Except as indicated in division (B) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the POTW
Director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of
four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative samples of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge
limits.



   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.



(Prior Code, § 8-271)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.066  TIMING.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States postal service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Prior Code, § 8-272)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.067  RECORD KEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of the requirements.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling and
the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods
used; and the results of the analyses. These records shall remain available
for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city,
or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period
by the POTW Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-273)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.068  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   The city requires the user to provide and operate at the
user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and
flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but
the city may, when a location would be impractical or cause due hardship on
the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or
sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or
parked vehicles.



   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.



   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
city’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-274)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.069  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   The city will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether
the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements being complied
with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the city, approval authority and EPA or its
representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying or in the performance of any of its duties. The city, approval
authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user’s property
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in
force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry
into his or her premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to
enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing its specific
responsibilities. Denial of the POTW Director’s, approval authority’s or
EPA’s access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access.



(Prior Code, § 8-275)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.070  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the POTW Director, approval authority or EPA has been refused access
to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the POTW Director, approval authority or EPA may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the Superior Court of the General Court of Justice in the county.



(Prior Code, § 8-276)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.071  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and
from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the release of
the information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any request must be
asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
chapter, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit,
nondischarge permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that
the portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not
be recognized as confidential information. All records relating to compliance
with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the
approval authority and EPA upon request.



(Prior Code, § 8-277)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS



§ 54.085  UPSET.



   (A)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (B) below, are met.



   (B)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs or other relevant evidence that:



      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;



      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and



      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the
POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days:



         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause
of noncompliance;



         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and



         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



   (C)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



   (D)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.



   (E)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.



(Prior Code, § 8-291)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.086  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE.



   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
54.003(A) or the specific prohibitions in § 54.003(B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(5)
through (B)(7) and (B)(9) through (B)(22) if it can prove that it did not
know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference
and that either:



   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



(Prior Code, § 8-292)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.087  BYPASS.



   (A)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are
not subject to the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) below of this section.



   (B)   (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director, at least ten days before
the date of the bypass, if possible.



      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of
the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24
hours.



   (C)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited and the POTW Director may take
an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under
division (B) of this section.



      (2)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that
it will meet the three conditions listed in division (C)(1) above of this
section.



(Prior Code, § 8-293)  (Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed
10-1-1998)



§ 54.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Administrative remedies.



      (1)   Notification of violation.  Whenever the POTW Director
finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter,
wastewater permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained
therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may serve
upon the  person a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
Within 30 days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the
city by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.



      (2)   Consent orders.  The POTW Director is hereby empowered
to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for
the noncompliance. The orders will include specific action to be taken by the
discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified
by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an
administrative order issued pursuant to division (A)(4) below.



      (3)   Show cause hearing.



         (a)   The POTW Director may order any industrial user
who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this
chapter or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show
cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the
POTW Director determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice
shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing,
the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for the action, and a request
that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered
or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the
hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.



         (b)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence
presented at the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement
action is appropriate.



         (c)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a
prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under division (B) below
nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this section
subject to an administrative appeal under § 54.041(H).



      (4)   Administrative orders.  When the POTW Director finds
that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter,
permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the
POTW Director may issue an order to cease and desist all violations and
direct those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following:



         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements;



         (b)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time
schedule set forth in the order;



         (c)   Take appropriate remedial or preventative action
in the event of a continuing or threatened violation; and/or



         (d)   Disconnect, unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated
within a specified time period.



      (5)   Emergency suspensions.



         (a)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or wastewater permit when the suspension is necessary
in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to
violate any condition of its NPDES or nondischarge permit.



         (b)   Any user notified of a suspension of the
wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of
the notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or
the user’s waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take
steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment
to any individuals. The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit
and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date
of the above-described hearing.



      (6)   Termination of permit.



         (a)   Any user who violates the following conditions of
this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to
having its permit terminated:



            1.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of the discharge;



            2.   Failure to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



            3.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



            4.   Violation of conditions of the permit.



         (b)   Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of
the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an
opportunity to show cause under this section why the proposed action should
not be taken.



(Prior Code, § 8-281)



   (B)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder, may be fined as set forth in the fee schedule per day per
violation.



      (2)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW
Director shall consider the following:



         (a)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural
resources, to the public health, or to public or private property resulting
from the violation;



         (b)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



         (c)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or
quality or on air quality;



         (d)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



         (e)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



         (f)   Whether the violation was committed wilfully or
intentionally;



         (g)   The prior record of the violator in complying or
failing to comply with the pretreatment program; and



         (h)   The costs of enforcement to the city.



      (3)   Action for any unpaid civil penalties shall be referred
to the City Attorney for collection.



      (4)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with
this section shall be as provided in § 54.041(H).



(Prior Code, § 8-282)



   (C)   Other available remedies.  Remedies, in addition to those
previously mentioned in this chapter, are available to the POTW Director who
may use any single one or combination against a noncompliant user. Additional
available remedies include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Criminal violations.  The District Attorney for the 278
Judicial District may, at the request of the city, prosecute noncompliant
users who violate the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B.



      (2)   Injunctive relief.  Whenever a user is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the
POTW Director, through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and
permanent injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question.



      (3)   Water supply severance.  Whenever an industrial user is
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service
will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated ability to comply.



      (4)   Public nuisances.  Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued
hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code governing the
nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing,
abating or remedying the nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 8-283)



   (D)   Remedies nonexclusive.  The remedies provided for in this
chapter are not exclusive. The POTW Director may take any, all or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s
enforcement response plan. However, the POTW Director may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW Director
is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.



(Prior Code, § 8-284)



   (E)   Annual publication of significant noncompliance.  At least
annually, the POTW Director shall publish in the largest daily newspaper
circulated in the service area, a list of those industrial users which are
found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable
noncompliance in 15A NCAC 2H.0903(b)(10), with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.



(Prior Code, § 8-285)



(Ord. O-32-94, passed 3-3-1994; Ord. O-64-98, passed 10-1-1998)



CHAPTER 55:  ELECTRICITY



Section



   55.01   City to make connections



   55.02   Charges for connections



   55.03   Installations according to local rules and regulations



   55.04   Rules for deposit for and termination of electric service



   55.05   Right to shut off current for repairs



   55.06   Builders to secure permit



   55.07   No claims for damages on account of accident



   55.08   No person to damage electric system



   55.09   Joint agency to provide electric power and energy



§ 55.01  CITY TO MAKE CONNECTIONS.



   The city will, in every usual instance, connect to the provided
weatherhead of any dwelling, commercial building or other structure, provided
the electrical inspector has certified that the installation is in compliance
with the ordinances of the city, the Electrical Code, and all other
regulations effective within the corporate limits.



(Prior Code, § 8-130)



§ 55.02  CHARGES FOR CONNECTIONS.



   The city will furnish meter and meter base, but reserves the right of
access to and control of same for the purpose of inspection and readings of
meters, and for any other purpose and may remove any fixtures so placed for
any connection larger than a ten-kilowatt load. The city and the subscriber
may negotiate a 360-day contract guaranteeing that the city will receive a
part of its initial investment. This contract should establish deposits,
conditions of service, type of service (whether three-phase wye, delta, ER or
the like), specify whether a primary or secondary connection, and set out all
other conditions of the agreement.



(Prior Code, § 8-131)



§ 55.03  INSTALLATIONS ACCORDING TO LOCAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   All electrical construction, all material and appliances used in
connection with electrical work and the operation of all electrical apparatus
within the city, shall conform to special rules as may be adopted by the City
Council and to the rules and requirements as set forth in the local rules and
regulations for the installation of wiring and apparatus for electrical
purposes as they are now established, or may hereafter be amended, and the
rules and regulations are hereby made a part of this chapter. No current will
be furnished until the superintendent has inspected and approved the wiring
of the premises and electrical apparatus and the same have been found in
proper condition as to meet the requirements of the above and the insurance
laws.



(Prior Code, § 8-132)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.04  RULES FOR DEPOSIT FOR AND TERMINATION OF ELECTRIC SERVICE.



   (A)   Findings.  The City Council declares that it is in the public
interest that the city fairly and indiscriminately administer a reasonable
policy with regard to deposits for electric service and termination of
electric service by written regulations. The regulations established hereby
shall be applied in an equitable and nondiscriminatory manner to all
applicants for electric service and electric customers of the city throughout
the service area of the city without any different application in any part
thereof.



   (B)   Residential customer deposits.  Applicants fore new
residential electric service shall be required to make a deposit guaranteeing
payment of charges for electric service or for reestablishment of service.



   (C)   Business, commercial and industrial customer deposits. 
Applicants for new business, commercial or industrial electric service shall
be required to make a deposit guaranteeing payment of charges for electric
service or for reestablishment of service.



   (D)   Amount of deposit.  Whenever an applicant or customer is
required to make a deposit pursuant to these rules either for guaranteeing
payment of charges for service or for reestablishment of service, the amount
of the deposit is disclosed in the fee schedule. Deposits will draw no
interest while held by the city.



   (E)   Refund of deposit.  The deposits of existing residential,
business, commercial or industrial customers shall not be subject to refund
and shall continue to be held by the city until service is discontinued or
terminated.



   (F)   Final disposition of deposit.  When a customer has furnished
a deposit to guarantee payment of bills and service has been terminated, the
deposit will be applied to any unpaid charges or indebtedness due to the city
and the balance refunded.



   (G)   Voluntary discontinuance of service.  In order to assure
discontinuance of service at a time requested by the customer notice to the
city in advance of the proposed time of discontinuance shall be required.
When a customer desires to discontinue service, he or she shall give notice
to the city at least 24 hours in advance and the customer will be responsible
for all service consumed within the 24 hours following the time of his or her
notice to the city.



   (H)   Involuntary discontinuance of service.



      (1)   The city sometimes finds it necessary to discontinue
electric service to customers because of the following reasons:



         (a)   Failure of a customer to pay any bill for electric
service within the time allowed by these rules;



         (b)   Failure of a customer to make a deposit to
guarantee payment of charges for electric service; or



         (c)   Refusal of legitimate access to premises or damage
to or loss of property of the city on the customer’s premises for which the
customer is liable.



      (2)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue
electric service to a customer for any of the foregoing reasons, service will
be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid, any
deposit required has been made, and a default fee has been paid to reimburse
the city for expenses.



      (3)   If a customer is receiving service at more than one
location, service at any or all locations may be discontinued if bills for
service at any one or more locations are not paid within the time specified
by these rules; provided, however, that residential electric service shall
not be discontinued for nonpayment of bills for other classes of service.



      (4)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue electric
service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bill only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for
application for electric service and all bills shall contain, in addition to
the title, address, room number and telephone number of the city official in
charge of utility billing, clearly visible and easily readable provision to
the effect:



         (a)   All bills are due and payable within ten days from
billing date;



         (b)   Accounts not paid in full within 15 days from
billing date are assessed a late fee;



         (c)   Any account not paid in full within 25 days from
billing date is in default, and utility services may be discontinued at any
time thereafter without further notice. Any account in default will be
assessed a default fee whether or not utility services have been
disconnected; and



         (d)   Any customer disputing the correctness of the bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of the customer’s choosing and
may present orally or in writing the customer’s complaint and contentions
to the city official in charge of electric utility billing who shall be
authorized to order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.



      (5)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be
entertained in most cases; only questions of proper and correct billing will
be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to
the hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the
time specified.



(Prior Code, § 8-133)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.05  RIGHT TO SHUT OFF CURRENT FOR REPAIRS.



   The city reserves the right at any time to shut off the current on the
transmission line, in case of accident or for the purpose of making
connections or repairs.



(Prior Code, § 8-134)



§ 55.06  BUILDERS TO SECURE PERMIT.



   A contractor or builder desiring use of electricity for temporary use
shall submit a service application at the Utility Billing and Collection’s
Department.



(Prior Code, § 8-135)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.07  NO CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES ON ACCOUNT OF ACCIDENT.



   It is expressly agreed between the city and users and consumers of
electric current or power that no claim for damages shall be made against the
city on account of any wire connection or any other appliance breaking or
accidental failure to supply current or power.



(Prior Code, § 8-136)



§ 55.08  NO PERSON TO DAMAGE ELECTRIC SYSTEM.



   No person shall shoot at with any gun or contrivance of any kind
whatsoever, or strike or injure in any manner, any of the electric lights, or
electric light and power system of the city. Any person so doing either or
all of the above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 8-137)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.09  JOINT AGENCY TO PROVIDE ELECTRIC POWER AND ENERGY.



   (A)   The City Council makes the following findings:



      (1)   A separate joint agency North Carolina Municipal Power
Agency Number 1 (NCMPA#1) was made up of two or more municipalities in order
to finance the cost of generation and transmission projects in a more
efficient and economical manner than individual municipalities acting
individually;



      (2)   It is probable that a better financial market acceptance
will result if a joint agency is responsible for issuing all of the bonds
required for a project or projects in a timely and orderly manner and with a
uniform credit rating than individual multiple municipalities issuing
separate issues of bonds;



      (3)   It is probable that savings and other advantages may be
obtained by municipalities through separate joint operating agencies
responsible for the investigation, acquisition, construction, ownership and
operation of a generation and transmission project or projects; and



      (4)   It is probable that the existence of a separate joint
agency will foster the continuation of joint investigation, planning and
undertaking of generation and transmission projects, and the resulting
economics and efficiencies would be derived therefrom.



   (B)   Based upon these findings, the City Council determined that it
was in the best interest of the city to become a member of the joint agency
North Carolina Municipal Power Agency  Number 1 (NCMPA#1) pursuant to the
provisions of G.S. Chapter 159B for the purpose of providing power and energy
to the city and the other members thereof as provided in G.S. Chapter 159B.



   (C)   The names of two or more of the municipalities which formed
the joint agency North Carolina Municipal Power Agency Number 1 (NCMPA#1)
are: Albemarle, Bostic, Cherryville, Cornelius, Drexel, Gastonia, Granite
Falls, High Point, Huntersville, Landis, Lexington, Lincolnton, Maiden,
Monroe, Morganton, Newton, Pineville, Shelby and Statesville, all located in
this state.



(Prior Code, § 8-138)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      73.   PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHTS AND DUTIES



      74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      75.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Motorcycles and Bicycles



   70.01   Riding on motorcycle handlebars and the like



   70.02   Parking bicycles



   70.03   Bicycles, skateboards, roller blades prohibited on sidewalks



Public Trails and Lands



   70.15   Self-propelled modes of transportation on public trails and
lands



   70.16   Motor vehicles on public trails and lands



Golf Carts on Public Streets



   70.30   Purpose



   70.31   Findings; authority



   70.32   Definitions



   70.33   Golf cart design criteria



   70.34   Registration process and fee prior to usage



   70.35   Operation restrictions



   70.36   Operation on public highways



   70.37   Safety inspection



   70.38   Insurance requirements



   70.39   Liability disclaimer



   70.40   Violations



 



   70.99   Penalty for Title VII



Cross-reference:



   Creation of noise with motor vehicles, see § 93.016



   Driving vehicles in cemetery, see § 91.26



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to control traffic, see G.S. §§ 20-169, 160A-300,
160A-301, 160A-302



MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES



§ 70.01  RIDING ON MOTORCYCLE HANDLEBARS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   The operator of a motorcycle when upon a street, shall not
carry any person upon the handlebars, frame or tank of the operator’s
vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall so ride upon any vehicle listed in division
(A) above.



(Prior Code, § 13-3)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.02  PARKING BICYCLES.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in a manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(Code 1976, § 7.82)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Definition of “bicycle,” see G.S. § 20-171.1



§ 70.03  BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER BLADES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall ride upon any device propelled wholly or in part by
muscular power upon any public sidewalk and adjoining crosswalks. These
devices include but not are not limited to bicycles, skateboards, roller
blades and other like devices. This section does not apply to public safety
officials carrying out his or her official duties and those authorized to
perform maintenance on city streets and sidewalks.



(Prior Code, § 13-13)  Penalty, see § 70.99



PUBLIC TRAILS AND LANDS



§ 70.15  SELF-PROPELLED MODES OF TRANSPORTATION ON PUBLIC TRAILS AND LANDS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate bicycles, roller skates,
in-line skates or other similar self-propelled modes of transportation in an
unsafe, reckless and irresponsible manner on the Lincolnton Rail-Trail or any
extensions or expansions of the Lincolnton Rail-Trail facility or any similar
facilities constructed in the future. In addition, this section shall apply
on any pedestrian trail on any public recreation lands inside the city.



   (B)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 13-14)  (Ord. O-68-98, passed 12-10-1998)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.16  MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC TRAILS AND LANDS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate motorized vehicles on the
Lincolnton Rail-Trail or any extensions or expansions of the Lincolnton
Rail-Trail facility or any similar facilities constructed in the future. In
addition, it shall be unlawful to operate motorized vehicles on any
pedestrian trail on any public recreation lands inside the city. This section
shall not apply to the periodic use of the trail by emergency and maintenance
vehicles.



   (B)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 13-15)  (Ord. O-68-98, passed 12-10-1998)  Penalty, see §
70.99



GOLF CARTS ON PUBLIC STREETS



§ 70.30  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is intended to establish a golf cart transportation
program for the city. This plan will extend the use of golf carts for
transportation above and beyond that of use on public golf courses. This plan
is aimed to assist functional travel needs for residents who may have no
other form of transportation and to assist the city with its quest to attract
persons who are considering retiring to the area.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 70.31  FINDINGS; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The city finds and determines that:



      (1)   Establishment of a golf cart transportation plan will
serve to expand mobility to those persons not operating automobiles;



      (2)   The selected areas for golf cart travel will be roads
and highways within the city limits of Lincolnton and with speed limits of 35
miles per hour or less (unless otherwise stated) and will not cause an
adverse impact upon traffic safety; and



      (3)   The regulations and use of golf carts on streets and
highways in the city will fall under the provisions outlined throughout this
ordinance and will require liability insurance sufficient to cover the risks
involved in using a cart on the streets of the city.



   (B)    Authority is contingent upon approval of legislation.



(Ord. passed - -; Ord. O-09-14, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 70.32  DEFINITIONS. 



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.   The City of Lincolnton, NC.



   GOLF CART.   A motor vehicle having not less than four wheels in
contact with the ground and unladen weight less than 1,300 pounds which is
designed to be operated at not more than 25 miles per hour and is designed to
carry golf equipment. This does not include vehicles known as all terrain
vehicles (ATVs) or go-carts.



   GOLF CART OPERATOR.   A person having a valid North Carolina
driver’s license (or a recognized valid license from another state) who is
driving the golf cart and has full control of its operation and passengers.



   PLAN AREA.   The area within the city limits that golf carts will be
allowed to travel which includes any public street or highway (not restricted
elsewhere in this ordinance) within the city limits with a speed limit of 35
miles per hour or less.



(Ord. passed - -; Ord. O-09-14, passed 11-6-2014)



Statutory reference:



   Golf cart defined, see G.S. § 20-4.01(12b)



§ 70.33  GOLF CART DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   Minimum golf cart vehicle design criteria and travel plan
areas are hereby established. In order for a golf cart to pass the city
inspection, it must meet the requirements or minimum standards of safety
equipment as set forth in this ordinance. Golf carts must have basic
equipment supplied by the manufacturer, including a vehicle identification or
serial number.  Such equipment must include all safety devices as installed
by said manufacturer, including rear view mirror and a rear triangle
reflector of the same type required by North Carolina law.



   (B)   The following elements are minimum design and equipment
requirements:



      (1)   The golf cart must be the shape and size that conforms
to industry standards for manufactured golf carts; and



      (2)   The golf cart must be equipped and safely operated with:



         (a)   Either an unobstructed rear-view mirror and left
side mirror, or a wide angle cross bar rear-view mirror;



         (b)   Head lights and tail lights if it is to be driven
after dark, and slow moving vehicle emblems that conform to G.S. § 20-129;



         (c)   Golf carts may have “lift kits” but no golf
cart may be more than 22 inches high measured from the ground to the floor
board of the cart; and



         (d)   Any other requirements as set forth by the Police
Department for inspection.



(Ord. passed - -; Ord. O-09-14, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 70.34  REGISTRATION PROCESS AND FEE PRIOR TO USAGE.



   (A)   All golf carts must complete a golf cart registration
application and submit to Lincolnton Police Department for approval. Before
driving on public roads, the operator of a golf cart must have a valid issued
registration. The cost for the registration shall be $20 which will be due at
the time of registration and is to be renewed annually.



   (B)   Each owner must have proof of ownership, and liability
insurance, and a completed waiver of liability, releasing the city from
liability that may arise as a result of operation of a golf cart inside the
city. These documents must be in the golf cart at all times while in
operation on public roads.



   (C)   All golf carts must meet the requirements or minimum standards
of safety equipment as set forth above in this ordinance.



   (D)   All golf cart operators must present a valid driver’s
license while operating a golf cart on a public road.



   (E)   The registration sticker shall be valid for no more than one
year and must be visible on a golf cart operated on a public road.



   (F)   Lost or stolen registration stickers are the responsibility of
the owner and must be replaced before the golf cart is operated on a public
road.



(Ord. passed - -; Ord. O-09-14, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 70.35  OPERATION RESTRICTIONS.



   The following restrictions limiting the operation of golf carts in the
city shall apply:



   (A)   Only those golf carts that have the necessary safety equipment
specified herein, and have obtained the proper registration sticker from the
city may be operated under the provisions of this subchapter;



   (B)   Golf cart transportation is limited to those streets and
highways within the city limits which have a posted speed limit of 35 miles
per hour or less (unless otherwise noted below). Golf carts may not be
operated on the following streets or roadways regardless of the speed limit:



      (1)   Any part of Main Street Hwy 27 from Flint Street East to
the city limits (four lane).



      (2)   Any portion of US 321.



      (3)   Any portion of Generals Blvd.



   (C)   A golf cart operator must maintain his or her golf cart in a
safe condition at all times;



   (D)   The golf cart must have displayed a slow moving vehicle emblem
on the back of the cart; and



   (E)   Golf carts without lights may be operated only during daylight
hours. Golf carts meeting the requirements set forth below may operate at any
time:



      (1)   Golf carts having two operating headlights, one on each
side of the front of the golf cart, and two operating tail lights, one on
each side of the rear of the cart; all four lights must be visible from a
distance of 500 feet; and



      (2)   If a mechanical turn signal indicator is not installed,
then hand signals are required for turns.



   (F)   Golf carts may cross a road with a posted speed limit greater
than 35 mph. However, once this segment of road has been transversed, the
golf cart is still required to travel only on or along a roadway with a speed
limit of 35 mph or less. Golf carts must cross in a manner that is the most
direct route in order to decrease crossing distance, i.e., no riding along a
road or crossing at an angle. Under no circumstance is a golf cart allowed to
cross a control access facility other than at bridges which cross over or
under a control access facility.



(Ord. passed - -; Ord. O-09-14, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 70.36  OPERATION ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a golf cart on a public street or
highway in the city unless the following requirements are met:



   (A)   Golf cart must display a slow moving vehicle emblem on the
back of the golf cart;



   (B)   Golf carts must display a valid city registration sticker;



   (C)   No person shall operate a golf cart on a public street or
highway in the city unless said person has a valid North Carolina driver’s
license or a valid, recognized, out-of-state license in accordance with G.S.
§ 20-7;



   (D)   Golf carts must be operated in accordance with all applicable
state and local laws and ordinances, including all laws, regulations and
ordinances pertaining to the possession and use of drugs and alcoholic
beverages;



   (E)   Only the number of people the golf cart is designed to seat
may ride on a golf cart. Additionally, passengers shall not be carried on the
part of a golf cart designed to carry golf bags;



   (F)   Golf carts shall not be operated during inclement weather or
when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions;



   (G)   Golf carts shall not be operated in a negligent manner. For
the purpose of this division (G), TO OPERATE IN A NEGLIGENT MANNER is defined
as the operation of a golf cart in such a manner as to endanger any person or
property, or to obstruct, hinder or impede the lawful course of travel of any
motor vehicle or the lawful use by any pedestrian of public streets,
sidewalks, paths, trails, walkways or parks;



   (H)   The city may prohibit the operation of golf carts on any
street or highway if the City Council determines that the prohibition is
necessary in the interest of safety;



   (I)   Golf carts may not be operated on any public street or roadway
in the city during one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise
unless equipped with the proper headlights and tail lights listed above;



   (J)   Golf carts must be parked in accordance with the laws and
ordinances which apply to any parked vehicle in the city;



   (K)   Golf carts are strictly prohibited from traveling upon or
parking on any sidewalk within the city;



   (L)   Golf carts are required to follow the rules and regulations of
any other vehicle during special events and are not permitted to enter
special event areas unless the golf cart is listed on the special event
permit and a part of the event; and



   (M)   Golf carts must be operated at the right edge of the roadway
and must yield to all vehicular and pedestrian traffic.



(Ord. passed - -; Ord. O-09-14, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 70.37  SAFETY INSPECTION.



   (A)   No golf cart may be operated on any street or highway in the
city without first passing a safety inspection which will be conducted prior
to the issuance of a city registration sticker. Furthermore, no registration
sticker will be issued until the operator presents proof that the golf cart
is fully insured, and the operator has a valid North Carolina driver’s
license or recognized valid driver’s license from another state.



   (B)   To pass the safety inspection for the city and to obtain a
special use permit, the golf cart must have the following:



      (1)   Headlights and tail lights if the operator plans to
drive after dark;



      (2)   Rubber or equivalent tires;



      (3)   Adequate steering gear, brakes, emergency or parking
brake, rear-view mirror, adequately fixed drivers seat;



      (4)   All other factory installed safety or mechanical
systems, including checking for gasoline or propane leaks;



      (5)   Speed governor if gasoline powered; and



      (6)   Golf carts with “lift kits” may not be more than 22
inches high measured from floorboard of cart to the ground.



(Ord. passed - -; Ord. O-09-14, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 70.38  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   Every golf cart and driver thereof shall have in full force and effect,
a valid insurance policy as set forth in G.S. § 20-309 of the state motor
vehicle laws.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 70.39  LIABILITY DISCLAIMER.



   This section is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Golf
carts are not designed or manufactured to be used on public streets, and the
city in no way advocates or endorses their operation on public streets and
roadways. The city, by regulating such operation, is merely trying to address
obvious safety issues, and adoption of this section is not to be relied upon
as a determination that operating on public streets and roadways is safe or
advisable if done in accordance with this section. All persons who operate or
ride upon golf carts on public streets, or rides, do so at their own risk and
peril, and must be observant of and attentive to the safety of themselves and
others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicycles and
pedestrians. The city has no liability under any theory of liability and the
city assumes no liability for permitting golf carts to be operated on public
streets and roadways. Any person who operates a golf cart is responsible for
procuring liability insurance sufficient to cover the risk involved in using
a golf cart on the public streets and roadways.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 70.40  VIOLATIONS.



   Any operation of a golf cart in violation of either this subchapter or
the motor vehicle laws of the state shall be guilty of the same traffic law
violations and charged the same as any other driver of any registered vehicle
in the state and will lose its special use permit with the city for a period
of not less than one year.



(Ord. passed - -; Ord. O-09-14, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 70.99  PENALTY FOR TITLE VII.



   Any violation of the sections of this chapter set forth below shall
subject the violator to those civil penalties hereinafter enumerated. Civil
penalties that are not voluntarily paid by the violator may be recovered by
the city by a civil action in the nature of a debt.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Notice to be affixed.  Whenever a member of the Police
Department of the city or other person authorized with the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter regulating parking of vehicles shall find that any
of those provisions are being, or have been violated by the owner or operator
of the vehicle, the officer or person shall notify the owner or operator of
the vehicle of the violation by conspicuously attaching to the vehicle a
parking violation notice or citation.



   (C)   Responsibility for penalty.  Upon receiving a notice or
citation serving as notice of violation of the parking regulations set forth
in these sections, the owner or operator of the vehicle found in violation
shall be responsible for penalties herein established.



   (D)   Penalty.



      (1)   Any penalty for parking violation that is not paid
within 15 days of issuance will accrue an additional penalty of $5 per 15
days it remains unpaid. After 15 days of issuance of a parking violation, a
delinquent notice will be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle.



      (2)   The maximum total combined fines and penalties for a
single $20 violation shall be $50. When the maximum is reached for either a
single violation or receives three or more for the same owner or operator, he
or she will be notified in writing of the intent of the city to pursue claims
through appropriate civil action or through referral to a collection agency.
Once a civil action is initiated, any fees or costs involved in the civil
action will be added to the settlement in each action.



      (3)   The penalty for any violation of § 72.02, Chapter 75
and Chapter 74, Schedule V shall be $20.



(Prior Code, § 13-12)  (Ord. O-49-97, passed 4-10-1997; Ord. O-05-10,
passed 12-2-2010)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Vehicles shall not be driven on the sidewalk



   71.02   Clinging to moving vehicles



   71.03   Vehicles with lugs prohibited



   71.04   Cutting corners



   71.05   Driving through funeral processions



   71.06   Cruising



§ 71.01  VEHICLES SHALL NOT BE DRIVEN ON THE SIDEWALK.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except
at a permanent or temporary driveway.



(Prior Code, § 13-1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.02  CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.



   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates or any toy vehicle, shall not attach the same, or the person’s self,
to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.



(Prior Code, § 13-2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  VEHICLES WITH LUGS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall drive a tractor or other vehicle with metal lugs or
other metal projections on the supporting wheels, or drag a harrow, or disc
harrow or other heavy object or vehicle of any kind whatsoever with metal
supporting wheels except smooth tread wheels, over any hard-surfaced street
or sidewalk. No person shall drag any heavy metal or wood article or
substance over the streets or sidewalks or any article or substance which
will scar or break or tear or unusually damage the surface of the streets or
sidewalks.



(Prior Code, § 13-4)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Restrictions as to tire equipment, see G.S. § 20-122



§ 71.04  CUTTING CORNERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle traveling
upon a street which is intersected by another street to turn from the street
for the purpose of entering the intersecting street except at and through an
intersection. Turns at the intersection shall be made in accordance with
applicable traffic rules and regulations. The purpose and intent of this
section is to make it unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn from one
street onto property which abuts on one or more of the intersecting streets
in order to enter the intersecting street. It will not apply to a driver of a
vehicle who turns from one street onto property abutting the street for the
purpose of stopping at a business or other establishment located thereon.



   (B)   Operation of a vehicle in the manner described in division (A)
above without stopping at a business or other establishment shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of the driver’s intent to violate this section.



(Prior Code, § 13-5)  (Ord. passed 8-9-1983)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.05  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   No vehicle may be driven through a funeral procession, except Fire
Department vehicles, police vehicles and ambulances, and only if the same are
responding to calls.



(Prior Code, § 13-6)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.06  CRUISING.



   (A)   In order to help prevent traffic congestion, obstruction of
streets, sidewalks or parking lots, impediment of access of shopping centers
or other buildings open to the public or the interference with the use of
property, or the conduct of business in the area adjacent thereto, no person
shall drive or permit a motor vehicle under his or her care, custody or
control to be driven past a traffic-control point three or more times within
a two-hour period from 8:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday, in or
around a posted no cruising area.



   (B)   At every point where a public street or alley becomes or
provides ingress to a no cruising area, there shall be posted a sign which
designates no cruising and gives the applicable time period. A no cruising
area is an area designated where no person shall drive or permit a motor
vehicle under his or her care, custody or control to be driven past a
traffic-control point three or more times within a two-hour period.



   (C)   A traffic-control point, as used in this section, means any
point or points within the no cruising area established by the Police
Department for the purposes of monitoring cruising.



   (D)   No violations shall occur except upon the third passage by the
same traffic-control point within the aforementioned two-hour period.



   (E)   No area shall be designated or posted as a no cruising area
except upon passage of a resolution by the Council specifically mandating the
designation and posting for a particular area.



   (F)   This action shall not apply to in-service emergency vehicles,
taxicabs for hire, buses and other vehicles being driven for business
purposes.



   (G)   Where there is a violation of any provision of this section,
the city shall take the following actions.



      (1)   A police officer shall issue a citation for a violation
of this section subjecting the violator to a civil penalty as set forth in
the fee schedule to be paid within ten days, which penalty shall provide for
an additional delinquency charge as set forth in the fee schedule upon
nonpayment, and which penalty and delinquency charge may be removed by the
city in a civil action pursuant to § 10.99.



      (2)   Upon any subsequent issuance of citation within a
seven-day period, a police officer shall issue to the violator a traffic
summons in lieu of a civil citation. Violation of this section shall be
punishable by a fine as set forth in the fee schedule.



(Prior Code, § 13-58)  (Ord. O-27-93, passed 10-7-1993; Res. passed
10-7-1993)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   Use of city parking lot adjacent to City Hall



   72.02   Handicapped parking



   72.03   Parking oversized vehicles, containers or trailers on streets



   72.04   Parking in front of private driveway, fire hydrant, fire
station, intersection of curb lines or fire lane



   72.05   Special event parking



Standing



   72.15   Standing in passenger curb loading zone



   72.16   Standing in freight curb loading zone



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  USE OF CITY PARKING LOT ADJACENT TO CITY HALL.



   (A)   The parking spaces in the city parking lot shall be used
without limitation to vehicles owned by the city and other vehicles
authorized by the City Manager.



   (B)   Parking in all spaces in the city parking lot shall be limited
to 30 minutes, except as to vehicles owned by the city or other authorized
vehicles, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.



   (C)   Any vehicle not owned by the city or not authorized by the
City Manager, parking in any space in the city parking lot exceeding 30
minutes shall be in violation of this code. This shall apply only between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.



   (D)   The police officers of the city shall patrol the parking lot
for the purpose of determining if any vehicles remain in any parking place
longer than the designated time, and in the event there is a violation, then
any member of the Police Department shall issue a citation and/or leave a
parking ticket on the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 13-7)  (Ord. passed 2-15-1984)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   The parking areas or spaces set out in Chapter 75, Schedule V shall be
reserved and designated as parking areas for handicapped citizens, upon the
city posting signs or street markings designating the areas for handicapped
parking.



(Prior Code, § 13-8)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.03  PARKING OVERSIZED VEHICLES, CONTAINERS OR TRAILERS ON STREETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle or container, as
described in division (B) of this section, in any residentially zoned area of
the city. No vehicle or trailer including those in divisions (C) (1) and (2)
below shall block the street or interfere with emergency response passage or
any normal flow of traffic.



   (B)   A vehicle to which this section shall be applicable shall be a
truck, tractor, trailer, (regardless of size), semi-trailer or bus which has
a gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds or which has a length of 270 inches
(22 feet and six inches) overall or a width in excess of 96 inches (eight
feet) or a height in excess of 96 inches (eight feet). Also included is any
dumpster, storage container, POD etc.



   (C)   This section shall not be applicable to the following vehicles:



      (1)   A vehicle in the process of being loaded, unloaded or in
the performance of service to or for property located adjacent to the public
street; or



      (2)   A vehicle temporarily rendered inoperable by mechanical
difficulty for the time necessary to effect necessary repairs, but in no
event to exceed three hours.



(Prior Code, § 13-59)  (Ord. O-47-96, passed - - ; Am. Ord. O-05-19, passed
6-6-2019)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.04  PARKING IN FRONT OF PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, FIRE HYDRANT, FIRE STATION,
INTERSECTION OF CURB LINES OR FIRE LANE.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to adopt G.S. § 20-162 and to
allow for the City of Lincolnton Police Department to charge violations on a
city parking citation with a civil penalty fine of $20.



   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether
attended or unattended, upon a highway in front of a private driveway or
within 15 feet in either direction of a fire hydrant or the entrance to a
fire station, nor within 25 feet from the intersection of curb lines or if
none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an
intersection of highways; provided that local authorities may by ordinance
decrease the distance within which a vehicle may park in either direction of
a fire hydrant.



   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether
attended or unattended, upon any public vehicular area, street, highway or
roadway in any area designated as a fire lane. This prohibition includes
designated fire lanes in shopping centers or mall parking lots and all other
public vehicular areas. Provided, however, persons loading or unloading
supplies or merchandise may park temporarily in a fire lane located in a
shopping center or mall parking lot as long as the vehicle is not left
unattended. The prima fascia rule of evidence created by G.S. § 20-162.1 is
applicable to the maximum combined fines and penalties for a single $20
violation shall be $50 dollars. When the maximum is reached for either a
single violation or more than three violations for the same owner or
operator, he or she will be notified in writing of the intent of the city to
pursue claims through appropriate civil action or through referral to a
collection agency. Once a civil action is initiated, any fees or costs
involved in the civil action will be added to the settlement in each action.
The owner of a vehicle parked in violation of this division shall be deemed
to have appointed any state, county or municipal law enforcement officer as
his or her agent for the purpose of arranging for the transportation and safe
storage of such vehicle. No law enforcement officer removing such a vehicle
shall be held criminally or civilly liable in any way for any acts or
omissions arising out of or caused by carrying out or enforcing any
provisions of this division, unless the conduct of the officer amounts to
wanton misconduct or intentional wrong.



(Ord. O-60-11, passed 12-2-2010)



§ 72.05  SPECIAL EVENT PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle attended or
unattended, on either side of Pine Street between Flint Street and Grove
Street during the Apple Festival, Hog Happenin, or any other special event
deemed necessary by the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to a park a vehicle attended or
unattended, on either side of the 100 and 200 blocks of East Main Street
during the Fourth of July parade, Christmas parade or any other parade deemed
necessary by the city.



   (C)   Vehicles parked in these areas in violation of this section,
as described in division (A) or (B) above, will be towed at the owner’s
expense.



(Ord. passed 8-13-2015)  Penalty, see § 70.99



STANDING



§ 72.15  STANDING IN PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period
of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to the curb loading zone are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed three minutes.



(Prior Code, § 13-10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.16  STANDING IN FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length
of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up and
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to the zones are in effect. In no
case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.



(Prior Code, § 13-11)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 73:  PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHTS AND DUTIES



Section



   73.01   Pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals



   73.02   Pedestrians’ right-of-way in crosswalk



   73.03   When pedestrian shall yield



   73.04   Pedestrians walking along roadways



   73.05   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business



§ 73.01  PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals, but at all
other places pedestrians shall be granted the rights and be subject to the
restrictions stated in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 13-20)



Statutory reference:



   Pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals, see G.S. § 20-172



§ 73.02  PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALK.



   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in
operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down
or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no
pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or
run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible for
the driver to yield. A pedestrian’s right-of-way in a crosswalk is modified
under the condition and as stated in § 73.03(B).



   (B)   When any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 13-21)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Pedestrians’ right-of-way at crosswalks, see G.S. § 20-173



§ 73.03  WHEN PEDESTRIAN SHALL YIELD.



   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the road.



   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 13-22)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Crossing at other than crosswalks; walking along highway, see G.S. §
20-174



§ 73.04  PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.



   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along
and upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.



(Prior Code, § 13-23)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Crossing at other than crosswalks; walking along highway, see G.S. §
20-174



§ 73.05  PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.



   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or
highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle
while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.



(Prior Code, § 13-24)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Pedestrians soliciting rides, employment, business or funds upon
highways or streets, see G.S. § 20-175



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Stop intersections



      II.   Traffic-control signal light locations



      III.   One-way streets



      IV.   No left turn intersections



      V.   No complete or “U” turns



      VI.   Speed limits on state maintained streets



      VII.   Speed limits on city maintained streets



      VIII.   Cruising



      IX.   No right turn on red



      X.   No through truck traffic



SCHEDULE I:  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   A stop is required before entering at the following intersections.



 


Street

 

Intersection





Academy Street
 
Chestnut Street


Academy Street
 
Church Street


Academy Street
 
East Rhodes Street


Academy Street
 
Pine Street


Academy Street
 
Sumner Street


Academy Street
 
Sycamore Street


Anastasia Lane
 
Valerie Drive


Aspen Street
 
Battleground Road


Aspen Street
 
Bonview Avenue


Aspen Street
 
Cherry Street


Aspen Street
 
Chestnut Street


Aspen Street
 
Dixon Street


Aspen Street
 
Laboratory Road


Aspen Street
 
Massapoag Road


Aspen Street
 
Motz Avenue


Aspen Street
 
Rhodes Street


Aspen Street
 
Skip Lawing Drive


Aspen Street
 
Westview Drive


Battleground Road
 
Linwood Drive


Battleground Road
 
McGinnis Avenue


Battleground Road
 
Westview Drive


Bonview Avenue
 
Battleground Road


Bonview Avenue
 
Forney Avenue


Bonview Avenue
 
Government Street


Bonview Avenue
 
Norman Fair Avenue


Bonview Avenue
 
North High Street


Bonview Avenue
 
Roberta Avenue


Cedar Street
 
Carter Street


Cedar Street
 
Dixon Street


Cedar Street
 
Jennings Street


Cedar Street
 
McBee Street


Cedar Street
 
Pine Street


Cedar Street
 
Rhodes Street


Cedar Street
 
Sumner Street


Cedar Street
 
Sycamore Street


Church Street
 
D Street


Church Street
 
Fairfield Circle


Church Street
 
Government Street


Church Street
 
High Street


Church Street
 
Lee Street


Congress Street
 
Poplar Street


East Park Drive
 
Carter Street


East Park Drive
 
Jennings Street


East Park Drive
 
East Rhodes Street


East Pine Street
 
Marcia H. Cloninger Rail Trail


Edwards Street
 
Catawba Street


Edwards Street
 
Cleveland Street


Edwards Street
 
Gaston Street


Edwards Street
 
Lincoln Street


Edwards Street
 
Sycamore Street


Flint Street
 
Alexander Street


Flint Street
 
Catawba Street


Flint Street
 
Church Street


Flint Street
 
Dixon Street


Flint Street
 
Dogwood Drive


Flint Street
 
Hillcrest Drive


Flint Street
 
Hoke Street


Flint Street
 
McBee Street


Flint Street
 
Pine Street


Flint Street
 
Sumner Street


Flint Street
 
Sycamore Street


Flint Street
 
Water Street


Gaston Street
 
Center Drive


Gaston Street
 
Clark Drive


Gaston Street
 
Magnolia Street


Grove Street
 
Brookside Drive


Grove Street
 
Childs Street


Grove Street
 
Church Street


Grove Street
 
Congress Street


Grove Street
 
Linwood Drive


Grove Street
 
Louise Avenue


Grove Street
 
Madison Street


Grove Street
 
Pine Street


Grove Street
 
Second Street


Grove Street
 
Sycamore Street


Grove Street
 
Third Street


Grove Street
 
Victor Avenue


Grove Street
 
Water Street


Government Street
 
Charlesvoix


Government Street
 
Grier Street


High Street
 
Charlesvoix


Hollybrook Avenue
 
McBee Street


Hollybrook Avenue
 
Pine Street


Ivan Lane
 
Anastasia Lane


Jonas Drive
 
Mockingbird Lane


Jonas Drive
 
Robin Road


Kennedy Drive
 
Jonas Drive


Laboratory Road
 
Massapoag Road


Laboratory Road
 
Sigmon Street


Laurel Street
 
Alexander Street


Laurel Street
 
Center Drive


Laurel Street
 
Church Street


Laurel Street
 
Clark Drive


Laurel Street
 
Congress Street


Laurel Street
 
Dixon Street


Laurel Street
 
Flint Street


Laurel Street
 
Hoke Street


Laurel Street
 
Liberty Street


Laurel Street
 
Lincoln Street


Laurel Street
 
Magnolia Street


Laurel Street
 
McBee Street


Laurel Street
 
Pine Street


Laurel Street
 
Rhodes Street


Laurel Street
 
Rock Creek Drive


Laurel Street
 
Sumner Street


Laurel Street
 
Sycamore Street


Laurel Street
 
Tait Street


Lauren Lane
 
Valerie Drive


Lee Avenue
 
Second Street


Lincoln Street
 
Flint Street


Lincoln Street
 
Oak Street


Linden Street
 
Lincoln Street


Linwood Drive
 
Battleground Road


Louise Avenue
 
Forney Avenue


Louise Avenue
 
Roberta Avenue


Madison Street
 
Congress Street


Madison Street
 
Grove Street


Madison Street
 
Motz Avenue


Madison Street
 
Second Street


Main Street
 
Abernathy Street


Main Street
 
Edwards Street


Main Street
 
Government Street


Main Street
 
High Street


Main Street
 
Hollybrook Avenue


Main Street
 
Magnolia Street


Main Street
 
Montgomery Street


Main Street
 
Oak Street


Main Street
 
West Main Extension


Mallory Tai Drive
 
Olivia Lane


North Street
 
Bonview Avenue


Oak Street
 
Alexander Street


Oak Street
 
Dixon Street


Oak Street
 
Hoke Street


Oak Street
 
Liberty Street


Oak Street
 
McBee Street


Oak Street
 
Pine Street


Oak Street
 
Sycamore Street


Pine Street
 
Laurel Street


Pine Street
 
Poplar Street


Poplar Street
 
Carter Street


Poplar Street
 
Congress Street


Poplar Street
 
Jennings Street


Poplar Street
 
McBee Street


Poplar Street
 
Pine Street


Poplar Street
 
Rhodes Street


Rhodes Street
 
Poplar Street


Poplar Street
 
Sumner Street


Poplar Street
 
Sycamore Street


Robin Road
 
Quail Trail


Rock Creek Drive
 
Crestview Drive


Rock Creek Drive
 
Kennedy Drive


Rock Creek Drive
 
Wendover Drive


Rhyne Street
 
Congress Street


Rhyne Street
 
Second Street


Second Street
 
Willow Street


Sherrill Street
 
Alexander Street


Spring Meadows Drive
 
Valerie Drive


State Street
 
Alexander Street


Sycamore Street
 
Laurel Street


Sycamore Street
 
Poplar Street


Tait Street
 
Crestview Drive


Tait Street
 
Gaston Street


Third Street
 
Willow Street


Valerie Drive
 
Olivia Lane


Victor Avenue
 
River Drive


West Park Drive
 
East Rhodes Street


Westview Drive
 
McGinnis Avenue




 



(Prior Code, § 13-37)  (Ord. O-28-89, passed 12-7-1989; Ord. O-29-89,
passed 12-7-1989; Ord. O-05-14, passed 7-10-2014; Ord. O-04-2018, passed
4-5-2018; Ord. - - , passed - - ; Ord. O-12-18, passed 10-4-2018)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LIGHT LOCATIONS.



   Traffic-control signal lights shall be located at the following
intersections.



 


Street

 

And

 

Street





Congress Street
 
 
 
Academy Street


North Academy Street
 
 
 
East Pine Street


North Academy Street
 
 
 
East Sycamore Street


North Government Street
 
 
 
West Sycamore Street


South Academy Street
 
 
 
East Water Street


South Cedar Street
 
 
 
East Water Street


South Government Street
 
 
 
West Congress Street


South Laurel Street
 
 
 
East Water Street


South Poplar Street
 
 
 
East Water Street




 



(Prior Code, § 13-38)  (Ord. O-04-2018, passed 4-5-2018; Ord. - -, passed -
-)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III:  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   The following streets or portions of streets are designated for
vehicular traffic in one direction only.



 


Street

 

Direction

 

Street





East Sycamore Street
 
Westerly
 
Between North Flint Street and the northeast quadrant of the Court Square


East Water Street
 
Easterly
 
The southeast quadrant of the Court Square to South Flint Street


North Academy
 
Northerly
 
Between East Main Street and East Sycamore Street


Railroad Street
 
Southerly
 
From East Main Street (Highways 27 and 150) to Lithia Inn Road


South Academy Street
 
Southerly
 
From East Main Street to East Water Street


Sunset Drive
 
Northerly
 
Between Skip Lawing Drive and West Dixon Street


Sunset Drive
 
Southerly
 
From West Dixon Street to Skip Lawing Drive


West Dixon Street
 
Easterly
 
Between Sunset Drive and North Aspen Street


West Dixon Street
 
Westerly
 
From North Aspen Street to Sunset Drive




 



(Prior Code, § 13-39)  (Ord. O-25-89, passed 9-7-1989; Ord. O-13-92, passed
1-9-1992; Ord. O-24-93, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. O-38-95, passed 12-7-1995; Ord.
O-50-97, passed 4-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV:  NO LEFT TURN INTERSECTIONS.



   There shall be no left turns at the following intersections.



 


Street

 

And

 

Street





Court Square
 
 
East Main Street


Court Square
 
 
East Sycamore Street


Court Square
 
 
East Water Street


Court Square
 
 
North Aspen Street


Court Square
 
 
South Aspen Street


Court Square
 
 
West Main Street


Court Square
 
 
West Sycamore Street


Court Square
 
 
West Water Street


East Main Street
 
 
Academy Street


East Water Street
 
 
Academy Street


East Water Street
 
 
Cedar Street


East Water Street
 
 
Flint Street


East Water Street
 
 
Laurel Street


East Water Street
 
 
Poplar Street


Traveling north on South Laurel Street
 

at

 
East Main Street




 



(Prior Code, § 13-40)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE V:  NO COMPLETE OR “U” TURNS.



   There shall be no complete or “U” turns at the following
intersections.



 


Street

 


 

Street



Aspen
 

at

 
The Court Square


Aspen Street
 

within

 
One block of the Court Square


East Main Street
 

from

 
Court Square to C. & N. W. Railway bridge


Main
 

and

 
Academy


Main
 

at

 
Court Square


West Main Street
 

from

 
Court Square to Government Street



 



(Prior Code, § 13-41)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VI:  SPEED LIMITS ON STATE MAINTAINED STREETS.



 


Description

 

Speed Limit





East Main Street from intersection of Cedar Street to Court Square
 

20 mph



West Main Street from Court Square to Grove Street completely around Court
Square
 

20 mph



From West Main Street to Congress Street
 

20 mph



Congress Street from Cedar Street to Laurel Street
 

25 mph



North Aspen Street (SR 1405) from Cherry Street, a point 0.83 mile south of
SR 1265, northward for 0.28 mile to a point 0.55 mile south of SR 1265
(Lincoln High School in effect from 30 minutes before to 30 minutes after
school begins and ends on school days only)
 

25 mph



Story Street (SR 1434), subdivision wide, from SR 1001 (Salem Church Road)
northward to a point 0.06 mile northeast of SR 1001 (Salem Church Road)
 

25 mph



US 321 from SR 1405 northward to a point 0.16 mile south of SR 1463, the
northern corporate limit of Lincolnton
 

45 mph



US 321 BUS between SR 1405 and a point 0.16 mile north of SR 1463
 

45 mph



Laboratory Road (SR 1238) from a point 9.22 mile south of SR 1427, the
southern corporate limits, northward to Aspen Street (SR 1406)
 

50 mph





 



(Prior Code, §§ 13-42, 13-44, 13-54)  (Ord. passed 6-9-1988; Ord. O-13-88,
passed 9-8-1988; Ord. O-9-91, passed 12-12-1991; Ord. O-05-07, passed
10-4-2007; Ord. O-08-14, passed 9-4-2014)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VII:  SPEED LIMITS ON CITY MAINTAINED STREETS.



 


Description

 

Speed Limit






Doris Court

 

15 mph




Julia Drive

 

15 mph




Melinda Drive

 

15 mph




Old Tram Way

 

15 mph




Carter Street

 

20 mph




Circle Drive

 

20 mph




Danbrook Circle

 

20 mph




McGinnis Avenue

 

20 mph




South Cedar Street from Congress Street to Carter Street

 

20 mph




Turner Street

 

20 mph




Williams Street

 

20 mph




Bonview Avenue from North Aspen Street to Grove Street

 

25 mph




Catawba Avenue

 

25 mph




Cline Street

 

25 mph




Congress Street from South Grove Street to South Laurel Street

 

25 mph




Deaton Avenue

 

25 mph




Edwards Street

 

25 mph




Forney Avenue

 

25 mph




Hoke Street, entire length of the street from Flint Street to the dead-end
portion past Cedar Street

 

25 mph




Hunter Oaks Lane

 

25 mph




Huntington Hills Drive

 

25 mph




Jonas Drive

 

25 mph




Lincoln Street

 

25 mph




Linden Street

 

25 mph




Lynwood Drive from North Grove Street to Battleground Road

 

25 mph




Madison Street from Childs Street to South Grove Street

 

25 mph




Magnolia Street

 

25 mph




Mauney Drive

 

25 mph




Mockingbird Lane

 

25 mph




North Cedar Street

 

25 mph




North Flint Street from East Main Street north to the city limits

 

25 mph




North Laurel Street

 

25 mph




North Oak Street

 

25 mph




Old Farm Road

 

25 mph




Periwinkle Street

 

25 mph




Pine Street from North Flint Street to Abernathy Street

 

25 mph




Pine Street from North Grove Street to North Flint Street

 

25 mph




Quail Trail (from Robin Road to Mockingbird Lane)

 

25 mph




Rock Creek Drive (from South Laurel to Tait Street)

 

25 mph




Skip Lawing Drive from Battleground Road to North Aspen Street

 

25 mph




South Poplar from East Main Street to Buff Street

 

25 mph




State Street from the intersection with Sumner Street, north to its dead end

 

25 mph




Sycamore Street from North Grove Street to west side of Court Square and from
east side of Court Square to North Flint Street

 

25 mph




Tait Street

 

25 mph




Water Street from South Grove Street to west side of Court Square from the
east side of Court Square to South Flint Street

 

25 mph




North Flint Street from Dogwood Avenue north to the city limits

 

35 mph




NC 27/150, from SR 1286 (Newbold Street), eastward to SR 1287 (Prison Camp
Road) (G.E. Massey Elementary School zone in effect from 30 minutes before to
30 minutes after school begins and ends on school days only

 

45 mph




NC 27/150, from US 321B/NC 150, eastward to NC 150

 

45 mph




SR 1405 from a point 9.55 mile south of SR 1265, northward to US 321

 

45 mph





 



(Prior Code, §§ 13-43, 13-45, 13-53)  (Ord. passed 3-7-1985; Ord. O-05-86,
passed 12-11-1986; Ord. O-06-91, passed 1-10-1991; Ord. O-11-91, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. O-12-92, passed - -; Ord. O-19-92, passed - -; Ord. O-22-93,
passed 6-3-1993; Ord. O-54-97, passed 8-14-1997; Ord. O-58-97, passed
11-6-1997; Ord. O-59-98, passed 3-5-1998; Ord. O-61-98, passed 6-4-1998; Ord.
O-01-00, passed 3-2-2000; Ord. O-05-04, passed 6-3-2004; Ord. O-06-04, passed
10-7-2004; Ord. O-05-06, passed 12-14-2006; Ord. O-04-06, passed 9-7-2006;
Ord. O-01-08, passed 3-6-2008; Ord. O-01-13, passed 5-2-2013; Ord. O-01-14,
passed 2-6-2014; Ord. passed 10-1-2015; Ord. O-02-17, passed 3-2-2017; Ord.
O-15-17, passed 10-5-2017; Ord. O-04-2018, passed 4-5-2018; Ord. - -, passed
- -; Ord. O-01-2019, passed 4-4-2019)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VIII:  CRUISING.



   The following streets or portions of streets are hereby designated as a
no cruising area.



 


Street





Downtown area:


   Academy Street


   Cedar Street


   Government Street Court Square


   High Street


   Oak Street


   Poplar Street




 



(Prior Code, § 13-58)  (Ord. O-27-93, passed 10-7-1993; Res. passed
10-7-1993)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Cruising, see § 71.06



SCHEDULE IX:  NO RIGHT TURN ON RED.



   There shall be no right-turn-on-red at the following intersections.



 


Description



South Academy and East Rhodes Street



 



(Prior Code, § 13-60)  (Ord. O-69-99, passed 5-6-1999)  Penalty, see §
70.99



SCHEDULE X:  NO THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC.



   (A)   The City Council shall have the authority to declare these
streets, or part thereof, prohibited to through truck traffic when signs have
been installed and when the truck’s point of origin or point of destination
is not located on the prohibited street or part thereof.



   (B)   The word TRUCK as used in this section shall mean any vehicle
having dual tires on three or more axles.



   (C)   All streets prohibiting truck traffic shall be designated by
ordinance.



 


Street





Bonview Avenue


East Dixon Street


East Pine Street


East Sycamore Street


Gaston Street (between Edwards Street and Tait Street)


Government Street south of Congress Street


Linwood Drive


Motz Avenue


North Flint Street from Main Street to 1000 North Flint Street


South Grier Street


West Pine Street


West Sycamore Street




 



(Prior Code, § 13-61)  (Ord. O-07-01, passed 6-1-2001; Ord. O-05-02, passed
7-11-2002; Ord. O-01-2019, passed 4-4-2019)   Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 75:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Parking prohibited at all times



      II.   Parking enforced Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.



      III.   Parking limited to two hours or as designated in the
schedule below



      IV.   Parking at Court Square



      V.   Handicapped parking



      VI.   Diagonal parking



      VII.   Other restrictions - parallel parking



SCHEDULE I:  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.



   Parking is prohibited at all times on the following streets or portions
of streets.



 


Description

 

Direction





Academy Street between Congress Street and Rhodes Street
 

East side



Academy Street between Main Street and Pine Street
 

East side



Battleground Road between Skip Liming Drive and Linwood Drive
 

Both sides



Carter Street from Cedar Street to Kistler Street
 

Both sides



Church Street from distance of 150 feet west from intersection with South
Academy Street
 

South side



Church Street from Government Street to Aspen Street
 

South side



Church Street from South Aspen to South Academy
 

North side



Circle Drive from its western intersection with East Main Street to its
eastern intersection with East Main Street
 

South side



Deaton Avenue from North Aspen Street to Mauney Drive
 

Both sides



Dixon Street from Sunset Drive to North Aspen Street
 

Both sides



East Catawba Street, 1100 Block, east to end of Catawba Street
 

East



East Main Street, extending from Laurel Street in an easterly direction to
North Flint Street
 

North side



East Main Street from Cedar Street to South Flint Street
 

South side



East Main Street from Flint Street to No. 321 By-Pass
 

Both sides



East Park Drive between Rhodes Street and Jennings Street
 

Both sides



East Pine Street from Oak Street to Flint Street
 

Both sides



East Pine Street from Aspen Street to Oak Street
 

South Side



East Rhodes Street from Aspen Street to Academy Street
 

South side



East Sumner Street extending a distance of 150 feet west toward Poplar Street
from intersection with North Cedar Street
 

Both sides



East Water Street from Academy Street to Flint Street
 

South side



Grier Street from Government Street to Motz Avenue
 

East side



High Street from intersection of Church Street north to intersection with
West Pine Street
 

East side



J.Rurel Street from Congress Street to No. 321 By-Pass
 

Both sides



Laurel Street from Main Street to Church Street
 

Both sides



Laurel Street from Sycamore Street to Main Street
 

Both sides



Lee Avenue
 

West side



Mauney Drive from North Aspen Street in a westerly direction until it
dead-ends
 

Both sides



McBee Street from North Poplar Street to North Cedar Street
 

Both sides



McBee Street from Poplar Street to Cedar Street
 

South side



North Aspen Street from Pine Street to Dixon Street
 

East side



North Aspen Street from Walker Branch to city limits
 

Both sides



North Cedar Street extending from Sycamore Street north to East Vine Street
 

East side



North Flint Street from East Main Street, north to East Hoke Street
 

West side



North Flint Street from the bridge crossing Walkers Branch to the
intersection of U.S. Highway 321
 

East side



North Poplar Street from McBee Street to Sumner Street
 

East side



Old Salem Lane (including cul-de-sac)
 

Both sides



Poplar Street from Main Street to railroad bridge
 

East side



Poplar Street/Rhodes Street from intersection curb edges extending
thirty-five feet
 

All sides



Railroad Street from East Main Street to Edgewood Drive
 

South side



Rhodes Street from Academy Street to Poplar Street
 

Both sides



Riverside Drive to city limits line
 

Both sides



Skip Lawing Drive
 

East side



South Aspen Street, a distance of 145 feet from the north edge of the
railroad bridge and the east side of South Aspen Street a distance of 145
feet from the north edge of the railroad bridge. (The area restricted by this
is in front of the Southern Bell building on both sides of South Aspen Street
extending from the bridge northward 145 feet)
 

West side



South Aspen Street between Cherry Street and Dixon Street
 

East side



South Aspen Street between Rhodes Street and Motz Avenue
 

West side



South Edwards Street from East Main Street south to intersection with East
Gaston Street
 

South



South High Street, 300 block, between Church Street and Congress Street
 

East side



South Linden Street from East Gaston Street to East Lincoln Street
 




South Poplar Street from Water Street to the south side of the bridge
 

Both sides



South Poplar Street from Congress Street to Buff Street
 

West side



Sunset Drive from Skip Lawing Drive to Dixon Street
 

Both sides



Sycamore Street from Court Square to High Street except on north side at City
Hall
 

Both sides



Sycamore Street from Flint Street to North Poplar Street
 

North side



Water Street from Court Square to Flint Street
 

South side



West Childs Street from South Madison Street to South Grove Street
 

South side



West Park Drive between Rhodes Street and Jennings Street
 

Both sides



West Water Street from South Government Street to Court Square
 

North side





 



(Prior Code, § 13-30)  (Ord. passed 11-6-1980; Ord. passed 8-9-1983; Ord.
passed 11-15-1984; Ord. passed 8-25-1985; Ord. passed 7-10-1986; Ord. passed
10-9-1986; Ord. passed 5-3-1990; Ord. passed 10-4-1990; Ord. O-25-93, passed
9-2-1993; Ord. O-26-93, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. O-48-96, passed 12-5-1996; Ord.
O-73-99, passed 8-5-1999; Ord. O-74-99, passed 8-5-1999; Ord. O-11-01, passed
9-6-2001; Ord. O-06-02, passed 9-5-2002; Ord. O-01-03, passed 2-13-2003; Ord.
O-06-08, passed 12-4-2008; Ord. O-04-17, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. O-04-18,
passed 4-5-2018; Ord. - -, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II:  PARKING ENFORCED MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY 8:00 A.M. TO 4:00 P.M..



   Except as otherwise permitted in Chapter 75, Schedule IV:



 


Enforced

 

Location



Parking enforced Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
 
All hard surfaced streets



 



(Prior Code, § 13-31)  (Ord. O-07-04, passed 12-9-2004; Ord. O-04-17,
passed 4-6-2017)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III:  PARKING LIMITED TO TWO HOURS OR AS DESIGNATED IN THE SCHEDULE
BELOW.



   Except as otherwise permitted in Chapter 75, Schedule IV, parking is
limited on the following streets or portions of streets.



 


Street Name

 

Parking Time Designation





Academy Street
 
2 hours


Aspen Street
 
2 hours


Cedar Street
 
2 hours


City Hall parking lot
 
Limited to 30 minutes for public parking


Court Square
 
2 hours


East Main Street, south side in 200 block
 
30 minute loading/unloading zone


Main Street 100 and 200 blocks
 
2 hours


Main Street 300 block
 
3 hours


Main Street 400 block
 
Open parking


Main Street from Court Square to Government - north side
 
2 hours


Poplar Street
 
2 hours


Sherrill Avenue, the west side, from Alexander Street to Hoke Street
 
2 hours


South Poplar Street, the west side, from East Main Street to East Water Street
 
2 hours


Sycamore Street from Court Square to North Academy
 
2 hours


Sycamore Street from North Flint Street to North Academy
 
Open parking


Water Street from Court Square to Poplar Street
 
2 hours


West Main Street (both north and south sides), from the Court Square to
Government Street
 
2 hours


West Water Street, the south side, from South Government Street to Court
Square
 
2 hours




 



(Prior Code, § 13-32)  (Ord. O-07-04, passed 12-9-2004; Ord. O-04-17,
passed 4-6-2017; Ord. O-06-2017, passed 6-1-2017)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV:  PARKING AT COURT SQUARE.



 


Location

 

Prohibition





Court Square, the entire area surrounding the courthouse, beginning at the
intersection of East Main Street and Court Square and continuing around the
Court Square to the intersection of Court Square and West Main Street and
then continuing around the Court Square from West Main Street to East Main
Street
 
All parking, except in those designated 24-hour parking spaces limited to two
hours shall be enforced between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


East Main Street, one block north, on Academy Street, both sides of the street
 
All parking, except in those designated 24-hour parking spaces limited to two
hours shall be enforced between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


East Main Street, one block north, on Cedar Street, both sides of the street
 
All parking, except in those designated 24-hour parking spaces limited to two
hours shall be enforced between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


East Main Street, one block north, on Laurel Street, both sides of the street
 
All parking, except in those designated 24-hour parking spaces limited to two
hours shall be enforced between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


East Main Street, one block north, on North Poplar Street, both sides of the
street
 
All parking, except in those designated 24-hour parking spaces limited to two
hours shall be enforced between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


East Main Street, two blocks south, on Academy Street, both sides of the
street
 
All parking, except in those designated 24-hour parking spaces limited to two
hours shall be enforced between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


East Main Street, one block south, on Cedar Street, both sides of the street
 
All parking, except in those designated 24-hour parking spaces limited to two
hours shall be enforced between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


East Main Street, one block south, on Laurel Street, both sides of the street
 
All parking, except in those designated 24-hour parking spaces limited to two
hours shall be enforced between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


East Main Street, one block south, on South Poplar Street, both sides of the
street
 
All parking, except in those designated 24-hour parking spaces limited to two
hours shall be enforced between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


East Main Street, parking on the north and south side, from the intersection
of East Main Street and Court Square to the intersection of East Main Street
and Laurel Street
 
All parking, except in those designated 24-hour parking spaces limited to two
hours shall be enforced between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.




 



   (A)   Upon application to the Chief of Police, parking shall be
allowed on those streets where it is prohibited during specified hours where
certain conditions are met. Application may be made to the Chief of Police in
writing by a responsible official of an organization conducting a meeting in
the Central Business District at least 24 hours prior to the time the meeting
is scheduled to be conducted. Approval by the Chief of Police of the
application shall suspend enforcement of the no parking provision for that
period in question.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to issue parking
permits upon proper written application.



(Prior Code, § 13-34)  (Ord. passed 2-11-1988; Ord. O-28-93, passed
11-4-1993; Ord. O-06-05, passed 9-1-2005; Ord. O-07-04, passed 12-9-2004;
Ord. O-04-17, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. O-04-18, passed 4-5-2018)  Penalty, see
§ 70.99



SCHEDULE V:  HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   The following parking areas or spaces shall be reserved and designated
as parking areas for handicapped citizens upon the city posting signs and/or
street markings designating the areas for handicapped parking.



 


Location

 

Number of spaces





East Main Street, north side
 

One space



East Main Street, south side between Academy Street and Poplar Street
 

One space



East Main Street, south side, between the Court Square and Academy Street
 

One space



East Sycamore Street, north side, between the Court Square and North Academy
Street
 

One space



North Academy between Sycamore and Main Street
 

Two Spaces



North Cedar Street, east side, adjacent to the entrance of the Lincoln
Cultural Center between East Main Street and East Sycamore Street
 

One space



North Cedar Street, west side, adjacent to the entrance of Saint Luke’s
Episcopal Church between East Pine Street and East McBee Street
 

Three spaces



South Aspen Street, west side, adjacent to the entrance of Emmanuel Lutheran
Church between West Church Street and West Water Street
 

Two spaces



West Main Street, north side, between Government Street and the Court Square
 

One space





 



(Prior Code, § 13-35)  (Ord. O-05-00, passed 8-3-2000; Ord. passed
9-1-2008; Ord. O-05-08, passed 9- 11-2008; Ord. O-06-2017, passed 6-1-2017) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Handicapped parking, see § 72.02



SCHEDULE VI:  DIAGONAL PARKING.



   All vehicles shall be parked at an angle of approximately 45 degrees
with the curb on the following streets or portions of streets.



 


Street

 

From

 

To

 

Side



Cedar Street
 
From Main Street
 
To Water Street
 
East side only


Court Square
 
 
 
West side only
 
 


Main Street
 
From intersection of Cedar Street
 
To Court Square
 
Both sides


North Poplar Street
 
From East Sycamore Street
 
To East Pine Street
 
West side


Oak Street
 
From East Main Street half way
 
To Water Street
 
Both sides



 



(Prior Code, § 13-36)  (Ord. O-04-17, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. O-06-2017,
passed 6-1-2017)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VII:  OTHER RESTRICTIONS - PARALLEL PARKING.



   Vehicles shall not park facing oncoming traffic.



(Ord. O-06-2017, passed 6-1-2017)  Penalty, see § 70.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS AND FOWL



      91.   CEMETERIES



      92.   FALSE ALARMS



      93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



      94.   PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS



      95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      96.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      97.   FILM PRODUCTION



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS AND FOWL



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Keeping of livestock prohibited



   90.02   Fowl at large



   90.03   Pigeons to be confined



   90.04   Continuation of activities after area annexed into the city



   90.05   Horses or livestock on Lincolnton Rail-Trail



   90.06   Animals at special events



   90.07   County ordinance; adopted



   90.08   County ordinance; enforcement



   90.09   County ordinance; conflict




Dogs at Large




   90.20   Generally



   90.21   Dangerous dogs



   90.22   Duty of Lincoln County Animal Services Department per
Lincoln County § 92.04 for the following



   90.23   Removal of canine waste




Dogs and Rabies Control




   90.35   Vaccination of dogs



Cross-reference:



   Keeping noisy animals, see § 93.016



Statutory reference:



   Animal fights, see G.S. § 14-362.1



   Animal protection, see G.S. §§ 19A-1 et seq.



   Authority of city to prohibit cruelty, see G.S. § 160A-182



   Authority to regulate domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-182



   Overworking, cruelty to animals, see G.S. § 14-360



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any cow, horse, pony,
mule, sheep, goat or other livestock on any lot or within any pen, stable or
other enclosure or building within the corporate limits.



   (B)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the assembling of
livestock for shipment or the unloading from shipment of livestock, provided
the livestock are not kept within the corporate limits for more than 24 hours
prior to shipment or subsequent to unloading.



(Prior Code, § 3-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.02  FOWL AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any ducks, geese, guinea,
roosters or other domestic fowl in the city. Residents of single family homes
may keep hens as authorized under this section.



   (A)   The tract on which the hens will be kept shall be at least
one-third of an acre in size.



   (B)   A maximum of five hens shall be permitted on a tract of land
that is between one-third and one-half acre in size and a maximum of ten hens
on a tract of land that is larger than one-half acre in size.



   (C)   No person shall allow his or her hens to run at large. Such
hens must be contained in a fowl house, coop or other secure, fenced
enclosure at all times.



   (D)   Such fowl house, coop or other enclosure must be situated at
least 15 feet from all property lines, at least 30 feet from the nearest
residence other than that of the owner and may not be located between the
street and a line drawn parallel to the street facing walls of a residence.



   (E)   Fowl houses, coops and enclosures must be kept in a neat and
sanitary condition at all times to prevent offensive odors.



(Prior Code, § 3-2) (Ord. O-04-16, passed 6-2-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.03  PIGEONS TO BE CONFINED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep pigeons, except when the
pigeons are properly kept in a cage or enclosure at all times.



(Prior Code, § 3-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.04  CONTINUATION OF ACTIVITIES AFTER AREA ANNEXED INTO THE CITY.



   (A)   Any activity described in this chapter shall be allowed to
continue in the same manner as is being carried out at the time it is annexed
into the city.



   (B)   No activity shall be expanded or enlarged beyond the size,
dimension and intensity that exists at the time the land on which the
activity is located is annexed into the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-4)  (Ord. O-31-94, passed 3-3-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.05  HORSES OR LIVESTOCK ON LINCOLNTON RAIL-TRAIL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to have or use horses or other livestock
on the Lincolnton Rail-Trail for any purpose including as a means of
transportation.



   (B)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 3-5)  (Ord. O-66-98, passed 12-10-1998)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.06  ANIMALS AT SPECIAL EVENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to take an animal into or
allow the animal to enter or remain within the boundaries of a festival,
concert or other public gathering (special events).  The event boundary
shall include any area that is part of the event and shall include any public
street, sidewalk or other publicly-owned area within the confines of such
event.



   (B)   The following animals are exempt from the prohibitions
contained in division (A):



      (1)   Service animals.  A SERVICE ANIMAL is defined as any
guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to provide
assistance to an individual with a disability.  If they meet this
definition, animals are considered service animals. (An emotional support
animal does not fall under the provisions of a service animal.)



      (2)   Animals under the control of the duty law enforcement
personnel.



      (3)   Animals that are part of an authorized exhibit or
attraction approved by the event organizers.



   (C)   Any animal that shows any sign of aggression in nature may be
removed from an event regardless of whether or not it is a service animal. 
However, the mere breed of an animal alone does not satisfy the requirements
of showing aggression.



(Ord. O-06-07, passed 11-1-2007; Ord. O-10-14, passed 11-6-2014; Ord.- -,
passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.07  COUNTY ORDINANCE; ADOPTED.



   The Lincoln County Animal Control Ordinance, as from time to time
amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set out
herein.



(Ord. O-09-18; passed 9-4-18)



§ 90.08  COUNTY ORDINANCE; ENFORCEMENT.



   The Lincoln County Animal Control Ordinance shall be applicable within
the corporate limits of the city. The Lincoln County Animal Control
Department as established and governed by the county ordinance shall enforce
such county ordinance within the city limits with the full cooperation of the
city.



(Ord. O-09-18; passed 9-4-18)



§ 90.09  COUNTY ORDINANCE; CONFLICT.



   Where any conflict appears between the provisions of this chapter and
such county ordinance, the more restrictive shall apply and control.



(Ord. O-09-18; passed 9-4-18)



DOGS AT LARGE



§ 90.20  GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any dog to
permit the same to be at large on the streets or sidewalks, or to be off the
owner’s premises, in the city unless under the physical control of the
owner or person in charge of the dog, either by leash or chain.



(Prior Code, § 3-20) (Ord. O-09-18, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.21  DANGEROUS DOGS.



   The authority and responsibility for dangerous dogs is delegated to the
Animal Services Department of Lincoln County per Lincoln County § 92.07
Dangerous Dogs. 



   (A)   Dangerous dogs prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for anyone
to own, maintain, or harbor a dog cited and identified as a DANGEROUS ANIMAL
in the county, as defined in Lincoln County § 92.02.



   (B)   A DANGEROUS DOG is defined by Lincoln County § 92.02
definitions as:



      (1)   Any dog that without provocation has killed or inflicted
severe injury on a person; or any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part
for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting; or is
determined by the Animal Control Supervisor or his or her designee or the
Board of Animal Appeals to be potentially dangerous because the dog has
engaged in one or more of the following behaviors:



         (a)   Inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in
broken bones or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or
hospitalization;



         (b)   Inflicted severe injury upon a domestic animal
when not on the owner's real property; or



         (c)   Approached a person when not on the owner's
property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack.



      (2)   This definition shall not include:



         (a)   A dog being used by a law enforcement officer to
carry out the officer's official duties;



         (b)   A dog being used in a lawful hunt;



         (c)   A dog where the injury or damage inflicted by the
dog was sustained by a domestic animal while the dog was working as a hunting
dog, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of, or under the
control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a species or
type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog; or



         (d)   A dog where the injury inflicted by the dog was
sustained by a person who, at the time of the injury, was committing a
willful trespass or other tort, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the
dog, had tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog, or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.



      (3)   A dog may not be deemed dangerous strictly because of
its breed or part thereof.



(Prior Code, § 3-21) (Ord. O-09-18, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.22  DUTY OF LINCOLN COUNTY ANIMAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT PER LINCOLN
COUNTY § 92.04 FOR THE FOLLOWING.



   (A)   It is hereby declared the duty of the Lincoln County Animal
Services Department to pick up any dog going at large per Lincoln County §
92.11  Impoundment and Adoption.



   (B)   Any dog at large picked up by the Lincoln County Animal
Services Department shall be held or redeemed per Lincoln County § 92.11 
Impoundment and Adoption.



   (C)   Animal bites.  The Animal Services Supervisor or his or her
designee shall be responsible for the county investigation of all reported
animal bites, and for the quarantine of any animal involved for a period of
ten days.



   (D)   Animal shelter. The Animal Services Supervisor or his or her
designee shall be responsible for the county animal shelter's operation and
maintenance.



   (E)   Arrest and enforcement.  Animal Services Officers shall have
the power to enforce all animal control laws of the state and violations of
this subchapter in cooperation with the Health Director and by the authority
of the County Sheriff.



   (F)   Investigations.  The Officer shall:



      (1)   Investigate all complaints of cruelty or abuse to any
animal;



      (2)   Investigate complaints involving and concerning animals
and animal welfare; and



      (3)   Investigate kennels and pet shops to ensure they are in
compliance with animal control laws of the state and this subchapter.



   (G)   Rabies control.  The Animal Services Officer shall enforce
and carry out all rabies control laws of the state and this subchapter.



   (H)   Seizure and impoundment.  The Officer shall be responsible
for the seizure and impoundment of dogs and cats in violation of any animal
control law of the state or this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-22) (Ord. O-09-18, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.23  REMOVAL OF CANINE WASTE.



   (A)   Any person owning, harboring, walking, in possession of or in
charge of a dog which defecates on public property, public park property,
public right-of-way or any private property without the permission of the
private property owner, shall remove all feces immediately after it is
deposited by the dog. All feces removed in accordance with this section shall
be placed in a suitable bag or other container that closes and disposed of in
a lawful manner.



   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a non-criminal
violation punishable by a fine or a civil penalty in accordance with § 10.99.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a guide dog,
hearing dog or service dog accompanying any person with a disability.



   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent a private citizen
from bringing an action to abate a nuisance or from bringing an action for
damage, loss or injury to the private citizen or his or her property
resulting from the animal being a public nuisance.



(Ord. O-09-18, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DOGS AND RABIES CONTROL



§ 90.35  VACCINATION OF DOGS.



   (A)   The authority and responsibility for animal services is
delegated to the Animal Services Department of Lincoln County per Lincoln
County § 92.06 responsibility of animal owner/harborer.



   (B)   All owners or custodians shall keep animals under sanitary and
humane conditions; provide proper food and potable water dailySeptember 25,
2018; provide shelter from weather and maintain clean and sanitary quarters
for the animals; provide medical attention for sick, diseased or injured
animals and comply with G.S. § 130A-185, which requires all dogs and cats
over four months of age to be vaccinated against rabies. A violation of this
section shall be considered abuse of animals pursuant to G.S. § 153A-127.



(Prior Code, § 3-23) (Ord. O-09-18, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Rabies vaccination required, see G.S. § 130A-185



CHAPTER 91:  CEMETERIES



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Destruction of property



   91.02   Garbage and the like



Hollybrook Cemetery



   91.15   Name of city cemetery



   91.16   Terms of sale of lots



   91.17   Reopening graves for interment of additional bodies



   91.18   Interment; disinterment; depth of graves



   91.19   Plantings



   91.20   Family monument; markers; embellishments



   91.21   Trees; shrubbery



   91.22   Grading, landscaping and improvements



   91.23   Structures



   91.24   Regulations; bill of sale clause



   91.25   Transfer of lots



   91.26   Vehicles



   91.27   Cemetery lot purchase



   91.28   Cemetery maintenance



   91.29   Animals



   91.30   Cemetery lot sales



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish and operate cemeteries, see G.S. §§ 160A-341
et seq.



   Authority to tax, see G.S. § 160A-209(c)(8)



   Municipal cemeteries in general, see G.S. §§ 65-37 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, deface, pull down or
remove anything put or placed to mark any plot, grave or enclosure or to
pluck flowers or shrubs planted or growing, in any cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 5-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.02  GARBAGE AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall deposit any rubbish, filth, waste or other unclean or
unsightly substance in any cemetery. All materials carried within the
cemetery and not used in the erection of monuments, markers or other lawful
structures authorized herein, shall be promptly removed therefrom by the
owner of the lot upon which the monument, marker or structure shall be
located.



(Prior Code, § 5-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



HOLLYBROOK CEMETERY



§ 91.15  NAME OF CITY CEMETERY.



   The name of the city cemetery shall be Hollybrook Cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 5-20)



§ 91.16  TERMS OF SALE OF LOTS.



   (A)   A resident of the city has the option of purchasing a maximum
number of burial spaces to accommodate his or her immediate family (spouse,
children or dependents). These individuals must be current residents in the
home of the purchaser. Each family is allowed to exercise this option only
once; however, additional grave sites may be purchased at the existing
maximum rate.



   (B)   All lots in the cemetery shall be paid in full at the time of
purchase.



(Prior Code, § 5-21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.17  REOPENING GRAVES FOR INTERMENT OF ADDITIONAL BODIES.



   (A)   No burial space shall be reopened for the interment therein of
an additional body, subject, however, to the following provisions. The city
will not allow a burial space to be used for more than two remains (one
burial and one cremains or two cremains). The number of second right of
interments purchased will be limited to the original number of burial spaces
sold. Before any burial space is used for a second remains, a right of second
interment must be purchased from the city.



   (B)   The establishment of marker(s) must conform to the established
policy of the section of the cemetery in which the particular burial space is
located.



(Prior Code, § 5-22)  (Ord. O-03-04, passed 4-1-2004)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 91.18  INTERMENT; DISINTERMENT; DEPTH OF GRAVES.



   No person shall be interred or disinterred in the cemetery without
lawful authority and permission. Interment and disinterment must be performed
by expert(s) whose primary occupation is in this profession. All graves over
four and one-half feet in length shall be a minimum of six feet in depth. All
graves shall be of sufficient depth to allow 18 inches of space between the
top of the vault or other container and the ground level.



(Prior Code, § 5-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.19  PLANTINGS.



   No person shall plant or set any tree, shrub, flower, grass or other
plant of any kind in the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 5-24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.20  FAMILY MONUMENT; MARKERS; EMBELLISHMENTS.



   (A)   Only one central or family monument shall be allowed on a
family lot. All monuments are restricted in size based upon the section. No
monument shall exceed four feet in height and one and one-half feet in width
(including the base). Any case intended to hold floral arrangements must be
permanently incorporated in the marker or its foundation and must fit within
the allowable space for the marker. Only monuments made by expert(s) whose
primary occupation is in this profession will be allowed. Foot markers shall
be laid flush with the ground and shall not exceed two feet in length and one
foot in width, and shall be placed at the end of the grave farthest from the
monument. No vases are allowed on the foot markers.



   (B)   All single grave sites in Sections “G” and “Z” are ten
feet in length and five feet in width.  This provides one and one-half feet
in width (including the base) at the head of each grave for the main family
marker and one-half foot at the opposite end of each grave for a foot marker,
if desired. The monument shall be centrally located on the lot(s) to allow at
least one foot from its edge to the lot line. This will provide three feet in
length on single lots, or eight feet in length on double lots. 



   (C)   In Section “Z,” the head marker shall be laid flush with
the ground and the vases placed in this section are to be of the variety that
can be inverted.



   (D)   No coping, fencing, hedging, ground mounds, borders or curb or
any kind shall be allowed on any burial lot.  Cemetery embellishments other
than ground level floral arrangements are not allowed.



(Prior Code, § 5-25)



   (E) The city reserves the right to regulate the size and quality of all
monuments, foundations and other construction placed upon any grave or lot in
the city cemetery.  The cemetery management shall have the authority to
enter upon any lot and to remove any objectionable thing, construction,
monuments or any foot markers that may have been placed or erected contrary
to this code at the violator’s expense.



(Ord. O-07-03, passed 7-17-2003; Ord. passed 8-5-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.21  TREES; SHRUBBERY.



   The pruning or cutting of all trees and shrubbery is hereby prohibited
unless done under the immediate supervision of the cemetery sexton.



(Prior Code, § 5-26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.22  GRADING, LANDSCAPING AND IMPROVEMENTS.



   All grading, landscaping and improvements of every kind shall be made
or done by the city only.



(Prior Code, § 5-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.23  STRUCTURES.



   No mausoleum, tomb, building or other structure of any kind shall be
erected on any lot within the cemetery, or within any extension of the
cemetery; provided, however, mausoleums and tombs may be constructed on lots
which may be designated on the plat and plan of the cemetery from time to
time by the City Council as lots to be used exclusively for mausoleums and
tombs. Should any mausoleum, monument or tomb at any time become unsafe,
unsightly or in need of repair or resetting, the Finance Director shall so
notify the owner of the lot, if living, or any person having an interest in
the lot, if known, and shall request the person to make the needed repairs
under the person’s supervision, and if the person shall fail to make
repairs the City Attorney shall take whatever action is necessary to remedy
the problem.



(Prior Code, § 5-28)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.24  REGULATIONS; BILL OF SALE CLAUSE.



   All lots within the cemetery, or within any extension of the cemetery
at any time hereafter made, whether owned by the city or by any other person,
shall be subject to and regulated by city policies as adopted by the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 5-29)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.25  TRANSFER OF LOTS.



   An owner of a cemetery plot may only sell or transfer a burial space(s)
in his or her plot upon approval of the City Manager or his or her designee.
In order to meet the approval, a notarized document containing pertinent
information must be submitted, and a transfer fee will be charged in most
cases. The transfer fee will be equal to the difference in the current sale
price of the owner and the purchaser’s cost based on the applicable sale
price for the plot(s) if purchased directly from the city. Transfer documents
not recorded and filed in the City Finance Department will be deemed invalid.
Plot(s) may not be sold for more than the current rate in effect at the time
of sale.



(Prior Code, § 5-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.26  VEHICLES.



   (A)   Vehicles shall be driven only upon the roadways within the
cemetery and at a rate of speed not in excess of 15 mph.



   (B)   No vehicles shall enter the cemetery except for the purpose of
the driver or passengers attending funerals, visiting graves or other lawful
mission.



(Prior Code, § 5-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.27  CEMETERY LOT PURCHASE.



   (A)   Grave lots may be purchased in advance of need. The price will
be determined by the permanent address of the deceased or in the case of the
residence at time of death being a nursing home, the last permanent address
prior to entering the nursing home will determine the price.



   (B)   A resident of the city is one who has established permanent
residence in the corporate limits of the city.



   (C)   Lots are available in single or four grave sites.



   (D)   Lots shall be purchased from the Director of Finance and/or
his or her designee who shall be responsible for maintaining all cemetery
records and collecting all revenues. All applicable fees are approved by the
Mayor and City Council, a copy of which is on file in the Finance Department.



§ 91.28  CEMETERY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The municipal cemetery shall be maintained by the city. As far
as possible, funds raised through the sale of cemetery lots and the interest
on any of the funds invested shall be the revenue used to finance the
operation and maintenance of the cemetery.



   (B)   The City Council may appropriate additional funds for the
operations and maintenance of the cemetery as it finds necessary.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.29  ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner to take an animal into or allow the
animal to enter or remain within the boundaries of Hollybrook Cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 5-32)  (Ord. O-07-07, passed 11-1-2007)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 91.30  CEMETERY LOT SALES.



   See fee schedule for applicable rates.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92:  FALSE ALARMS



Section



   92.01   Purpose



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Alarm user permits required



   92.04   Multiple alarm systems



   92.05   Response to alarm; determination of validity



   92.06   Review of false alarm determinations



   92.07   Service charge assessment for false alarms and reinstatement
of alarm user permits



   92.08   Automatic dialing protection devices prohibited



   92.09   Prohibited acts



   92.10   Confidentiality



   92.11   Government immunity



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and
alarm companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of
alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false alarms; thereby reducing
unnecessary use of limited police and fire resources and hidden costs
associated with investigating alarms that result as false.



   (B)   This section governs alarm systems intended to summon law
enforcement or Fire Department response, and requires registration,
establishes fees, provides penalties for violations, establishes a system of
administration and sets conditions for suspension of response or revocation
of registration.



(Prior Code, § 10-37)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM PERMIT.  A permit issued by the city allowing the operation of
an alarm system within the city.



   ALARM SIGNAL.  A detectable signal, either audible or visual,
generated by an alarm system, to which the Police or Fire Department may
respond.



   ALARM SYSTEM.



      (1)   Any single device or assembly of equipment designed to
signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring
immediate attention and to which the Police and/or Fire Department responds,
but does not include alarms installed in motor vehicles or fire box alarms
accessible to/able to be activated by the general public.



      (2)   Further, alarm systems that are operated by the county,
state or federal government and installed on the premises which the entity
occupies or uses for governmental purposes shall not be subject to this
chapter. However, each entity shall apply for and obtain a permit for each
alarm system it operates.



      (3)   Alarms requesting a Police and or Fire Department
response for purposes of this chapter may include burglary, holdup, robbery,
duress, panic, fire or smoke and others.



   ALARM SYSTEMS COORDINATOR.  An employee of the city designated by the
Chief of Police to administer this chapter.



   ALARM USER.  Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship,
governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning or leasing an
alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the
protection of the premises.



   ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS.  A class conducted for the purpose of
educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation and maintenance of
alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.



   AUTOMATIC DIAL PROTECTION DEVICE.  An automatic dialing device or an
automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system, which,
upon being activated, automatically initiates to the City Police Department
and/or the Fire Department or to the Police Department’s and/or Fire
Department’s designated communications center, a recorded message or code
signal indicating a need for Police and/or Fire Department response. This
does not apply to a life safety alert system utilizing residential
transmitting equipment designated for direct or indirect telephone access to
dedicated control receiving equipment.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Chief of Police of the City Police Department or
his or her designee.



   DEFENSES TO FALSE ALARMS.  Affirmative defense to a false alarm
service fee assessment may include evidence that a false alarm was caused by
action of the telephone company, telephone line outage, power outage lasting
longer than the life of a fully charged battery and other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user, subscriber
or proprietor alarm owner.



   FALSE ALARM.  The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or
electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of
the alarm user, his or her employees or agents and signals activated to
summon police and/or fire personnel unless police and/or fire personnel
response was cancelled by the alarm user or his or her agent before Police
and/or Fire Department personnel arrive at the alarm location. A FALSE ALARM
shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been
caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it
include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control
by the alarm user. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system
testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user
first notifies and receives permission from the user’s alarm company and/or
the Police and/or Fire Department’s designated communications center. An
alarm is not considered false as it relates to this section, when the alarm
is activated within five days of initially becoming operable. An alarm is
false within the meaning of this chapter when, upon inspection by the Chief
of Police or his or her designee and/or Fire Chief or his or her designee,
evidence indicates that no entry, without authorization, robbery or other
crime was committed or attempted in or on or against the premises, no fire or
smoke signs which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system.



(Prior Code, § 10-38)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)



§ 92.03  ALARM USER PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person shall use an alarm system, as
described in § 92.02, which is designed to elicit, either directly or
indirectly, a Police and/or Fire Department response without first obtaining
a permit for the alarm system from the city designee.



   (B)   Application.  The permit shall be requested on an application
form provided by the city. An alarm user has the duty to obtain an
application from the city and return completed application to alarm systems
administrator within 30 days of installing an operational alarm system.



   (C)   Transfer of possession.  When the possession of the premises
at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person obtaining
possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm user permit
within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not
transferable.



   (D)   Reporting updated information.  Whenever the information,
provided on the alarm user permit application changes, the correct
information must be provided by the alarm user to the city’s alarm systems
coordinator within 30 days of the change. In addition, each year after the
issuance of the permit, permit holders are to be mailed from the alarm
systems coordinator a form requesting updated information. The permit holder
shall complete and return this form to the alarm systems coordinator when any
of the requested information has changed.



   (E)   Alarm reset.  An alarm user may not install, maintain or use
an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than 15 minutes.



   (F)   Grace period.



      (1)   Existing operational alarm system users, upon adoption
of this chapter, shall have 90 days to request and submit an alarm
user’s/systems permit application. Further, users/systems existing upon
adoption of this chapter shall not be subject the provisions of this chapter
relating to the counting and the assessments for a period of 30 days from
date of adoption of Ord. O-11-02, January 9, 2003.



      (2)   Newly installed and reinstalled alarm systems shall not
be subject to the provisions of this chapter relating to the counting and the
assessments for a period of five  days from date the alarm system becomes
operational. For purposes of this section, REINSTALLED ALARM SYSTEM means the
installation of a new control panel.



(Prior Code, § 10-39)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.04  MULTIPLE ALARM SYSTEMS.



   If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more
separate structures having different addresses, a separate permit will be
required for each structure.



(Prior Code, § 10-40)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.05  RESPONSE TO ALARM; DETERMINATION OF VALIDITY.



   (A)   Police/fire response.  Whenever an alarm is activated in the
city and the Police and/or Fire Department does respond, a police officer or
fire personnel on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the
area and shall determine whether the police/fire response was in fact
necessary as indicated by the alarm system or whether the alarm was a false
alarm.



   (B)   Notification.  If the police officer/fire personnel at the
scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, that
personnel shall file a written report of the false alarm. An alarm user shall
be notified of each false alarm.



   (C)   Inspection.  The Chief of Police or his or her designee
and/or Fire Chief or his or her designee shall have the right to inspect any
alarm system on the premises to which a response has been made at any
reasonable time thereafter to determine whether it is being used in
conformity with the terms of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 10-41)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.06  REVIEW OF FALSE ALARM DETERMINATIONS.



   (A)   The alarm systems coordinator shall, when requested by an
alarm user, review the determination that an alarm was false. The review
shall be conducted by the alarm systems coordinator only if the alarm user
requests in writing a review within ten days of the date that the false alarm
occurred. The written request for review of a false alarm determination by
the alarm systems coordinator shall include the following information:



      (1)   Alarm user’s name;



      (2)   Address at which alarm is installed;



      (3)   Date of false alarm that is being contested;



      (4)   Alarm user permit number;



      (5)   Facts upon which request for review of the false alarm
determination is made; and



      (6)   Specific defenses to the false alarm assessment.



   (B)   If the request for review is not received within ten days of
the date false alarm occurred, the alarm user shall be deemed to have waived
the right to any further review and the initial assessment shall be final.



   (C)   Upon receiving the request in a timely manner, defenses, if
any, shall be reviewed. If defenses are determined valid to the initial
determination of false alarm assessment, a notice will be sent to the alarm
user that no assessment will be made for that particular alarm.



   (D)   Upon determining that a valid defense to the initial notice of
assessment has not been set forth, a notice of decision shall be sent to the
alarm user that they will be assessed.



   (E)   Notices in divisions (C) and (D) shall contain the specific
findings and conclusions of the Police Chief or his or her designated systems
administrator with respect to the review of the initial assessment.



(Prior Code, § 10-42)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.07  SERVICE CHARGE ASSESSMENT FOR FALSE ALARMS AND REINSTATEMENT OF
ALARM USER PERMITS.



   (A)   Excessive false alarms.  It is hereby found and determined
that three or more false alarms within any 12-month period is excessive and
constitutes a public nuisance. Only one false alarm per calendar day will be
assessed for each permitted alarm system, upon finding of common cause.
COMMON CAUSE is defined as a technical difficulty or malfunction causing the
system to generate a series of false alarms, all of which occurs within a
calendar day. The series of false alarms shall be counted as one false alarm
only if the cause of the series of alarms is repaired before generating
additional false alarms during the next 24-hour calendar day.



   (B)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   The third through fifth false alarms within any 12-month
period will be billed a service charge as set forth in the fee schedule per
occurrence which shall be considered a bill owed by the alarm user to the
city and may be collected from the alarm user as a civil penalty. Each
service charge incurred for false alarms at the premises shall be paid within
30 days from the date of receipt of the invoice. Failure can result in
discontinuance of police response.



      (2)   When scheduled, the Police Department’s alarm systems
coordinator shall provide an educational program for prevention of false
alarms. Each alarm system user (subscriber/proprietor owner) successfully
completing the program shall receive a certificate, issued by the Police
Department. The one-time certificate may be used to satisfy the requirements
in lieu of paying the service fee as set forth in the fee schedule imposed
upon an alarm user for an assessed third or fourth or fifth false alarm. The
certificate is valid for one year from date of completion of program and is
not transferable.



   (C)   Permit year.  For the purposes of this section, a permit year
is a 12-month period beginning on the date of the permit’s issuance.



   (D)   Discontinuance of police/fire response.  The failure of an
alarm user to make payment of any service charge imposed under this section
within 30 days from the date of receipt of invoice can result in
discontinuance of police/fire response to alarms that may occur at the
premises described in the alarm user’s permit until payment is received.



      (1)   With exception to police receiving a separate indication
that there is a crime or incident in progress at the premises, requiring a
police response, such as holdup alarm, panic alarm, duress alarm or other
alarm indicating an authorized person(s) is on the premises and intentionally
activating the alarm to cause a police response; and



      (2)   With exception a person reporting a “working fire”
or “fire/smoke showing,” requiring a Fire Department response.



   (E)   Responsibility to pay service fees or penalties. 
Responsibility to pay service fees or penalties subject to this section shall
be the responsibility of the alarm subscriber or alarm user, jointly and
severally. The owner of a proprietor alarm shall be solely responsible.



   (F)   Unregistered alarm.  Upon determining an unregistered alarm
to be false pursuant to this chapter, the owner/user shall receive a one-time
warning for failure to register the system as required. Subsequent
determinations of a system at the same site, not being registered as
required, shall cause a penalty fee as set forth in the fee schedule to be
assessed per occurrence.



(Prior Code, § 10-43)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.08  AUTOMATIC DIALING PROTECTION DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   No automatic dial protection device shall be used to report, or cause
to be reported, any recorded message to the Police or Fire Department or its
designated communications center. This shall not apply to a life safety alert
system utilizing residential transmitting equipment designated for direct
telephone access to dedicated control receiving equipment located in any
public safety facility.



(Prior Code, § 10-44)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.09  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision
of this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to activate a burglary or
robbery/holdup or panic or fire alarm or for the purpose of summoning
police/fire personnel when no action or other action dangerous to life or
property is being committed or attempted or involved on the premises, or
otherwise to cause a false alarm.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for an alarm user to fail to reimburse
the city, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, for response(s)
by the city police to any false alarm(s).



(Prior Code, § 10-45)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.10  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   In the interest of public safety and security for the premises and
premises occupants, all information contained in and gathered through the
alarm registration applications and applications for appeals will be held in
confidence by all employees or representatives of the municipality and by any
third-party administrator with access to the information.



(Prior Code, § 10-46)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)



§ 92.11  GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY.



   Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract,
duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all
liability and consequential damage resulting from failure to respond to a
notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by
law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user
acknowledges that law enforcement/fire response may be influenced by factors
such as the availability of police/fire units, priority of calls, weather
conditions, traffic conditions, staffing levels and prior response or alarm
history.



(Prior Code, § 10-47)  (Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   The city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by one or
combination of the following methods.



   (A)   Civil penalty.



      (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
may be fined by a civil penalty as set forth in the fee schedule which may be
recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the
violator does not pay the penalty within 30 days from the date the violator
is notified of the penalty. Any other service charges imposed by this chapter
may be collected by the city as a civil penalty in a civil action.



(Prior Code, § 10-46)



      (2)   Eligibility for police/fire response to alarm calls will
be made upon receipt of any prior unpaid civil penalties assessed pursuant to
this section and receipt of the applicable charges as set forth below:



 


Occurrence

 

Charge



Sixth through eighth false alarms
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Ninth through eleventh false alarms
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Twelfth or more false alarms
 

as set forth in the fee schedule




 



(Prior Code, § 10-43)



   (B)   Equitable remedy.  The city may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for an injunction, abatement order or any other appropriate
equitable remedy.



(Prior Code, § 10-46)



(Ord. O-11-02, passed 1-9-2003)



CHAPTER 93:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



General Provisions



   93.001   Compliance with county health regulations



   93.002   Unlawful to hinder health officer or assistants



   93.003   Septic tank installation



Noise



   93.015   Unnecessary noise generally prohibited



   93.016   Unnecessary noise prohibited specifically



   93.017   Tests and standards



Cleanliness of Premises; Littering



   93.045   Offensive matter on premises generally



   93.046   Accumulation of refuse and weeds prohibited; removal



   93.047   Declaration of nuisance



   93.048   Complaint and investigation



   93.049   Littering; generally



   93.050   Littering; from vehicles



   93.051   Scrap on street right-of-way



Abatement of Nuisance



   93.065   Required



   93.066   Notice and order to abate



   93.067   Hearing



   93.068   Failure of owner to abate



   93.069   Recovery of cost



   93.070   Procedure is alternative to other authorized procedures



 



   93.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.001  COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY HEALTH REGULATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any lawfully adopted
rule or regulation of the County Board of Health, or regulations of the
Division of Health Services, State Department of Human Resources. The
enforcement of these laws shall be the responsibility of the county health
officer.



(Prior Code, § 7-1)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.002  UNLAWFUL TO HINDER HEALTH OFFICER OR ASSISTANTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or delay the
county health officer or any of the health officer’s assistants in the
lawful discharge of his or her duties.



(Prior Code, § 7-2)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.003  SEPTIC TANK INSTALLATION.



   Septic tanks may be installed where the sanitary sewer is not
reasonably accessible, provided the tank is constructed in accordance with
the specifications of the State Commission for Health Services and applicable
county health regulations.



(Prior Code, § 7-3)  Penalty, see § 93.999



Statutory reference:



   Improvement permit required where there is no approved sanitary sewer
system, see G.S.§ 130A-336



NOISE



§ 93.015  UNNECESSARY NOISE GENERALLY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or assist in creating any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the city. Noise of the
character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the public health,
welfare and peace is hereby prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 7-4) (Ord. O-11-18, passed 10-4-2018)  Penalty, see § 93.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate loud noises on streets and sidewalks, see G.S. §
160A-184



§ 93.016  UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED SPECIFICALLY.



   The following acts, among others, are hereby declared to create loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this code, but the
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:



   (A)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create
any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of the device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;



   (B)   The playing of any radio or television or phonograph or other
musical instrument in a manner or with volume, particularly during hours
between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or other type of resident;



   (C)   The keeping of any animal or bird, which, by causing frequent
or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person
in the vicinity;



   (D)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out
of repair, so loaded, or in a manner as to create loud or unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;



   (E)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary
boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a
warning of danger;



   (F)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or
service station in any residential area so as to cause loud or offensive
noises to be emitted therefrom, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or on Sundays;



   (G)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to
any school, institution of learning or court while the same are in session,
or within 150 feet of any hospital, which unreasonably and unnecessarily
interferes with the working of these institutions, provided conspicuous signs
are displayed in the streets indicating that the area is a school, court or
hospital area;



   (H)   The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or
repair of any building in a residential or business district other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on weekdays, except in the case
of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a
permit from the Building Inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period
of three days or less while the emergency continues; and



   (I)   Any person or group of persons willfully making any loud,
raucous, or disturbing sound that - because of its volume or duration -
annoy, disturb, frighten, injure, or endanger the comfort, health, peace, or
safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities in the neighborhood or
Central Business District is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 7-5)  (Ord. O-18-2017, passed 12-7-2017; Ord. O-11-18,
passed 10-4-2018)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.017  TESTS AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   Factors to consider.  The standards which shall be considered
in determining whether a violation of §§ 93.015 or 93.016 exist shall
include, but shall not be limited to the following:



      (1)   The volume of the noise;



      (2)   The intensity of the noise;



      (3)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;



      (4)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;



      (5)   The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;



      (6)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping
facilities;



      (7)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;



      (8)   The density of inhabitation of the area within which the
noise emanates;



      (9)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;



      (10)   The duration of the noise;



      (11)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or
constant; and



      (12)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or
noncommercial activity.



   (B)   Tables.



 


Table I:  Limiting Noise Levels for Use Districts




Octave Band



Center Frequency



Cycles Per Second

 

Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure



(Levels in Decibels re 0.0002 Microbars)




Residential

 

Use District Commercial

 

Manufacturing






Below 75

 

65

 

79

 

80




75-150

 

60

 

74

 

75




150-300

 

55

 

66

 

70




300-600

 

55

 

59

 

64




600-1200

 

45

 

53

 

58




1200-2400

 

45

 

47

 

53




2400-4800

 

40

 

41

 

49




Above 4800

 

40

 

49

 

46



If the noise is not smooth and continuous, one or more of the corrections in
Table II below shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel
levels given in Table I.




 



 


Table II:  Type of Operation in Character of Noise




(Correction in Decibels)





Noise source operated less than 20% of any one-hour period
 

plus 5*



Noise source operated less than 5% of any one-hour period
 

plus 10*



Noise source operated less than 1% of any one-hour period
 

plus 15*



Noise of impulsive character (hammering and the like)
 

minus 5



Noise of periodic character (hum, screech and the like)
 

minus 5



*Apply one of these corrections only.


If the noise occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday
through Saturday or at any time on Sunday or a holiday, seven shall be
subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in Table I.




 



   (C)   Motorized vehicles.  It shall be unlawful to operate a
motorized vehicle within the city limits which creates a noise or sound which
exceeds the noise level limits set out in Table III below.



 


Table III:  Limiting Noise Levels from Vehicles





Trucks and Buses
 
Over 10,000 pounds:
 
93 dB(A) measured at 50 feet - Maximum allowable limit


 
97 dB(A) measured at 25 feet - Maximum allowable limit


Trucks and Buses (Cont’d)
 
Under 10,000 pounds:
 
80 dB(A) measured at 50 feet - Maximum allowable limit


 
86 dB(A) measured at 25 feet - Maximum allowable limit


Passenger Cars
 
78 dB(A) measured at 50 feet - Maximum allowable limit


84 dB(A) measured at 25 feet - Maximum allowable limit


Motorcycles, Including Other Vehicles
 
87 dB(A) measured at 50 feet - Maximum allowable limit


93 dB(A) measured at 25 feet - Maximum allowable limit




 



(Prior Code, § 7-6)  Penalty, see § 93.999



CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES; LITTERING



§ 93.045  OFFENSIVE MATTER ON PREMISES GENERALLY.



   No owner or occupant of any premises shall suffer to remain on premises
owned or occupied by the person any decayed animal or vegetable matter or any
other thing which may be offensive or injurious to the health of persons in
the vicinity; nor shall any person place or throw offensive matter upon any
street or alley or upon the premises of another person.



(Prior Code, § 7-20)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.046  ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE AND WEEDS PROHIBITED; REMOVAL.



   No person shall permit any accumulation of waste or rubbish of any kind
to remain upon any roof, yard, vacant lot or other open space. Every owner or
occupant of property shall cut down and remove therefrom all weeds, grass,
vines and other growth, which endanger the same or any other property, or
which are likely to be set on fire.



(Prior Code, § 7-21)  Penalty, see § 93.999



Cross-reference:



   Use of containers required, see § 50.02



§ 93.047  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant lot or
other parcel of land within the corporate limits is hereby declared to be
dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or safety and to constitute a
public nuisance:



   (A)   The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds or grass to a height
in excess of 12 inches causing or threatening to cause a hazard detrimental
to the public health or safety;



   (B)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is
offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitation therein of
rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or
prejudicial to the public health;



   (C)   Any accumulation of rubbish, trash or junk causing or
threatening to cause a fire hazard, or causing or threatening to cause the
accumulation of stagnant water, or causing or threatening to cause the
inhabitation therein of rats, snakes or vermin of any kind which are
dangerous or prejudicial to the public health; and/or



   (D)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which violates
the rules and regulations of the County Health Department.



   (E)   The maximum height restrictions set out in this section shall
not apply to the following:



      (1)   Natural areas including, but not limited to, wetland
areas, public open spaces, wooded areas and lots, stormwater detention areas,
rain gardens or wild flower restoration areas;



      (2)   Land located within 50 feet of natural or altered
creeks, rivers and stream corridors, including riparian buffer strips that
convey water;



      (3)   Land used for agriculture including, but not limited to
pastures that are fenced and contain animals;



      (4)   Temporary erosion control measures; as shown on an
approved erosion control plan,



      (5)   Ornamental grasses grown as ornamental plants; or



      (6)   Utility rights-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 7-22)  (Ord. –, passed 9-12-2013)  Penalty, see § 93.999



Cross-reference:



   Disposal of building debris, § 50.10



   Refuse in cemetery, § 91.02



Statutory reference:



   Littering, see G.S.§ 14-399



§ 93.048  COMPLAINT AND INVESTIGATION.



   The City Clerk, upon notice from any person of the existence of any of
the conditions described in § 93.047 shall cause to be made by the
appropriate County Health Department official or city official, the
investigation as may be necessary to determine whether, in fact the
conditions exist as to constitute a public nuisance as declared in § 93.047.



(Prior Code, § 7-23)



§ 93.049  LITTERING; GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit upon any street
or sidewalk, or upon any private property, except with written permission of
the owner or occupant of the private property, any trash, refuse, pet waste,
garbage, building material, cans, bottles, broken glass, paper or any type of
litter.



(Prior Code, § 7-24) (Ord. O-09-18, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 93.999



Statutory reference:



   Municipal litter regulation, see G.S. § 160A-303.1



§ 93.050  LITTERING; FROM VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person while a driver or a passenger in a
vehicle to throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place
within the city, or upon private property.



(Prior Code, § 7-25)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.051  SCRAP ON STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, including the City Council,
agents or employees of the city, to place or leave or cause to be placed or
left temporarily or permanently, any trash, garbage, scrapped automobile or
scrapped truck or part thereof, on the right-of-way of any street or public
road of the city.



   (B)   The placing or leaving of the articles or matter forbidden by
this section shall, for each day or portion thereof that articles of matter
are placed or left, constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 7-26)  Penalty, see § 93.999



ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE



§ 93.065  REQUIRED.



   The owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any building or premises,
where there shall be a nuisance or any violation of any ordinance relating to
health and sanitation, shall be jointly and severally liable therefor and
each of them may be required to abate the same or comply with the order of
the appropriate enforcement official within the time specified within the
order.



(Prior Code, § 7-27)



Statutory reference:



   Abatement of public health nuisance, see G.S. § 130A-19



   Abatement of public health nuisance by local health director, see G.S.
§ 130A-19



   Authority of city to abate, see G.S. § 160A-193



§ 93.066  NOTICE AND ORDER TO ABATE.



   (A)   If a determination is made that the conditions constituting a
public nuisance as described  in § 93.047(B) through (D) exist, the city
shall notify, in writing, the owner, occupant or person in possession of the
premises in question of the conditions constituting the public nuisance and
shall order the prompt abatement thereof within 15 days from the receipt of
the written notice.



   (B)   If a determination is made that the conditions constituting a
public nuisance as described  in § 93.047(A) exist, the city shall notify,
in writing, the owner, occupant or person in possession of the premises in
question of the conditions constituting the public nuisance and shall order
the prompt abatement thereof within ten days from the receipt of the written
notice.  When a person has failed to comply with a notice of violation as
described above, the city  shall not be required to provide further notice
of violation to that person with regard to the same property before taking
any of the enforcement actions authorized under this chapter.



(Ord. O-07-2018, passed 6-28-2018)



§ 93.067  HEARING.



   (A)   At any time before the expiration of the 15-day abatement
period specified in § 93.066(A), the owner or any party of interest may
request a hearing before the City Manager or his or her designee(s) to appeal
the finding  that a public nuisance as defined in § 93.047(B) through (D)
exists on the premises. The request for a hearing must be in writing and must
be filed with the City Code Enforcement Officer. The officer shall fix a time
for the hearing, and the initial abatement order shall be temporarily
suspended pending such hearing. The hearing must be held by the City Manager
or his or her designee(s)  within 31 calendar days following  receipt of
the request for hearing.  At the hearing, the individual(s) affected by the
order shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to refute the
findings which supported the abatement order.  Any persons desiring to do so
may attend the hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter heard. The
rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in the hearing.



   (B)   Upon completion of the hearing, the City Manager or his or her
designee(s) shall consider the evidence and shall either revoke the initial
order, issue a final order which differs from the initial order, or reinstate
the initial order as a final abatement order.



(Ord. O-07-2018, passed 6-28-2018)



§ 93.068  FAILURE OF OWNER TO ABATE.



   (A)   City action. Upon the occurrence of either of the following
conditions,  the city shall cause said condition to be removed or otherwise
remedied by having employees of the city and/or an independent contractor 
go upon the premises and remove or otherwise abate such nuisance under the
supervision of an officer or employee designated by the City Manager:



      (1)   A hearing is requested and held under § 93.067
resulting in either a final order with modifications or the reinstatement of
the initial order as a final order, and such order is not complied with
within 15 days from adjournment of the hearing.



      (2)   No hearing is requested or held, and the respondent
having been ordered to abate such a public nuisance fails, neglects or
refuses to abate or remove the condition constituting the nuisance within 15
days from receipt of said order.



   (B)   Request to city.  Any person who has been ordered to abate a
public nuisance may within the time allowed request the city in writing to
remove the condition, the cost of which shall be paid by the person making
the request.



   (C)   Enforcement and penalties.



      (1)   If any person, having been ordered to abate a public
nuisance, fails, neglects or refuses to abate or remove the condition
constituting the nuisance within 15 days from the receipt of the order, in
addition to other remedies cited in this chapter for the enforcement of its
provisions and pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(b), the regulations and standards
in this chapter may be enforced through the issuance of civil penalties by
the City Manager or his or her designee.



      (2)   Subsequent citations for the same violation may be
issued by the City Manager or his or her designee if the offender does not
correct the violation within three days of the time specified therein (except
as otherwise provided in a warning situation).



(Prior Code, § 7-29)  (Ord. CCTA-01-91, passed 8-8-1991; Ord. O-05-05,
passed 7-7-2005; Ord. O-07-05, passed 10-6-2005; Ord. O-07-2018, passed
6-28-2018)



§ 93.069  RECOVERY OF COST.



   (A)   The actual cost incurred by the city in removing or otherwise
remedying a public nuisance shall be charged to the owner of the lot or
parcel of land and it shall be the duty of the tax collector to mail a
statement of the charges to the owner or other person in possession of the
premises with instructions that the charges are due and payable within 30
days from the receipt thereof.



   (B)   In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public
nuisance are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of
charges, the charges shall become a lien upon the land or premises where the
public nuisance existed and shall be collected as unpaid taxes, as provided
in G.S. § 160A-193.



(Prior Code, § 7-30)



§ 93.070  PROCEDURE IS ALTERNATIVE TO OTHER AUTHORIZED PROCEDURES.



   The procedure set forth hereinabove shall be in addition to any other
remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of
public nuisances, and the provisions shall not prevent the city from
proceeding in a criminal action against any person violating the provisions
of this chapter as provided in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 7-31)



§ 93.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Abatement of nuisance.  The following penalties are hereby
established.



 

Warning citation
 

Correct violation within ten days



First citation
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Second citation for same offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Third and subsequent
 

as set forth in the fee schedule




 



(Prior Code, § 7-29)  (Ord. CCTA-01-91, passed 8-8-1991; Ord. O-05-05,
passed 7-7-2005; Ord. O-07-05, passed 10-6-2005)



CHAPTER 94:  PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Definitions



Permits



   94.15   Required



   94.16   Application



   94.17   Standards of issuance



   94.18   Revocation



Prohibitions and Exceptions



   94.30   Certain activities prohibited



   94.31   Exceptions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK.  The portion of any street lying between its intersections with
other streets.



   GROUP DEMONSTRATION.  Any assembly together or concert of action
between or among two or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter
or of making known any position or promotion of the persons, or of or on
behalf of any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of
attracting attention to the assembly.



   PARADE.  Any assemblage of two or more persons participating in or
operating any vehicle or riding or attending any animal, in any march,
ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any kind in or upon the public
streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or other public grounds or places.



   PICKET LINE.  Any two or more persons formed together for the purpose
of making known any position or promotion of the persons, or on behalf of any
organization or class or persons.



(Prior Code, § 10-30)



PERMITS



§ 94.15  REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate
in any parade or group demonstration in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley
or other public place within the city unless a permit therefor has been
issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 10-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.16  APPLICATION.



   The Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee shall issue permits as
required. In the issuance thereof the Chief shall:



   (A)   Require a written application for permit, to be filed not less
than 24 hours in advance of the parade, picket line or group demonstration,
which application shall specify the time and place of the commencement of any
picket line and the time, place, route and duration of any parade or group
demonstration;



   (B)   Require that the application for a permit specify whether or
not minors below the age of 18 years will be permitted to participate; and



   (C)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify and
the permit shall designate the persons in charge of the activity. The persons
shall be required to accompany the parade, picket line or group demonstration
and shall carry the permit with them at that time. The permit shall not be
valid in the possession of any other person.



(Prior Code, § 10-32)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.17  STANDARDS OF ISSUANCE.



   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit for the proposed parade unless
the Chief finds that:



   (A)   The parades, picket lines or group demonstrations are to
commence before 6:00 a.m. or terminate after 5:00 p.m.;



   (B)   The parades or group demonstrations are to be held at the same
time and place as those designated in a permit issued pursuant to a written
application previously received by the Chief of Police or the Chief’s
designee;



   (C)   The conduct of the parade will substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;



   (D)   The conduct of the parade or demonstration will require the
diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly
police the line of movement of the parade and of contiguous areas so that
adequate police protection cannot be provided the remainder of the city;



   (E)   The conduct of the parade or demonstration will require the
diversion of so great a number of ambulances so that adequate ambulance
service to portions of the city not occupied by the parade or demonstration
and contiguous areas will be prevented;



   (F)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade or demonstration will substantially interfere with
adequate fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas
contiguous to the assembly areas;



   (G)   The conduct of the parade or demonstration is reasonably
likely to result in violence to persons or property causing serious harm to
the public;



   (H)   The parade or demonstration is to be held for the primary
purpose of advertising a product, goods or event, and is designed to be held
primary for private profit; or



   (I)   The conduct of the parade or demonstration will interfere with
the movement of firefighting equipment to an extent that adequate fire
protection cannot be provided to the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-33)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.18  REVOCATION.



   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade,
picket line or group demonstration for any of the following causes:



   (A)   The violation by any participant of § 94.30; or



   (B)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the
permit.



(Prior Code, § 10-34)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PROHIBITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS



§ 94.30  CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.



   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of any parade, picket line or group
demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:



   (A)   The carrying on or about the person of any firearm or any
weapon, including but not limited to blackjacks, nightsticks or flashlights
which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon; or



   (B)   The taking or keeping of a dog or other animal, whether
leashed or unleashed.



(Prior Code, § 10-35) (Ord. O-09-18, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.31  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Funeral processions; or



   (B)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(Prior Code, § 10-36)



CHAPTER 95:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Property numbering requirements



   95.02   Planting of trees



   95.03   Removing dirt or gravel from streets



   95.04   Awnings regulated



   95.05   Gates opening on streets and sidewalks



   95.06   Obstructions



   95.07   Removal of encroachments on streets



   95.08   Placing objects on streets and sidewalks



   95.09   Protection from construction near sidewalk



   95.10   Snow and ice removal



   95.11   Sidewalk construction materials



   95.12   Sidewalk and planting strip required



Excavations and Cuts



   95.25   Permit required



   95.26   Protection of openings



   95.27   Filling



Utility Poles



   95.40   Permit required



   95.41   Care and inspection



Charter reference:



   Eminent domain, see Charter § 7.2



   Street improvements, see Charter § 7.1



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  PROPERTY NUMBERING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every owner of a dwelling, building or other structure on any
street, avenue or alley within the city, when notified of the proper number
of the structure by the Director of Public Works and Utilities, shall place
the same in a conspicuous place on the front of the structure. One whole
number shall be allowed for each 25 feet of the front footage whenever
practical whether improved or vacant, provided, that any structure with a
front footage of less than 25 feet shall be allotted one whole number.



   (B)   All streets, avenues and alleys running north and south shall
be numbered from Main Street or the nearest street thereto with odd numbers
on the left side and even numbers on the right side.



   (C)   All streets, avenues and alleys running east and west shall be
numbered from Aspen Street or the nearest street thereto with odd numbers on
the west side and even numbers on the right side.



   (D)   One hundred numbers shall be allotted for each block, so that
the numbers on each consecutive block shall commence with consecutive 101.



(Prior Code, § 12-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.02  PLANTING OF TREES.



   Citizens may plant trees in front of their lots and around their lots
on the sidewalks under the supervision of the Director of Public Works and
Utilities, provided they shall not plant any that are detrimental to the
city. No trees shall be planted in the streets or gutters.



(Prior Code, § 12-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.03  REMOVING DIRT OR GRAVEL FROM STREETS.



   No person shall dig or scrape up or carry away gravel, earth, dirt,
rocks or sand, from any street, alley or grounds belonging to the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.04  AWNINGS REGULATED.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any shelter, sunshade or
awning in front of any building which shall extend over the sidewalk, which
shall be less than seven feet above the level of any sidewalk, or which shall
extend more than ten feet from the building to which it is attached;
provided, however, that stationary awning arms shall not be less than eight
feet above the level of the sidewalk.



(Prior Code, § 12-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.05  GATES OPENING ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   No gate to any residence, lot or other enclosure shall swing or open
outward over or into the street or sidewalk. Each day any gate is allowed to
open outward over the street or sidewalk shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 12-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.06  OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to build, erect, construct or place any
porch, steps, fence, wall or other obstruction whatsoever in or over any of
the streets or sidewalks, and it shall be unlawful to repair or improve any
porch, steps, fence, wall or other obstruction whatsoever now in or over any
of the streets or sidewalks; and it shall be unlawful to obstruct any
sidewalk or street with any buggy, wheelbarrow, wagon, automobile, truck or
other vehicle, railroad car, chair, bench, open gate, chicken coop, box or
other article; provided, a margin not exceeding two and one-half feet in
width on the inside of the sidewalk in the business blocks shall be allowed
for the exhibition of merchandise by abutting merchants; provided, further,
that this section shall not apply to baby carriages and invalid chairs rolled
on the sidewalks in a manner as not to obstruct the same.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section the words OBSTRUCT or
INTERFERENCE herein used, shall be construed to mean any permanent
encroachment or temporary encroachment across that part of the street line
which separates or divides the sidewalk or street from the property of an
abutting owner.



   (C)   When necessary, and in the discretion of the Director of
Public Works and Utilities or City Manager, a temporary obstruction or
interference may be permitted upon the conditions as shall be prescribed by
the Director of Public Works and Utilities or City Manager.



   (D)   No building permit duly issued by the Building Inspector shall
in any manner be deemed a permit to violate any part of this section.



(Prior Code, § 12-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Placing tree trimmings so as to interfere with traffic, see § 50.09



§ 95.07  REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENTS ON STREETS.



   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works and Utilities to
notify all persons about to erect any building, sidewalk, wall or fence near
the street or any public way not to encroach upon the street or public way
and if, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works and Utilities, any
obstruction is being, or has been, on any street or public way, the Director
of Public Works and Utilities shall cause a survey of the line of the street
or public way to be made by a competent surveyor, and if the survey shall
show that the street or way is obstructed by any building, sidewalk, wall or
fence, the owner shall be required to pay the costs of the survey, and be
required to remove all obstructions at once; and no person who shall be found
to have encroached on any street or public way by any building, sidewalk,
wall or fence, shall refuse or neglect to remove the same upon notice from
the Director of Public Works and utilities within one week from the date
thereof.



(Prior Code, § 12-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.08  PLACING OBJECTS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   No brick, stone or wood or other substance obstructing the
free passage of persons and vehicles shall be placed or suffered to lie in
any of the streets or sidewalks or other ways of the city.



   (B)   No person shall place thereon any boxes, crates, casks or
barrels of any description, or any other obstruction of any kind; provided,
that any person erecting a building, may, with permission, place building
material for immediate use on the streets in a way as to not interfere with
the usual traffic.



(Prior Code, § 12-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.09  PROTECTION FROM CONSTRUCTION NEAR SIDEWALK.



   Before building or remodeling at any place where the same is in close
proximity to the sidewalk an overhead covered passageway shall be constructed
so as to leave the sidewalk unobstructed and provide safe and easy passage.



(Prior Code, § 12-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.10  SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.



   Every occupant of a store building, in front of which the sidewalk is
paved with stone, brick, asphalt or cement, shall remove snow, ice or other
obstruction from the sidewalk at the earliest possible time and as soon as
the weather permits.



(Prior Code, § 12-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.11  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.



   No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any person of any
brick, wood or other material without a written permit from the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.12  SIDEWALK AND PLANTING STRIP REQUIRED.



   Except as provided in divisions (E) and (F) of this section,
construction of sidewalks and planting strips shall be required along public
street frontages in conjunction with new development.



   (A)   The sidewalks shall be constructed to a minimum width of five
feet and a minimum thickness of four inches of concrete.  All sidewalks
shall be placed in the street right-of-way where sufficient right-of-way
exists and shall be a minimum distance of six feet off of the back of the
curb in order to accommodate a planting strip.  Sidewalks shall contain a
minimum of six inches of concrete at driveway crossings.  Sidewalks shall
comply with the American with Disabilities Act and shall be constructed in
accordance with North Carolina Department of Transportation standards.



   (B)   Where public right-of-way is not sufficient, the sidewalk
and/or planting strip may be located wholly or partially within a perpetual
easement in favor of the city.



   (C)   The sidewalk and/or planting strip may be located within the
designated landscape area as required under § 153.047(B) of the Unified
Development Ordinance if feasible.



   (D)   The six foot planting strip shall be grassed or otherwise
landscaped with plant material.  If street landscaping is required under §
153.047(B)(2) of the Unified Development Ordinance, the landscaping may be
located within the planting strip if feasible.  Along roads that do not have
curb and gutter, sidewalks shall be located on the lot side of road side
ditches.



   (E)   Development in the following locations is exempt from this
section:



      (1)   Along existing alleys;



      (2)   Along existing cul-de-sac streets and/or permanent dead
end streets of less than 500 feet in length where no sidewalks are present
and along the bulb of existing cul-de-sacs; and



      (3)   Along streets that are designated as freeways by the
city Thoroughfare Plan or Transportation Plan.



   (F)   The following types of development are exempt from this
section:



      (1)   Changes of use in existing buildings;



      (2)   Expansions of existing buildings by less than 33% of the
building area or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less;



      (3)   Renovations and facade improvements to existing
buildings with no expansion;



      (4)   Accessory structures; and



      (5)   Single family and two family dwellings on existing lots
of record.



   (G)   Where because of topography, geography, drainage features or
other unusual conditions relating to the site, strict compliance with this
section shall cause an unusual or unnecessary hardship, the Staff Review
Committee may vary any of the requirements set forth in this section. 
Within areas zoned C-B where the installation of a planting strip would serve
no public purpose and/or not be in keeping with adjacent developed areas
along the same street, the Staff Review Committee may vary the planting strip
requirements set forth in this section.



(Ord. O-05-12, passed 9-13-2012)



EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS



§ 95.25  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall make any excavation, cut or other opening in any of the
streets, sidewalks or other public ways without first having obtained a
permit therefor from the Director of Public Works and Utilities.



(Prior Code, § 12-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.26  PROTECTION OF OPENINGS.



   Any person excavating or opening any street, sidewalk or other public
way shall protect the same with a sufficient number of red flags or other
warning devices during the daytime and red lights at night, in accordance
with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.



(Prior Code, § 12-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.27  FILLING.



   All openings made in any street, sidewalk or other public way under the
provisions herein contained shall immediately, upon the completion of the
work, be filled in and the surface thereof made flush with the adjacent
surfaces. Any hard surface, macadam or asphalt removed shall be replaced by
the city at the expense of the applicant granted permission to open the
street, sidewalk or other public way.



(Prior Code, § 12-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



UTILITY POLES



§ 95.40  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No poles for electric, telegraph, telephone or other purposes shall be
placed on any street without a permit therefor being obtained from the
Director of Public Works and Utilities.



(Prior Code, § 12-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.41  CARE AND INSPECTION.



   It shall be the duty of the owners of all poles supporting electric,
telephone or telegraph or other wires, to keep the same in a safe condition.



(Prior Code, § 12-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 96:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   96.01   City parks and playgrounds; hours



   96.02   Parks and recreation facilities; ban on registered sex
offenders



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  CITY PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS; HOURS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to be on any park or playground
owned or operated by the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m.
(Highland Drive Park shall be between sunset and 6:30 a.m.), except those
persons who have been authorized to be in those places by the Parks Director.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.02  PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES; BAN ON REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS.



   (A)   Prohibition. No person registered with the State of North
Carolina and/or any other state or federal agency as a registered sex
offender, including, but not limited to, the sex offender registry
established pursuant to G.S. § 14-27A, shall enter into or upon any public
park or recreation facility owned, operated or maintained by the city.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      OFFICIAL MEETING.  A meeting that is required to be open to the
public by the Open Meetings Law, G.S. Chapter 143, Art. 33C.



      PUBLIC PARK.  Any publicly owned, leased, operated or maintained
property that is designated as a park by the city, including any adjacent
public parking area as well as the driveway, entrance way or pedestrian
walkway used by the public to access the public park or recreation facility.



      RECREATION FACILITY. Any publicly owned, leased, operated or
maintained property that is designated as a recreation facility by the city,
including any adjacent public parking area as well as the driveway, entrance
way or pedestrian walkway used by the public to access the recreation
facility.



      REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER.  An individual who is registered by any
state or federal agency as a sex offender and/or whose name is published or
required to be published on any state or federal sex offender registry,
including, but not limited to, the North Carolina Sex Offender and Public
Protection Registry established pursuant to G.S. § 14-27A.



   (C)   Limited exceptions.



      (1)   Official meetings.



         (a)   A registered sex offender who has the right to be
present at an official meeting shall have the limited privilege of entering
on and into a park or recreation facility for such time as is necessary to
attend the meeting or function, but any form of loitering or lingering shall
be a violation of this section.



         (b)   The privilege shall only extend to those parts of
the park and/or recreation facility that are commonplace for meetings of that
kind and any registered sex offender found outside of those parts shall be
punished as outlined in § 96.99(B).



      (2)   Polling place. When such recreation facility is used as
a polling place for an election, the registered sex offender may enter the
facility for the limited purpose of voting if he or she qualifies to do so at
the polling place.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (b) Violation of § 96.02 shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by
a fine as set forth in the fee schedule and/or incarceration for up to 30
days. Each entry into a public park, regardless of the time period between
the entries, shall constitute a separate offense under this section.



(Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 97:  FILM PRODUCTION



Section



   97.01   Purpose



   97.02   Definitions



   97.03   Application; exemptions



   97.04   Film permit



   97.05   Low impact vs. high impact filming; definitions and
determination



   97.06   Permitting and notification procedure for filming in the city



   97.07   Street closures and intermittent traffic holding



   97.08   Special effects, explosives and similar devices



   97.09   Removal of vegetation



   97.10   Clean-up



   97.11   General restrictions; access and public safety



   97.12   Insurance



   97.13   Disclaimer of liability; indemnity



   97.14   Deposit required; fees; additional permits, facilities and
services



§ 97.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City of Lincolnton recognizes film production as an
important economic activity which benefits the community. However, such
activity requires regulation to ensure that citizens, property, traffic flow
and public safety are protected and the least amount of disruption to the
community occurs.



   (B)   The city has developed this Film Ordinance (“this
chapter”) to facilitate advance planning, coordinate scheduling and arrange
for appropriate city services and operations to serve the film production
event in an efficient manner. Toward this end, film production companies are
required to secure a film permit in advance of any film production activity.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE FILM PRODUCTION. Motion pictures, television programs or
video tapes produced by a non-profit organization which qualifies under
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization.



   CITY SERVICES. Services provided by the city in support of special
events, including regular and over-time staff hours, regular and over-time
equipment hours, supplies and other services.



   FILM LIAISON. City staff member who administers the Film Ordinance and
permit application process.



   FILM PERMIT. A document issued by the city upon completion of the
application process that officially approves the film production and
identifies requirements for appropriate city services and operations and
after payment of any required fees.



   FILM PRODUCTION. All activity attendant to staging or shooting motion
pictures, television shows or programs, commercials, videotapes or similar
productions. FILM PRODUCTION shall be deemed to include all activity
attendant to the arrival and set up of base camps, equipment and vehicles and
the take down and departure of same.



   LOCATION MANAGER. A representative of the film production organization
or the individual in charge of planning and implementing the film production.
The person submitting the permit application must be an adult age 18 years or
older.



   NEWS MEDIA. The photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose
of television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporters,
photographers or camerapersons.



   PRODUCTION COMPANY. The film production organization which is planning
and implementing the film production.



   STUDENT FILM PRODUCTION. The photographing, filming or videotaping for
educational purposes with a letter from the student’s school verifying the
student status.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.03  APPLICATION; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter shall apply to any film production activities
taking place within the city limits, whether on public or private property.
Examples of film production activities include, but are not limited to,
staging or shooting motion pictures, television shows or programs,
videotapes, and commercials.



   (B)   Note: The following activities are exempt from this chapter:



      (1)   News media activities;



      (2)   Charitable film production; and



      (3)   Student film production.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.04  FILM PERMIT.



   (A)   Application procedure.



      (1)   At the beginning of the film planning process, the
location manager should contact the Film Liaison to discuss the planned film
production and to obtain a copy of the film application. Prior to submittal
of the application, a pre-production meeting is required between the Film
Liaison and the location manager. Other agencies may be included in this
meeting as needed. A complete listing of all anticipated locations with
tentative dates is requested at this time, as the Film Liaison or other
agency representatives may know of possible conflicts with city services,
local events or other filming activities of which the location manager may
not be aware.



      (2)   The production company should complete the application
with required attachments and return it to the Film Liaison no later than 30
days prior to film production. The Film Liaison will review the application
for completeness and route the application to the appropriate city staff for
acknowledgment of service and operations support for the event and for
comment. When all requirements listed on the application have been met, the
Film Liaison will issue a film permit to the location manager for the
specific film production activity at the specified times and locations. The
city reserves the right to deny film activities that, in the city’s view,
pose a threat to public health and safety and/or if determined that the
production company will be unable to provide adequate services to ensure
public health and safety during the activity. The Film Liaison may convene
the appropriate city staff to meet with the location manager prior to issuing
the permit and as needed after the permit is issued to facilitate
coordination of activities and services. In the event that the film
production involves multiple locations or dates, separate applications per
location per day are required. Multiple locations listed on the same
application or illegible applications will not be accepted. Incomplete
applications will also not be accepted.



      (3)   No more than one filming permit will be issued within
any neighborhood or business district for any given time or date. The
production company shall limit the activities at each location to those
outlined in the permit and within the time frame specified in the permit.
Failure of the production company to comply with the guidelines and
conditions set forth in each permit or the use of any location not specified
in the permit shall give the city grounds to revoke the permit or take other
restrictive actions as necessary.



   (B)   Change in plans. The permit is issued based on the conditions
outlined in the permit application. The location manager must notify the Film
Liaison about any changes in plans, activities and/or service requirements no
later than three weeks prior to the event so that accommodations can be made,
if feasible. If accommodations for the proposed changes are not feasible,
then the location manager must follow the arrangements specified in the
permit application.



   (C)   Permit amendments. The Film Liaison should document changes in
plans in writing as an amendment to the film permit and circulate to
respective city departments.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.05  LOW IMPACT VS. HIGH IMPACT FILMING; DEFINITIONS AND DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Low impact vs. high impact filming activities in residential
areas. Filming in residential areas is defined as either low impact or high
impact.



      (1)   LOW IMPACT FILM ACTIVITIES are defined as those which:



         (a)   Have a minimal impact on the activities of the
neighborhood;



         (b)   Take place between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday and noon to 10:00 p.m. on Sunday including the
arrival, set up, take down and departure of base camps, equipment and
vehicles; and



         (c)   Have a minimal impact on traffic and pedestrian
flow and parking.



      (2)   HIGH IMPACT FILMING ACTIVITIES are defined as those
which involve extenuating circumstances including, but not limited to,
extended hours, displacement of more than 25% of on-street parking in
neighborhoods where on-street parking is customary and essential to
residents, use of explosives, pyrotechnics, fire, smoke-making machines or
similar special effects, extensive set dressing, extensive nighttime
lighting, loud noises, gunshots, street closures, and larger than average
base camps and/or base camps with larger than average trucks parked on public
streets.



   (B)   Low impact vs. high impact filming activities in commercial
areas outside of downtown business district. Filming in commercial areas
outside of the downtown business district is defined as either low impact or
high impact.



      (1)   LOW IMPACT FILM ACTIVITIES are defined as those which:



         (a)   Have a minimal impact on the activities of the
area; and



         (b)   Have a minimal impact on traffic and pedestrian
flow and parking.



      (2)   HIGH IMPACT FILMING ACTIVITIES are defined as those
which involve extenuating circumstances including, but not limited to,
displacement of more than 25% of on-street parking in areas where on-street
parking is customary and essential to businesses, use of explosives,
pyrotechnics, fire, smoke making machines or similar special effects,
extensive set dressing, loud noises, gunshots, street closures and larger
than average base camps and/or base camps with larger than average trucks
parked on public streets.



   (C)   Low impact vs. high impact filming activities in downtown
business district. The DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT is defined as the area
bounded by Government Street to the west, Pine Street to the north, Water
Street to the south and Flint Street to the east. Filming in the downtown
business district may be defined as either low impact or high impact.



      (1)   LOW IMPACT FILM ACTIVITIES are defined as those which:



         (a)   Have a minimal impact on the activities of the
area;



         (b)   Take place outside of regular business hours.
Since business hours for restaurants may be different from those of service
and retail establishments, this determination will be made on a case-by-case
basis;



         (c)   Take place outside of the peak shopping season
from Thanksgiving Day to December 31;



         (d)   Have a minimal impact on parking, vehicular and
pedestrian traffic flow and maintain public access to businesses that are
open and allow for normal flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic;



         (e)   Utilize no more than two on-street parking spaces
in any linear block containing businesses or residents dependent upon
on-street parking;



         (f)   Utilize no on-street parking where there are no
marked on-street parking spaces;



         (g)   Utilize no more than 25% of the available sidewalk
for filming-related activity and provide a clear path around or through such
activity; and



         (h)   Produce minimal noise between the hours of 10:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



      (2)   HIGH IMPACT FILMING ACTIVITIES may be defined as those
which involve extenuating circumstances including, but not limited to, those
which take place during business hours, disrupt traffic flow or parking,
occur during the peak shopping season, involve the use of explosives,
pyrotechnics, fire, smoke-making machines or similar special effects,
extensive set dressing, extensive nighttime lighting, loud noises, gunshots,
street closures, and larger than average base camps and/or base camps with
larger than average trucks parked on public streets.



   (D)   The low vs. high impact determination will be made by the city
on a case-by-case basis.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.06  PERMITTING AND NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE FOR FILMING IN THE CITY.



   (A)   Notification process. The production company is responsible
for notifying all businesses and residents affected by the film production.
Notification shall take place following the city’s review of the
application and no less than ten business days prior to any film production
activity. The production company must notify affected businesses and
residents of the planned activity (including equipment staging areas and base
camps). The Film Liaison shall determine the extent of the required
notification. Notification shall include a copy of the film permit
application and a cover letter from the production company and shall include
detailed information concerning the location and duration of the filming
activities as well as specifics regarding lights, noise, traffic and parking
where applicable and contact phone numbers. Maps and other pertinent
information may be included as well. The production company is responsible
for seeing that businesses and residents on upper floors receive the same
notification as street-level businesses and residents. The cover letter
provided by the production company shall provide notice of a five business
day call-in period as outlined in division (B) below. Documentation of the
required notification is required for further processing of the application.



   (B)   Business or resident concerns. Businesses and residents within
the required notification area shall have a five business day call-in period
during which they may contact the Film Liaison to ask any questions or
express concerns or objections. The Film Liaison will attempt to address
objections and concerns in consultation with the location manager.



   (C)   Notification process for high impact filming. The notification
process for high impact filming as defined in § 97.05 above shall follow the
same procedure and include the same information as that required for low
impact filming. However, proof of notification in the form of signatures on
sign off sheets must be obtained from affected businesses and/or residents
and submitted to the Film Liaison prior to any further processing of the film
application.



   (D)   Permit issuance. At the end of the call-in period, the Film
Liaison will issue the film permit if all reported concerns and objections
have been adequately addressed.



   (E)   Permit amendments. If the film production activities differ
substantially from the film permit application, the production company shall
re-notify affected businesses and residents in accordance with divisions (A),
(B) and (C) above.



   (F)   Insufficient notice. The city reserves the right to deny or
revoke permits where insufficient time has been allowed for proper
notification or when the notification process has been improperly applied.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.07  STREET CLOSURES AND INTERMITTENT TRAFFIC HOLDING.



   (A)   Street closures. Production companies who wish to temporarily
close a street inside the city limits must also complete a street closure
application. Applications for closures of city maintained streets must be
submitted a minimum of 30 days prior to the requested closure date. If the
request involves closure of a state maintained street, the application would
also need to be submitted in advance to the North Carolina Film Commission
for approval.



   (B)   Traffic control. Traffic control, if needed, must be handled
by off-duty police officers hired by the production company or as otherwise
approved by the City Police Department. The City Police Department reserves
the right to determine the number of officers needed.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.08  SPECIAL EFFECTS, EXPLOSIVES AND SIMILAR DEVICES.



   No film activity which involves the use of explosives, pyrotechnics,
fire, smoke-making machines or other special effects of a similar nature may
be undertaken unless specifically approved by permit from the City Fire
Department. The City Fire Department reserves the right to require the
presence of off-duty fire personnel during any film activity which involves
the use of hazardous materials.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.09  REMOVAL OF VEGETATION.



   Removal or alteration of vegetation in the public right-of-way or on
city-owned lands is prohibited unless specifically approved by the film
permit.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.10  CLEAN-UP.



   The production company is fully responsible for clean-up and proper
disposal of all waste and materials produced.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.11  GENERAL RESTRICTIONS; ACCESS AND PUBLIC SAFETY.



   The following restrictions and standards apply to film production in
the city:



   (A)   Clear access must be provided and maintained for all emergency
vehicles per the City Fire Code.



   (B)   Production vehicles and equipment shall not block fire
hydrants, driveways, or other access ramps unless authorized by the city
and/or affected businesses/residents.



   (C)   Production vehicles and equipment must be parked in such a way
as to not impede safe lines of vision at intersections and comply with all
city ordinances regarding on-street parking.



   (D)   Lighting for filming, both during the day and at night, should
not interfere with the safe movement of traffic.



   (E)   Production companies blocking or holding traffic on streets
scheduled for trash/recycling pick up or leaf collection must allow trucks to
access those areas for normal pickup.



   (F)   Production companies are responsible for returning any public
rights of way used for filming, base camp, or equipment purposes to their
original condition in a timely manner, and for repairing damage to foliage,
grass, or public property.



   (G)   Any filming activity involving holding, delaying or re-routing
of traffic may require the presence of one or more off-duty police officers,
to be determined by the City Police Department.



   (H)   The city reserves the right to require the presence of one or
more off-duty police officers at any filming activity utilizing public
property and/or rights-of-way for base camps.



   (I)   The city reserves the right to require the presence of one or
more off-duty fire personnel at any filming activity utilizing hazardous
materials.



   (J)   No parking of vehicles or equipment of any kind in alleys
shall be permitted without written permission from the City Fire Department
and the written consent of affected businesses and residents.



   (K)   In the event of natural or civil disasters, the city reserves
the right to cancel all outstanding film permits on both public and private
properties within city limits. Should evacuation of a street, neighborhood,
or district be deemed necessary by fire, police, or other emergency
authorities, all outstanding permits for that area are null and void. Permits
will be re-granted as soon as possible following a safety evaluation by the
city.



   (L)   The city reserves the right to change, modify, update, or
waive provisions of these standards where necessary for the public’s safety.



   (M)   The city reserves the rights to cancel filming permits and/or
take further restrictive actions where necessary to assure adherence to these
standards.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.12  INSURANCE.



   (A)   All film productions are required to maintain liability
insurance policies for filming on location within the city. The following
minimum policy amounts are required:



 

General liability insurance
 
$1,000,000


Automobile liability
 
$1,000,000


Worker’s comp and employer’s liability
 
$1,000,000



 



   (B)   While these minimum insurance amounts are required, each
filming will be treated on a case by case basis. If the production company
has “high hazard” events planned, then these amounts may be increased.
Examples of high hazard events include, but are not limited to, using a
vehicle to jump a railroad track, using a significant amount of explosives or
pyrotechnics, or demolition of a building or vehicle. The Film Liaison will
determine if insurance amounts need to be increased.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.13  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY; INDEMNITY.



   (A)   Every production company to whom a filming permit is issued
and every person who participates in filming events acknowledges and agrees
that the city, its elected officials and employees, shall not be held liable,
for any injury, loss, damage, liability or obligation arising out of, or
connected in any manner with, the planning, permitting, or conduct of the
film production.



   (B)   Every production company to whom a filming permit is issued,
as a condition of the issuance of the filming permit, agrees to indemnify and
hold harmless the city, its elected officials and employees with respect to
any and every claim, demand, cause of action, injury, loss, damage, liability
and obligation arising out of, or connected in any manner with, the planning,
permitting, or conduct of the film production. The city shall require a
written acknowledgment of the disclaimer of liability and the indemnity set
out herein.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



§ 97.14  DEPOSIT REQUIRED; FEES; ADDITIONAL PERMITS, FACILITIES AND
SERVICES.



   (A)   Required permits. Some film productions may include activities
that require the issuance of one or more permits by the city, as outlined in
the city fee schedule.



   (B)   Off-duty city personnel. Some film productions may require the
use of off-duty city police or fire personnel. Such personnel may be hired
directly by the production company at an hourly rate of $30 per hour for four
hour minimum periods of time.



   (C)   Use of city services or facilities. Production companies that
wish to use city services or facilities will be charged the same fee as other
for-profit ventures for the service or facility used. Production companies
that wish to use city services for which a fee has not been established will
be charged at the discretion of the city on the basis of time, equipment, and
materials. The city reserves the right to deny requests for use of city
services or facilities.



   (D)   Deposit required. Prior to the granting of any film permits,
the city will require production companies to assure their financial
responsibility through a $5,000 cash deposit. Upon completion of filming, the
deposit will be returned after the production company has paid all
outstanding bills owed to the city.



(Ord. –, passed 1-9-2014)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   PEDDLING AND SOLICITING AT PRIVATE RESIDENCES



      111.   POOLROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS



      112.   TAXICABS



      113.   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS



      114.   SIDEWALK DINING



      115.   PAWNBROKERS, METAL DEALERS AND SCRAP DEALERS



      116.   SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



CHAPTER 110:  PEDDLING AND SOLICITING AT PRIVATE RESIDENCES



Section



   110.01   Door-to-door solicitations prohibited



Cross-reference:



   Creation of noise by peddlers, see § 93.016



   Placing of merchandise on sidewalks, see § 95.06



   Soliciting alms, see § 131.02



Statutory reference:



   Regulation and licensing of businesses, G.S. §§ 160A-194



§ 110.01  DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATIONS PROHIBITED.



   The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of
merchandise not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or
occupant of the private residence for the purpose of soliciting orders for
the sale of goods, wares or merchandise or disposing of or peddling or
hawking the same is declared to be a nuisance and is punishable as a
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 9-40)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 111:  POOLROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS



Section



   111.01   License required



   111.02   Application for license



   111.03   Applications to be accompanied by tax and bond



   111.04   Bond required



   111.05   Cause for denial of license



   111.06   Form and content of license; posting



   111.07   Opening and closing hours



   111.08   Unlawful for certain persons to enter



   111.09   Acts prohibited to licensee and employees



   111.10   Revocation of license



   111.11   License not assignable or transferable



   111.12   Location and regulation of room



§ 111.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall maintain or operate any pool or billiard table, bowling
alley or any other table or alley for any game or play, for which a charge is
directly or indirectly made without a license therefor issued by the City
Council, it being the intent of this section that the tables and alleys,
except those in private homes, shall not be operated unless so licensed.



(Prior Code, § 9-50)  (Ord. O-08-02, passed 10-3-2002)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Applications for licenses shall be made to the City Council in letter
form and shall be filed with the tax collector. The forms shall be so
prepared as to furnish all information necessary to enable the City Council
to act intelligently on the application.



(Prior Code, § 9-51)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.03  APPLICATIONS TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY TAX AND BOND.



   Application shall be accompanied by the license tax and bond required
by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-52)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.04  BOND REQUIRED.



   Each application filed with the City Council for the purpose of
obtaining a license for any business as described in § 111.01 shall be
accompanied by a bond in a sum as may be required by the City Council and
with sureties as may be approved by it and conditioned upon the faithful
observance by the license and licensee’s employees of each provision of
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-53)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.05  CAUSE FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   The City Council shall not issue a license to any person:



   (A)   Who has been convicted of unlawfully selling or possessing
with intent to sale or deliver an alcoholic beverage, a controlled substance
or counterfeit controlled substance;



   (B)   Who is not a citizen and resident of the state;



   (C)   Who has been convicted within the last five years of a felony;
or



   (D)   Who is a habitual user of intoxicating liquor or narcotic
drugs.



(Prior Code, § 9-54)  (Ord. O-08-02, passed 10-3-2002)



§ 111.06  FORM AND CONTENT OF LICENSE; POSTING.



   Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall specify the
premises for which it is issued, the number of tables or alleys to be
operated thereunder, the name of the owner or operator and the dates upon
which the license begins and shall expire. The license shall be posted in a
prominent place on the premises at all times.



(Prior Code, § 9-55)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.07  OPENING AND CLOSING HOURS.



   No licensee and no employee of any licensee shall open, or allow to
remain open, any hall or room operated under § 111.03 before 7:00 a.m. or
after 2:00 a.m..



(Prior Code, § 9-56)  (Ord. O-19-2017, passed 12-7-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.08  UNLAWFUL FOR CERTAIN PERSONS TO ENTER.



   No person under 16 years of age shall be permitted from 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m. on school days. No person under 18 years of age permitted after
11:00 p.m.



(Prior Code, § 9-57)  (Ord. O-19-2017, passed 12-7-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.09  ACTS PROHIBITED TO LICENSEE AND EMPLOYEES.



   No license and no employee of any licensee shall:



   (A)   Suffer or permit the licensed premises to become disorderly;



   (B)   Suffer or permit any minor to enter or remain in or on the
licensed premises unless minor is under direct supervision by an adult; or



   (C)   Permit any alcoholic beverages, prescribed medications,
controlled or counterfeit substances to be sold on the licensed premises,
except a licensed premises, except a licensed premises may sell alcoholic
beverages with commission approved ABC license.



(Prior Code, § 9-58)  (Ord. O-08-02, passed 10-3-2002; Ord. O-02-03, passed
2-13-2003; Ord. O-19-2017, passed 12-7-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.10  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   A second conviction for a violation of any provision of this chapter
shall automatically act as a revocation of the license. The City Council may
at any other time, for cause, and after a hearing of which reasonable notice
shall be given the licensee as the City Council may direct, revoke any
license issued hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 9-59)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.11  LICENSE NOT ASSIGNABLE OR TRANSFERABLE.



   No license issued hereunder shall be assignable or transferable, and no
license issued hereunder shall cover any change of premises without the
written permission of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-60)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.12  LOCATION AND REGULATION OF ROOM.



   All public pool or billiard rooms shall be located on the ground floor
of the building housing the same; shall be well ventilated and lighted at all
times; shall have no window or door coverings that prevent public view from
the outside; shall be open for full inspection by any officer without
interference from the proprietor, owner or operator at all times and shall be
kept in a sanitary condition at all times.



(Prior Code, § 9-61) (Ord. O-19-2017, passed 12-7-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 112:  TAXICABS



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Definition



   112.02   Taxicab stands



Certificate of Convenience and Necessity



   112.15   Required; limit of one; proof of necessity



   112.16   Application; bond



   112.17   Granting; posting



   112.18   Cancellation for failure to begin operations



   112.19   Transfer



License



   112.30   Information required by city; insurance; display; driver
identification; compliance with rates; cancellation for violation



   112.31   Suspension



   112.32   Revocation



Vehicles



   112.45   Inspection subsequent to issuance of license



   112.46   Substitution



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate taxicabs, see G.S. § 160A-304



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TAXICAB.  Any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer passengers, operated
upon any street or highway on call or on demand, accepting or soliciting
passengers indiscriminately for hire between points along streets or highways
as may be directed by the passengers so being transported, and shall not
include motor vehicles or motor vehicle carriers as defined in G.S. §
62-3(17).



(Prior Code, § 9-70)



§ 112.02  TAXICAB STANDS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and operate a
taxicab stand for the parking of taxicabs without first obtaining a license
to operate a taxicab from the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate one or more taxicab stands
within the corporate limits of the city without having the proper taxicab
license from the city and without charging and collecting the rates as
prescribed by the city.



   (C)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle as a taxicab until the
vehicle has been registered in accordance with requirements in this state and
all proper licenses have been obtained therefor from the city and state.



(Prior Code, § 9-79)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Parking in loading zone, see § 72.16



   Standing at taxicab stand, see § 72.15



CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY



§ 112.15  REQUIRED; LIMIT OF ONE; PROOF OF NECESSITY.



   (A)   Required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
taxicab business upon and over the streets of the city without first having
applied for and secured from City Council a certificate of convenience and
necessity as hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   Burden of proof.  The burden of proof shall be upon the
applicant to establish the existence of public convenience and necessity for
the operation of the taxicabs specified in the application, and all other
facts required for the granting of a certificate.



(Prior Code, § 9-71)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.16  APPLICATION; BOND.



   (A)   Application.  Every person desiring to operate a taxicab upon
and over the streets of the city shall file on forms supplied by the City
Clerk an application for certificate of convenience and necessity. The
application for a certificate shall be filed with City Council with an
affidavit attached signed by two citizens certifying to applicant’s good
character.



   (B)   Bond.  The applicant shall be required, when application for
certificate is approved, to obtain an indemnifying or surety bond in a sum of
not less than $1,000 to serve as security for possible damages claimed by
persons who may suffer damages on account of the negligent operation of
taxicabs operated under the certificate; provided, however, that if the
applicant shall carry casualty insurance with some standard casualty and
insurance company, which will indemnify any person for damages sustained on
account of the negligent operation of applicant’s taxicabs, and if the
applicant shows a premium receipt on a policy covering a period of not less
than the following six months, the casualty insurance policy will be accepted
in lieu of an indemnifying or surety bond.



(Prior Code, § 9-72)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.17  GRANTING; POSTING.



   (A)   Conditions to granting.  No certificate shall be granted
until City Council shall, after hearing, declare by resolution that public
convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab service. In
determining whether public convenience and necessity require the operation of
taxicabs for which application for a certificate is made, City Council shall
consider and investigate whether the demand of the public requires additional
taxicab service; the adequacy of existing mass transportation and taxicab
service; the financial responsibility and experience of the applicant;
ability of the applicant to earn a fair return on the capital invested; the
number, kind and type of equipment and the color scheme to be used; the
effect which the additional taxicab service may have upon traffic congestion
and parking; whether the additional taxicab service will result in a greater
hazard to the public; and other relevant facts as City Council may deem
advisable or necessary. No certificate will be issued to any applicant unless
the applicant be the holder in due course and for value of the title to the
taxicab, and the holder of the certificate only shall be permitted to operate
the taxicab and the applicant shall not be allowed to engage the services of
any person to operate a taxicab for the person or in the person’s stead at
any time.



   (B)   Hearing.  Each application for certificate of convenience and
necessity shall be scheduled for a hearing not later than 30 days after the
same is filed, and the applicant shall be notified by the City Clerk by mail
to the business address set forth in the application of the date and time of
the hearing, the notification to be sent at least ten days before the date
set for the hearing. The City Clerk shall also, within the same time, notify
all persons who, at the time, hold certificates of convenience and necessity
for the operation of taxicabs within the municipality, of the date and time
for the hearing and the name of the applicant. In addition, City Council
shall have the power to have published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation at least ten days before the hearing a notice setting
forth the name of the applicant and the date and time of hearing. The cost of
the publication shall be paid by the applicant.



   (C)   Posting.  Every operator of a taxi under permit, as provided
herein, shall post conspicuously in the taxi the certificate of
identification issued by the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-73)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.18  CANCELLATION FOR FAILURE TO BEGIN OPERATIONS.



   If a certificate is granted to an applicant, and the applicant shall
fail, in accordance with the provisions of the certificate, to begin
operations within 60 days after the date of the certificate, then the
certificate shall become null and void, and no refund of any amount paid by
the applicant will be made by the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-74)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.19  TRANSFER.



   A certificate is not transferable without the consent and approval of
City Council. Application for a permit to transfer shall be filed in the same
manner as an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity. The
proceedings upon the application for transfer shall be the same as those
prescribed for the issuance of a certificate, except that the question of
public convenience and necessity need not be proved.



(Prior Code, § 9-75)  Penalty, see § 10.99



LICENSE



§ 112.30  INFORMATION REQUIRED BY CITY; INSURANCE; DISPLAY; DRIVER
IDENTIFICATION; COMPLIANCE WITH RATES; CANCELLATION FOR VIOLATION.



   (A)   Each licensee to operate one or more taxicabs within the city,
after first obtaining a license to operate one or more taxicabs, shall submit
the names of the operators of each taxicab licensed and each employee in his
or her employ; their names must be submitted to the Chief of Police or the
Chief’s agent and it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or agent to
pass on the qualifications of the person to operate a taxicab giving an
opinion of the operator’s character, ability and police record.



   (B)   Each person licensed to operate taxicabs within the city must
have on each taxicab, liability insurance and personal property insurance in
at least the amounts required by state law before operating any of the
taxicabs.



   (C)   No taxicab shall be operated within the city unless duly
authorized by City Council, without a valid license being publicly displayed
and without first being inspected by the Chief of Police or the Chief’s
agent.



   (D)   Each taxicab driver shall have the driver’s name and picture
displayed and attached to the interior of the taxicab assigned to the driver
plainly visible to every occupant or passenger of the taxicab, the picture to
be replaced in the event the driver changes the driver’s appearance in any
way.



   (E)   The rates established by City Council must be strictly
complied with, not overcharging or undercharging.



   (F)   Any violation of any of these conditions by the licensee will
automatically cancel the license to operate taxicabs within the city, the
license to be cancelled by the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 9-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.31  SUSPENSION.



   When any vehicle licensed under the provisions of this chapter becomes
unsafe or unfit for service hereunder, the Chief of Police shall suspend the
license thereof until the vehicle is put in a safe and usable condition.



(Prior Code, § 9-77)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.32  REVOCATION.



   The City Council, after a hearing, upon reasonable notice thereof to
the licensee as City Council may direct, shall revoke any license issued
under the provisions of this chapter when the licensee uses the licensed
vehicle for immoral or illegal purposes, or when licensee has become an
habitual violator of the provisions of this chapter, or of the traffic
regulations or of the laws of city or state.



(Prior Code, § 9-78)



VEHICLES



§ 112.45  INSPECTION SUBSEQUENT TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   At times as may be necessary, the Chief of Police shall cause
inspection to be made for all vehicles licensed under the provisions of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-80)



§ 112.46  SUBSTITUTION.



   The person to whom a certificate has been issued may, by proper
endorsement thereon by the City Clerk, substitute another vehicle or other
vehicles, for the vehicle or vehicles for which the certificate was granted.
In that instance, the liability insurance or bonds shall also be transferred
to the substitute vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 9-81)



CHAPTER 113:  CABLE COMMUNICATIONS



Section



   113.01   Cable television; regulation of basic service tier rates
and other charges



§ 113.01  CABLE TELEVISION; REGULATION OF BASIC SERVICE TIER RATES AND
OTHER CHARGES.



   (A)   The city shall follow the FCC rate regulations in its
regulation of the basic cable service tier rates and related equipment,
installation and service charges of any cable television system and any other
cable television system operating in the city under the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, notwithstanding any
different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise.



   (B)   In connection with the regulation, the city will ensure a
reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties.



   (C)   The Mayor, or an appointed designee, is authorized to execute
on behalf of the city and file with the FCC the certification forms or other
instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate
regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and
charges.



   (D)   Any cable television system operating in the city shall file
with the city any schedules which shall describe all services offered, all
rates and charges of any kind, and all terms and conditions relating thereto.



(Prior Code, § 4.5-21)  (Ord. O-35-94, passed 7-14-1994)



CHAPTER 114:  SIDEWALK DINING



Section



   114.01   General



   114.02   Permit required



   114.03   Application



   114.04   Issuance of permit



   114.05   Alcoholic beverages



   114.06   Denial



   114.07   Terms and transfer



   114.08   Permit suspension



   114.09   Permit revocation



§ 114.01  GENERAL.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code to the contrary,
sidewalk cafés or sidewalk dining shall be permitted in the Central Business
District and Central Business Transitional District as indicated on the
official zoning map of the city and shall be subject to regulations as are
set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. O-02-06, passed 4-6-2006; Ord. O-02-14, passed 2-6-2014)



§ 114.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No business owner may operate a sidewalk café without first obtaining
a permit from the City Manager in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. As used in this section, the term CITY MANAGER includes his or her
authorized representative.



(Ord. O-02-06, passed 4-6-2006; Ord. O-02-14, passed 2-6-2014)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 114.03  APPLICATION.



   Any business owner desiring to operate a sidewalk café shall prepare
and file an application with the City Manager which shall contain the
following information:



   (A)   The name, addresses and telephone number of the business
desiring to operate a sidewalk café;



   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the business
operator;



   (C)   The type of products to be sold and served at the sidewalk
café;



   (D)   The hours of operation of the business and the proposed hours
of operation of the sidewalk café;



   (E)   A site plan showing the section of sidewalk or pedestrian way
to be used for the sidewalk café, and the section to be kept clear for
pedestrian and fire lane use, and depicting the proposed placement of tables,
chairs, umbrellas, trash receptacles and other furnishings on the sidewalk or
pedestrian way;



   (F)   Proof of an insurance policy, issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state, protecting the permittee and the city
from all claims for damages to property and bodily injury, including death,
which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. The
insurance shall name the city as additional insured and shall provide that
the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date
without 30 days advance written notice to the city. The insurance shall
afford minimum limits of $1,000,000 aggregate annually. In addition to the
aforesaid general liability coverage provided by permittee on behalf of city,
the permittee shall also offer proof of a liquor liability policy or
endorsement issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, which protects the permittee and the city from all claims for damages
to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation
under or in connection with the permit (and specifically for the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages as authorized by this chapter). Additional
liquor liability policy or endorsement shall name the city as additional
insured and shall provide that the policy or endorsement shall not terminate
or be cancelled prior to the expiration date without 30 days written notice
to the city. The liquor liability insurance policy or endorsement shall
afford minimum limits of $1,000,000 aggregate annually;



   (G)   A copy of all the permits and licenses issued by the county,
state or the city, including health and ABC permits and business licenses,
necessary for the operation of the business, or a copy of the application for
the permit if no permit has been issued. This requirement includes any
permits or certificates issued by the city or other governmental authority,
for exterior alterations or improvements to the building;



   (H)   A sworn statement describing any violation by the business
operator of any laws, regulations or ordinances relating to the possession,
sale, consumption or transportation of intoxicating beverages or controlled
substances during the five years immediately preceding the date of the permit
application;



   (I)   Additional information as may be requested by the City Manager
or his or her designee in order to determine compliance with this section; and



   (J)   An annual fee in the amount as set forth in the fee schedule
to cover the cost of processing and investigating the application and issuing
the permit.



(Ord. O-02-06, passed 4-6-2006; Ord. O-02-14, passed 2-6-2014)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 114.04  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   No permit for the operation of a sidewalk café may be issued unless
the application is complete and the following requirements are met.



   (A)   The sidewalk café must be associated with an operating
business so that it is under the same management and shares the same
preparation facilities, restroom facilities and other customer convenience
facilities as the business. The sidewalk café must be operated under the
same name as the business and may not be open or operated at any time when
the business is not open for business.



   (B)   The operation of the sidewalk café must be clearly incidental
to the associated business. The seating capacity of the sidewalk café may
not be more than 50% of the interior seating capacity of the associated
business.



   (C)   The placement of tables, chairs and other furnishings as shown
in the site plan must be done in a manner that at least five feet of
unobstructed space (as measured from the building façade or, in the absence
of a building façade, a straight line connecting the building façades)
remains on the sidewalk or pedestrian way for the passage of pedestrians. No
fire exits or lanes may be blocked and must remain clear at all times. The
pedestrian passage may not be used for the display of merchandise or for
portable signs otherwise authorized.



   (D)   The business seeking to operate the sidewalk café must front
on and open onto the sidewalk or pedestrian way proposed for the sidewalk
café. The placement of tables, chairs and other furnishings may not extend
beyond the sidewalk or pedestrian way frontage of the associated business,
with the following exception: tables, chairs and other furnishings may extend
up to eight feet onto adjacent property frontage in either or both directions
with the written permission (provided at the time of application) of the
occupant of the adjacent property.



   (E)   The tables, chairs and other furnishings used in the sidewalk
café shall not be anchored and shall be of a type of street furniture that
is easily movable.



   (F)   Except as elsewhere permitted by the code, the operation or
furnishing of the sidewalk café shall involve no permanent alteration to or
encroachment upon any street, sidewalk or pedestrian way or to the exterior
of the associated business.



   (G)   Each sidewalk café shall provide adequate trash removal for
its patrons. At the end of each business day and during operating hours, the
operator shall remove all trash and debris of any sort from the sidewalk
area. In addition, the operator shall remove from the sidewalk alongside and
abutting properties any trash or debris originating as a result of the
operation of the sidewalk café.



   (H)   Tables, chairs and other furnishings that remain on the
sidewalk at times when the business is not in operation shall be secured in a
manner that allows clear access from the street equal to or exceeding half of
the frontage of the associated business.



(Ord. O-02-06, passed 4-6-2006; Ord. O-02-14, passed 2-6-2014)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 114.05  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, alcoholic beverages
may be served in approved sidewalk cafés provided that the following
requirements are met.



   (A)   The sidewalk café shall be part of a business and shall
otherwise be authorized, permitted or licensed under the state law and this
code to serve and sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption.



   (B)   The sidewalk café must be included as part of the premises
for which an ABC permit is issued pursuant to state law, for the purpose of
applying and enforcing state laws regarding the sale or consumption of
alcoholic beverages.



   (C)   Signs shall be posted, visible at all exit points from the
sidewalk café, that it is unlawful to remove alcoholic beverages from the
premises.



   (D)   The business operator shall not have violated any law,
regulation or ordinance relating to the possession, sale, transportation or
consumption of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances for the three
years preceding the commencement of the sale of alcoholic beverages at the
sidewalk café.



   (E)   No outdoor bar is allowed within the sidewalk café, nor shall
outdoor preparation of alcoholic beverages be permitted, except that
unfortified wine may be decanted or beer poured at a table.



   (F)   Any alcoholic beverages served and consumed at an approved
sidewalk café must be served and consumed in glasses or cups which bear no
markings other than the logo or the name of the business operating the
sidewalk café.



(Ord. O-02-06, passed 4-6-2006; Ord. O-02-14, passed 2-6-2014)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 114.06  DENIAL.



   A permit may be denied if it is found that the application does not
demonstrate compliance with this section and/or that the granting of the
permit would not be in the public interest. Any applicant denied a permit to
operate a sidewalk café shall receive a written statement outlining the
grounds on which the denial is based. The applicant may appeal the denial of
the permit to city, and City Council may take action as it shall find
necessary. The finding and determination of City Council shall constitute
final action by the city.



(Ord. O-02-06, passed 4-6-2006; Ord. O-02-14, passed 2-6-2014)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 114.07  TERMS AND TRANSFER.



   Permits for a sidewalk café issued in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter shall be issued for the period beginning July 1 or thereafter
and expiring June 30 of each year. If a permittee discontinues the business
operation or the sidewalk café, no refund of the permit fee shall be made.
Permits issued pursuant to this section shall not be transferable or
assignable. Permits may prohibit operation of sidewalk cafés during special
events and contain other conditions and restrictions as may be necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. O-02-06, passed 4-6-2006; Ord. O-02-14, passed 2-6-2014)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 114.08  PERMIT SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The City Manager may suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
section if he or she finds one or more of the following conditions exist:



      (1)   Violation of any provision of the County Health
Department regulations or of this section;



      (2)   Violation of any law, regulation or ordinance regarding
the possession, sale, transportation or consumption of intoxicating beverages
or controlled substances;



      (3)   Operation of the sidewalk café in a manner as to create
a public nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or
welfare; specifically including failure to keep the café area clean and free
of refuse; and/or



      (4)   Operation of the business or sidewalk café in violation
of any city, county or state law, ordinance or regulation.



   (B)   The permit suspension shall take effect immediately upon
delivery of a citation to the business operator or, in his or her absence,
the person with supervisory authority over the operation of the business and
shall be reinstated once the City Manager has verified that the condition has
been remedied.



   (C)   The business operator may request a hearing contesting the
suspension of the permit by filing written notice thereof upon the City
Manager. The hearing shall be held and a written decision rendered within 15
days of the date of receipt. The decision of the City Manager may be appealed
to the City Council by written notice thereof filed with the City Clerk
within 15 days of the date of receipt of the decision.



(Ord. O-02-06, passed 4-6-2006; Ord. O-02-14, passed 2-6-2014)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 114.09  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   The City Manager may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
section if he or she finds that the business operator has:



      (1)   Deliberately misrepresented or provide false information
in the permit application;



      (2)   Violated any provision of the County Health Department
regulations or of this section;



      (3)   Violated any law, regulation or ordinance regarding the
possession, sale, transportation or consumption of intoxicating beverages or
controlled substances;



      (4)   Operated the sidewalk café in a manner as to create a
public nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or
welfare; specifically including failure to keep the café area clean and free
of refuse;



      (5)   Failed to maintain any health, business or other permit
or license required by law or the operation of a business;



      (6)   Fails to consistently maintain the sidewalk café in a
neat and trash free manner; and/or



      (7)   Operated the business or sidewalk café in violation of
any city, county or state law, ordinance or regulation.



   (B)   In the event the City Manager determines good grounds exist
for the revocation of a permit issued under this section, he or she shall
provide the business operator a notice to show cause, stating with
particularity the grounds therefor, why the sidewalk café permit should not
be revoked. The business operator shall be provided an opportunity for a
hearing, following which the City Manager shall render an order in writing.
The business operator may appeal any order by filing a written appeal with
the City Clerk within 15 days of receipt thereof. City Council shall conduct
a hearing on the appeal and render its decision thereon. The finding and
determination of City Council shall constitute final action by the city.



(Ord. O-02-06, passed 4-6-2006; Ord. O-02-14, passed 2-6-2014)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



CHAPTER 115:  PAWNBROKERS, METAL DEALERS AND SCRAP DEALERS



Section



   115.01   Purpose



   115.02   Definitions



   115.03   Electronic record-keeping and reporting requirements for
pawnbrokers



   115.04    Electronic record-keeping and reporting requirements for
currency converters



   115.05   Electronic record-keeping and reporting requirements for
dealers



   115.06   Electronic record-keeping and reporting requirements for
secondary metals recyclers



§ 115.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a means of electronic
record-keeping and record-submission of pawnbrokers, currency converters,
dealers and secondary metals recyclers to the Lincoln County Sheriff’s
Office.



(Ord. O-02-14, passed 6-5-2014)



§ 115.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, all words used herein shall have
their ordinary and customary usage, except for those capitalized terms
contained herein, which shall contain the same meanings and definitions as
found in the Act (G.S. Chapter 66, Article 45), the terms and conditions of
which are incorporated herein by reference thereto. Without in any way
limiting the foregoing:



   CURRENCY CONVERTER.  Shall be defined as provided in G.S. § 66-387(2).



   DEALER.   Shall be defined as provided in G.S. § 66-406(1).



   PAWNBROKER.   Shall be defined as provided in G.S. § 66-387(4).



   SECONDARY METALS RECYCLER.   Shall be defined as provided in G.S. §
55-420(8).



(Ord. O-02-14, passed 6-5-2014)



§ 115.03  ELECTRONIC RECORD-KEEPING AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR
PAWNBROKERS.



   Pawnbrokers shall keep the records required by G.S. § 66-391 in an
electronic format and shall report such records electronically in a manner
authorized by the Lincolnton Police Department.



(Ord. O-02-14, passed 6-5-2014)



§ 115.04  ELECTRONIC RECORD-KEEPING AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR CURRENCY
CONVERTERS.



   Currency converters shall keep the records required by G.S. § 66-392
in an electronic format and shall report such records electronically in a
manner authorized by the Lincolnton Police Department.



(Ord. O-02-14, passed 6-5-2014)



§ 115.05  ELECTRONIC RECORD-KEEPING AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR DEALERS.



   Dealers shall keep the records required by G.S. § 66-410 in an
electronic format and shall file such records electronically in a manner
authorized by the Lincolnton Police Department.



(Ord. O-02-14, passed 6-5-2014)



§ 115.06  ELECTRONIC RECORD-KEEPING AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR
SECONDARY METALS RECYCLERS.



   Secondary metals recyclers shall keep the receipts and the records
required by G.S. §§ 66-421 and 66-422 in an electronic format and shall
transfer such receipts and records electronically directly to the Lincolnton
Police Department in a manner authorized by said Police Department.



(Ord. O-02-14, passed 6-5-2014)



CHAPTER 116:  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   116.01   Sale of alcoholic beverages before noon on Sundays at
licensed premises



§ 116.01  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BEFORE NOON ON SUNDAYS AT LICENSED
PREMISES.



   Pursuant to the authority contained in G.S. 160A.205.3, the sale of
malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, and mixed beverages is
allowed within the corporate limits of the city beginning at 10:00 a.m. on
Sunday pursuant to the licensed premises’ permit issued under G.S. 18B-1001.



(Ord. O-13-2017, passed 8-3-2017)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



      133.   WEAPONS



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



Section



   130.01   Disorderly conduct



   130.02   Loitering on streets



   130.03   Unauthorized use of police whistles and fire signals



   130.04   Public housing applicants; screening for felonies



   130.05   Special events and festivals



   130.06   Helmets for minors



   130.07   Prevention from pursuing lawful business or occupation



§ 130.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   Any person who commits a nuisance or conducts a person’s
self in a disorderly manner within the city limits or defaces or damages any
public building or grounds is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any person who urinates or defecates on any public street or
upon public property, or in a public place in the city shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 10-1)  (Ord. passed 9-1-1983)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Disorderly conduct, see G.S. § 14-288.4



   Offenses against the public peace, see G.S. § 14-269



§ 130.02  LOITERING ON STREETS.



   No person shall habitually loaf or loiter on the streets or sidewalks,
nor shall any persons congregate on the streets or sidewalks in a way as to
obstruct or interfere with the free passage into or out of any public
business or private property. It shall be the duty of the police officer who
observes a violation of this section first to warn the offender and upon
failure to heed the warning to arrest the offender.



(Prior Code, § 10-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.03  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF POLICE WHISTLES AND FIRE SIGNALS.



   No person, without special authority from the Police Department or Fire
Department, shall carry or use any whistle, bell, horn or siren similar in
appearance or sound to the whistles, bells, horns or sirens used by the
Police Department or Fire Department.



(Prior Code, § 10-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.04  PUBLIC HOUSING APPLICANTS; SCREENING FOR FELONIES.



   (A)   In order to protect the residents of public housing and
citizens in housing units surrounding the public housing areas and his or her
properties by denying admission to public housing by a person who has been
convicted of a felonious drug charge, felonious assault charge or other
felonies, the following procedures for screening applicants to occupy public
housing units are hereby adopted.



   (B)   Whenever an applicant applies for public housing units, the
executive director of the housing authority of the city, functioning as the
housing authority for public housing in the city, or his or her designee,
shall screen all applicants for occupancy of a unit. The executive director
or his or her designee shall require each applicant for admission to public
housing to provide all necessary personal identification, including birth
certificate, social security number and driver’s license, if available, so
that the Chief of Police or his or her designee may cause a thorough search
to be made of local or state criminal convictions of the crimes enumerated
above by use of the Police Information Network (PIN).



   (C)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall provide the
findings made through the use of PIN to the executive director of the
Lincolnton Housing Authority of the city or his or her designee, provided the
housing authority has executed all necessary agreements with the police
information network of the State Bureau of Investigation, Division of
Criminal Information.



(Prior Code, § 10-23)  (Ord. O-44-96, passed 8-1-1996)



§ 130.05  SPECIAL EVENTS AND FESTIVALS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall define an
area within the city for the activities to be conducted and the duration of
the activities. He or she shall have the authority to block streets to
vehicular traffic, and control the conduct of participants and attendees of
special events to the extent necessary to ensure public safety. The area as
defined, and the duration of activities shall be clearly marked on maps
posted on the barricades erected to block vehicular traffic, and shall be
published prior to the events in the publication having general circulation
in the Lincolnton/Lincoln County area prior to the event.



   (B)   During the time and area so designated, the following
activities shall be forbidden:



      (1)   The movement of powered vehicles (except for public
safety and public works/utilities vehicles or others as approved for short
distance movement on festival grounds while accompanied by law enforcement or
festival officials);



      (2)   Per § 90.06 Animals at Special Events, it shall be
unlawful for any owner to take an animal into or allow the animal to enter or
remain within the boundaries of a festival, concert or other public gathering
(special events).  The event boundary shall include any area that is part of
the event and shall include any public street, sidewalk or other
publicly-owned area within the confines of such event. Animals that are part
of an authorized exhibit or attraction approved by the event organizers shall
be appropriately confined or restrained and under the physical control of the
owner or person in charge of the animal , either by leash or chain; and



      (3)   Any conduct deemed to be disruptive or dangerous to
participants or attendees of the special event. Abusive or threatening
language that disrupts a special event or festival or that abuses or
threatens another person in a manner likely to cause a fight or brawl at a
special event or festival is prohibited. Noise Ord. 93.016(I) also applies.



   (C)   A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 2
misdemeanor unless it is alleged that the conduct was intentional or was
carried out in a way that constituted willful or wanton disregard for the
safety of the participants or attendees of the event, in which case it shall
constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 10-24)  (Ord. O-55-97, passed 8-14-1997; Ord. O-18-2017,
passed 12-7-2017; Ord. O-09-18, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.06  HELMETS FOR MINORS.



   (A)   No person under the age of 16 years of age shall operate a
bicycle, use roller blades or skateboards or ride as a passenger on a bicycle
on a public street or highway, public vehicular area, bicycle path or public
right-of-way located within the city without wearing a protective helmet. Nor
shall a parent or guardian allow his or her child or ward to so operate or
ride a bicycle, roller blades or skateboard without wearing a protective
helmet. The helmet shall meet or exceed the safety standards set by the
American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation.



   (B)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor or infraction as defined in G.S. § 14-4. A first violation of
this section shall be dismissed if the person charged with the violation
submits proof that the operator or passenger has acquired a protective helmet
meeting the standards for use.



(Prior Code, § 10-26)  (Ord. O-65-98, passed 12-10-1998)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 130.07  PREVENTION FROM PURSUING LAWFUL BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION.



   (A)   Individuals have the constitutional right to pursue their
lawful business or occupation.



   (B)   No person shall interfere with, disrupt, obstruct or prevent
anyone from pursuing their lawful business or occupation.



(Ord. O-08-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



   131.01   Drinking in public



   131.02   Solicitation of alms



   131.03   Failure to pay fare or fee



   131.04   Criminal history check



Cross-reference:



   Registered sex offenders, banned from parks, see Chapter 96



§ 131.01  DRINKING IN PUBLIC.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess open container(s) of, or
consume, any malt beverage or unfortified wine while standing, walking or
otherwise on any street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or property owned, or
occupied, or controlled by the city and likewise, it shall be unlawful to
possess malt beverages or unfortified wine on public streets, alleys or
parking lots which are temporarily closed to regular traffic for special
events, except as otherwise authorized and regulated by the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-2)  (Ord. O-01-02, passed 4-4-2002)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 131.02  SOLICITATION OF ALMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit alms in any public place.



(Prior Code, § 10-3)  (Ord. O-04-08, passed 10-2-2008)  Penalty, see §
10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate begging, see G.S. § 160A-179



§ 131.03  FAILURE TO PAY FARE OR FEE.



   No person, except persons entitled to free transportation, shall ride
upon any bus, taxicab or other public conveyance without paying therefor the
fare prescribed or allowed by law, or attend any show or other amusement
without paying the prescribed fee.



(Prior Code, § 10-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.04  CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECK.



   (A)   In order to protect the citizens of the city and his or her
properties, the procedures herein are established to provide for
fingerprinting and criminal history checks on applicants for any or all
position(s) in the city government. Subject to division (C)(3) of this
section, employment with the city government may be denied for those persons
convicted of any crime(s) against a person, or crime(s) against property
where intent is an element or any offense involving controlled substances
(counterfeit or otherwise), alcohol, gambling or acts against morality. The
crimes listed above are representative of, but not an exclusive list, of
those convictions, which may be considered to be sufficient justification to
deny employment.



   (B)   Candidates for positions, which may require operation of city
owned/insured vehicles may be denied employment or driving privileges if his
or her driving history does not meet standards established by the city or the
state.



   (C)   The procedures herein are established to provide for
fingerprinting, state criminal history checks and driving history record
checks on applicant(s) for position(s) in the city government.



      (1)   The City Manager, or Director of Human Resources, or
either’s designee, shall conduct an investigation of any final candidate
for a city government position and it shall be a precondition of employment
that an applicant (candidate) for a position shall, upon request, provide
fingerprints and all other necessary personal identification, including birth
certificate, social security number and driver’s license, if available, so
the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, may cause a thorough search to
be made of local and state criminal records to determine if the applicant has
a history of criminal convictions by use of the Division of Criminal
Information (D.C.I.) network and to obtain the applicant’s driver’s
history record.



      (2)   The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall
provide findings made by use of the D.C.I. network to the City Manager,
Director of Human Resources or the designee, provided that all necessary
agreements with the State Bureau of Investigation’s Division of Criminal
Information have been executed.



      (3)   An evaluation of any crime for purposes of employment
will take into account the nature and the circumstances of the offense, and
the time frame of the offense as they relate to the essential job functions
for the position applied.



      (4)   No action to deny employment, based on a criminal
history, will be taken until the Chief of Police, or his or her designee,
confirms the identity of the applicant by a match of the applicant’s
fingerprints to the state bureau of investigation and a certified true copy
of the public record document is retrieved.



(Prior Code, § 10-27)  (Ord. O-10-01, passed 8-2-2001)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



General Provisions



   132.01   Playing ball games in street



   132.02   Climbing on city water tank



   132.03   Damaging or defacing property generally



   132.04   Damaging or interfering with property used in water or
sewer systems or police or fire alarm systems



   132.05   Damaging or defacing streets or sidewalks



   132.06   Damaging lights, pumps and the like



   132.07   Injuring trees, shrubs or flowers



   132.08   Damaging bridges, culverts and the like



Posting Advertising or Other Matter



   132.20   Posting on public property



   132.21   Posting on private property



   132.22   Posting of election-related materials; bond required



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 132.01  PLAYING BALL GAMES IN STREET.



   No person shall play baseball, football or other games of similar
nature, or bat or catch balls on any public street.



(Prior Code, § 10-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.02  CLIMBING ON CITY WATER TANK.



   It shall be unlawful for any person (other than persons employed by the
city) to climb up any city water tank.



(Prior Code, § 10-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.03  DAMAGING OR DEFACING PROPERTY GENERALLY.



   No person, without authority from the owner or person in charge
thereof, shall wilfully or negligently damage, deface, draw, paint, carve
upon or mutilate in any way whatsoever any sign, post, lamppost, pole, wire,
apparatus, building, residence, walls or fences.



(Prior Code, § 10-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Damage to property, see G.S. §§ 14-135 et seq.



§ 132.04  DAMAGING OR INTERFERING WITH PROPERTY USED IN WATER OR SEWER
SYSTEMS OR POLICE OR FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.



   No person shall wilfully or negligently damage or interfere with any
valve, valve box, meter, meter box, storm or sanitary sewer manhole cover,
storm sewer catch basin cover, fire hydrant, police or fire alarm box,
traffic signal or any other property used in the city’s water or sewer
system or police or fire alarm system.



(Prior Code, § 10-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.05  DAMAGING OR DEFACING STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall damage, deface or mar in any manner whatsoever any of
the streets or sidewalks. The city shall have the right and privilege to
repair any damage, defacement or mar and assess the cost thereof against the
offender.



(Prior Code, § 10-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Removal of rock or gravel, see § 95.09



§ 132.06  DAMAGING LIGHTS, PUMPS AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall break, destroy or in any manner damage any light, pump
or well in any street or public place, or deface, or in any manner damage any
building belonging to the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.07  INJURING TREES, SHRUBS OR FLOWERS.



   It shall be unlawful to pull down, cut, deface with signs, break or in
any way injure any of the trees, shrubs or flowers on the streets, parks or
squares in the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.08  DAMAGING BRIDGES, CULVERTS AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall damage or remove any part of any bridge, culvert, ditch
or drain or other property belonging to or used by the city, or shall place
any obstruction in any culvert, ditch or drain, to prevent the free flow of
water on or over the streets of the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



POSTING ADVERTISING OR OTHER MATTER



§ 132.20  POSTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, nail, stick or otherwise
affix bills, posters, advertisements, notices or any other printed or graphic
matter upon public property in the city. This section shall not apply to
notices, signs or advertisements required to be posted by law, signs or
plates on residential premises giving the name or address of the occupant,
mail boxes or newspaper tubes, municipal, county, state and federal traffic
signs, historical markers, monuments or signs erected by public authority,
temporary displays as a part of customary holiday decorations and signs
denoting the location of underground utilities.



(Prior Code, § 10-20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.21  POSTING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to nail, stick or otherwise affix
bills, posters, advertisements, notices or other printed or graphic matter
upon private property within the city without the consent of the owner.



(Prior Code, § 10-21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.22  POSTING OF ELECTION-RELATED MATERIALS; BOND REQUIRED.



   Notwithstanding the above sections, it shall be lawful to post or affix
printed or graphic materials upon public property in the city for up to 60
days preceding a national, state or local election or referendum to be held
in the city, when the materials relate to the candidates seeking election or
the political issues being voted upon; provided, however, the Chief of Police
may require the giving of a bond by those posting the election-related
materials, the amount of the bond to be commensurate with the cost of
removing the materials so posted. If the election-related materials are not
removed within 15 days following the scheduled election, the bond may be
retained by the city to defray the costs of removing the election-related
posters and materials.



(Prior Code, § 10-22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 133:  WEAPONS



Section



   133.01   Projectiles; archery ranges



   133.02   Weapons and pyrotechnics; certain activities with deadly
weapons unlawful



   133.03   Weapons and pyrotechnics; firing



   133.04   Firing firearms or fireworks within city limits



   133.05   Firebombs



   133.06   Firearms within city park or buildings



 



   133.99   Penalty



§ 133.01  PROJECTILES; ARCHERY RANGES.



   No person shall shoot or project any stone, rock, shot or other hard
substance by means of a slingshot, bean shooter, air rifle, popgun, bow or
other similar contrivance; provided, that archery shooting may be engaged in
on grounds as may be set aside and approved therefor by City Council.



(Prior Code, § 10-4)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.02  WEAPONS AND PYROTECHNICS; CERTAIN ACTIVITIES WITH DEADLY WEAPONS
UNLAWFUL.



   (A)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to carry about
the person any deadly weapon under any of the following circumstances or
conditions:



      (1)   While under the influence of intoxicating drink or
narcotic drugs;



      (2)   At any public assembly;



      (3)   In any manner calculated to inspire terror; or



      (4)   While taking part in a parade or march, the purpose of
which is to inspire terror.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to members of the armed forces of
the United States or officers of the government of the United States, this
state or any subdivision thereof charged with the execution of the laws of
the United States, this state or city, when acting in the discharge of their
official duties.



(Prior Code, § 10-5)  Penalty, see § 133.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate firearms, see G.S. § 160A-189



§ 133.03  WEAPONS AND PYROTECHNICS; FIRING.



   (A)   No person shall fire or discharge any gun or air rifle or
spring type rifle or similar device upon any public street or sidewalk within
the city.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply under the
conditions specified in § 133.02(B).



(Prior Code, § 10-6)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.04  FIRING FIREARMS OR FIREWORKS WITHIN CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   No person shall fire any pistol, gun or any other type firearm
or any fireworks or other pyrotechnics within the city limits.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply under the
conditions specified in § 133.02(B).



   (C)   For the purposes of sport, amusement, approved firing ranges
or businesses, the Chief of Police shall be authorized to grant a permit for
the firing of any firearms, the use of fireworks or other pyrotechnics within
the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 10-7)  (Ord. O-30-94, passed 2-3-1994; Ord. O-04-07, passed
9-13-2007)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.05  FIREBOMBS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FIREBOMB.  Any type of object designed or constructed so that
upon being propelled it will explode on or ignite its area of impact.



      MOLOTOV COCKTAIL.  Any container which is designed in a manner
that upon being propelled it will at impact empty its contents of an
inflammable fluid or substance, and which is fitted with a fuse or wick.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, possess,
transport or use any Molotov cocktail or other firebomb.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess all the items
or materials needed to manufacture Molotov cocktails or other firebombs,
other than on the person’s premises. The provisions of this section shall
be supplemental and in addition to any general statute of the state on this
subject.



(Prior Code, § 10-8)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.06  FIREARMS WITHIN CITY PARK OR BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Firearms prohibited.  Except as provided in division (B)
below, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess and display a firearm
concealed or otherwise displayed, on or within each city park and each
building or portion of a building owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied
or controlled by the city, as well as the appurtenant premises to the
buildings.



   (B)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
to the following:



      (1)   Sworn law enforcement officers and to firearms lawfully
seized or in the possession of law enforcement officers within the City
Police Department and its appurtenant premises;



      (2)   Lincoln County animal control officers;



      (3)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the armed forces of
the United States when in discharge of their official duties as such and
acting under orders requiring them to carry firearms;



      (4)   Civil officers of the United States while in discharge
of their official duties; and



      (5)   Persons possessing a written permit from the Chief of
Police to possess weapons for ceremonial purposes.



   (C)   Contraband.  Firearms possessed in violation of this section
are hereby declared to be contraband. The Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall hold the weapon for disposal pursuant to court order. In the
absence of any court order, the firearms shall be destroyed.



   (D)   Notice.  Notice that possession of firearms is prohibited
shall be posted at the entrance of any property set forth in division (A)
above.



(Prior Code, § 10-25)  (Ord. O-57-97, passed 10-9-1997)  Penalty, see §
133.99



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Firearms within city park or buildings.  A violation of §
133.06 shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine as set
forth in the fee schedule and/or imprisonment not to exceed 20 days.



(Prior Code, § 10-25)  (Ord. O-57-97, passed 10-9-1997)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES



      151.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



      152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



      153.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES



Section



General Provisions



   150.001   Rules and regulations



   150.002   Fire limits



   150.003   House moving



Inspection Services



   150.015   Delegated to county



   150.016   General duties of Inspectors



   150.017   Powers of Inspectors



Regulatory Codes



   150.030   Building Code adopted



   150.031   Plumbing Code adopted



   150.032   Heating Code adopted



   150.033   Electrical Code adopted



   150.034   Residential Building Code adopted



   150.035   Compliance with Codes




Abandoned Structures




   150.050   Findings; intent



   150.051   Duties of City Manager or designee



   150.052   Powers of City Manager or designee



   150.053   Standards for enforcement



   150.054   Procedure for enforcement



   150.055   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   150.056   In rem action by City Manager or designee; placarding



   150.057   Costs of lien on premises



   150.058   Alternate remedies



   150.059   Demolition permit and bond



Minimum Housing Standards



   150.070   Definitions



   150.071   Findings; purpose



   150.072   Minimum standards of fitness for dwellings and dwelling
units



   150.073   Minimum standards for structural condition



   150.074   Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities



   150.075   Minimum standards for ventilation



   150.076   Minimum standards for space, use and location



   150.077   Minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance



   150.078   Minimum standards for control of insects, rodents and
infestations



   150.079   Minimum standards applicable to roominghouses; exceptions



   150.080   Responsibilities of owners and occupants



   150.081   Duties of Director of Public Works and Utilities



   150.082   Powers of Director of Public Works and Utilities



   150.083   Inspections; duty of owners and occupants



   150.084   Procedure for enforcement



   150.085   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   150.086   In rem action by Director; placarding



   150.087   Costs a lien on premises



   150.088   Alternative remedies



   150.089   Council to hear appeals



   150.090   Conflict with other provision




Minimum Nonresidential Building Standards




   150.100   Definitions



   150.101   Purpose



   150.102   Applicability and compliance



   150.103   Maintenance standards for nonresidential buildings and
structures



   150.104   Duties of the enforcement officer



   150.105   Powers of the enforcement officer



   150.106   Inspections



   150.107   Procedure for enforcement



   150.108   Limitations on orders and ordinances - historic landmark
or historic district



   150.109   Limitations on orders and ordinances - vacant
manufacturing facility or vacant industrial warehouse



   150.110   Vacated and closed nonresidential buildings or structures



   150.111   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   150.112   Interim action by the code enforcement officer



   150.113   Costs, a lien on premises



   150.114   Ejectment



   150.115   Alternative remedies



   150.116   Appeals process



   150.117   Conflict with other provisions



   150.118   Violations; penalty



 



   150.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Construction near sidewalk, see § 95.09



   Creation of noise in construction or demolition, see § 93.016



   Disposal of building debris, § 50.10



   Placing building material on street, see § 95.08



   Property numbering requirement, see § 95.01



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   No provision of this chapter shall be held to repeal the power of the
city to make and enforce any further rules and regulations under the powers
granted in the Charter, and the city may pass ordinances for the enforcement
of any provision of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-4)



§ 150.002  FIRE LIMITS.



   The following fire limits are established and defined.



      Beginning at a point at intersection of Sycamore and Poplar
Streets on north side of Sycamore Street, and run north along the east side
of North Poplar Street 100 feet to a point on east side of North Poplar
Street; thence west, 100 feet north of, and parallel with, Sycamore Street,
across North Poplar Street, North Academy Street and North Aspen Street to a
point in North Government Street, 100 feet north of Sycamore Street; thence
south along Government Street across Sycamore Street, West Main Street and
West Water Street to a point in Government Street 100 feet south of West
Water Street; thence east, 100 feet south of and parallel with Water Street,
across South Aspen Street, South Academy Street and C. & N.W. railway tracks
to a point on east side of South Poplar Street, 100 feet south of Water
Street; thence along east side of Poplar Street across East Water Street,
East Main Street and East Sycamore Street to the beginning; provided, that
the following described area of property be herewith excluded from and taken
without the fire limits as herein described to the intent and purpose that
the following described area shall be deemed to be wholly outside of the fire
limits; beginning at a point at the intersection of Poplar and Pine Streets
run thence along Pine Street in a westerly direction to the intersection of
Pine and Government Streets; thence along Government Street in a southerly
direction to the intersection of Government and Church Streets; thence in a
easterly direction along Church Street to a point where Church Street
intersects Poplar Street; thence along Poplar Street in a northerly direction
to the intersection of Poplar and Water Streets; thence along Water Street in
a easterly direction to the intersection of Water and Cedar Streets; thence
along Cedar Street in a northerly direction to the intersection of Cedar and
Sycamore Streets; thence along Sycamore Street in a westerly direction to the
intersection of Poplar and Sycamore; thence along Poplar Street in a
northerly direction to the intersection of Pine and Poplar Streets, the
beginning corner.



(Prior Code, § 4-5)



Statutory reference:



   Establishment of fire limits, see G.S. § 160A-435



§ 150.003  HOUSE MOVING.



   No person shall move any house or building upon or across the public
streets or sidewalks of the city without the written consent of the governing
body and the deposit of a good and sufficient bond in the sum of $5,000, or
proof of sufficient liability insurance, to cover damage done to the street
or sidewalk or to private property.



(Prior Code, § 4-6)  Penalty, see § 150.999



INSPECTION SERVICES



§ 150.015  DELEGATED TO COUNTY.



   The construction inspection services are delegated by the city to the
county. The Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Heating-air Conditioning
Inspector, Electrical Inspector and any other inspectors as may be necessary
shall be those persons assigned by the county to perform the duties.



(Prior Code, § 4-1)



§ 150.016  GENERAL DUTIES OF INSPECTORS.



   It shall be the duty of the Inspectors to enforce all of the provisions
of this chapter and of the regulatory Codes adopted herein, and to make all
inspections necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of this
chapter and the Codes are being met.



(Prior Code, § 4-2)



§ 150.017  POWERS OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   Authority.  Inspectors are hereby authorized, empowered and
directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and the regulatory
Codes herein adopted.



   (B)   Right-of-entry.  Subject to applicable statutes on
administrative searches and investigations and relevant court case decisions,
Inspectors shall have the right-of-entry on any premises within the
jurisdiction of the regulatory Codes herein adopted at reasonable hours for
the purpose of inspection or enforcement of the requirements of this chapter
and the regulatory Codes, upon presentation of proper credentials.



   (C)   Stop orders.



      (1)   Whenever any building or structure or part thereof is
being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in a
hazardous manner, or in violation of any provision of this chapter or any
city ordinance, or in violation of any provision of any regulatory Code
herein adopted, or in violation of the terms of the permit issued therefor,
or in a manner as to endanger life or property, the appropriate Inspector may
order the work to be immediately stopped.



      (2)   The order shall be in writing to the owner of the
property or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work, and
shall state the reasons therefor and the conditions under which the work may
be resumed.



(Prior Code, § 4-3)



REGULATORY CODES



§ 150.030  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina State Building Code, Volume I, General Construction,
as adopted by the State Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby
adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the Building Code
of the city to the extent the Code is applicable for safe and stable design,
methods of construction, minimum standards and use of materials in buildings
or structures hereafter erected, enlarged, altered, repaired, or otherwise
constructed or reconstructed.



(Prior Code, § 4-20)



§ 150.031  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina Plumbing Code (North Carolina State Building Code,
Volume II, Plumbing) as adopted and published by the State Building Code
Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though
set forth herein as the Plumbing Code for the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-21)



§ 150.032  HEATING CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina Heating Code (North Carolina State Building Code,
Volume III, Heating) as adopted and published by the State Building Code
Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though
set forth herein as the Heating Code for the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-22)



§ 150.033  ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina Electrical Code (North Carolina State Building Code,
Volume IV, Electrical) adopting by reference the National Electrical Code of
the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted by the State Building
Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as
though set forth herein as the Electrical Code for the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-23)



§ 150.034  RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code, as adopted by the
North Carolina Building Inspectors Association, and as published by the State
Building Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set
forth herein as the Residential Building Code for One- and Two-family
Residential Buildings in the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-24)



§ 150.035  COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.



   (A)   All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished or
moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards and other
provisions of either the North Carolina State Building Code, General
Construction, Volume I or the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building
Code, whichever is applicable, or both if both are applicable.



   (B)   Every building or structure intended for human habitation,
occupancy or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems or plumbing fixtures
installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired or reconstructed in
accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of
the North Carolina Plumbing Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume
II, Plumbing).



   (C)   All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and
appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other
provisions of the North Carolina Heating Code (North Carolina State Building
Code, Volume III, Heating).



   (D)   All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall
be erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the
minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the North Carolina
Electrical Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume IV, Electrical).



(Prior Code, § 4-25)



ABANDONED STRUCTURES



§ 150.050  FINDINGS; INTENT.



   It is hereby found that there exists within the city abandoned
structures which the City Council finds to be hazardous to the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the city due to the attraction of insects or
rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard; dangerous conditions constituting
a threat to children, or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary facilities. Therefore, pursuant to the authority granted
by G.S. § 160A-441, it is the intent of this subchapter to provide for the
repair, closing or demolition of any abandoned structures in accordance with
the same provisions and procedures as are set forth by law for the repair,
closing or demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation.



(Prior Code, § 4-30)



Statutory reference:



   Minimum housing standards; authority, see G.S. § 160A-441



§ 150.051  DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER OR DESIGNEE.



   The City Manager or the City Manager’s designee is hereby designated
as the city officer to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. It shall be
the duty of the City Manager or designee:



   (A)   To locate abandoned structures within the city and determine
which structures are in violation of this subchapter;



   (B)   To take action pursuant to this subchapter as may be necessary
to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of structures;



   (C)   To keep an accurate record of all enforcement proceedings
begun pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter; and



   (D)   To perform other duties as may be prescribed herein or
assigned to the officer by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 4-31)



§ 150.052  POWERS OF CITY MANAGER OR DESIGNEE.



   The City Manager or designee is authorized to exercise powers as may be
necessary to carry out the intent and the provisions of this subchapter
including the following powers in addition to others herein granted:



   (A)   To investigate the condition of buildings within the city in
order to determine which structures are abandoned and in violation of this
subchapter;



   (B)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections;



   (C)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence; and



   (D)   To designate other officers, agents and employees of the city
as the officer deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-32)



§ 150.053  STANDARDS FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Every abandoned structure within the city shall be deemed in
violation of this subchapter whenever the structure constitutes a hazard to
the health, safety or welfare of the citizens as a result of:



      (1)   The attraction of insects or rodents;



      (2)   Conditions creating a fire hazard;



      (3)   Dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children;
and



      (4)   Frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary facilities.



   (B)   In making the preliminary determination of whether or not an
abandoned structure is in violation of this subchapter, the City Manager or
designee may, by way of illustration and not limitation, consider the
presence or absence of the following conditions:



      (1)   Holes or cracks in the structure’s floors, walls,
ceilings or roof which might attract or admit rodents or insects, or become
breeding places for rodents and insects;



      (2)   The collection of garbage or rubbish in or near the
structure which might attract rodents and insects, or become breeding places
for rodents and insects;



      (3)   Violations of the State Building Code, the State
Electrical Code, the State Plumbing Code or the Fire Prevention Code which
constitutes a fire hazard in the structure;



      (4)   The collection of garbage, rubbish or combustible
material which constitutes a fire hazard in the structure;



      (5)   The use of the structure or nearby grounds or facilities
by children as a play area;



      (6)   Violations of the State Building Code which might result
in danger to children using the structure or nearby grounds or facilities as
a play area; and



      (7)   Repeated use of the structure by transients and
vagrants, in the absence of sanitary facilities, for living, sleeping,
cooking or eating.



(Prior Code, § 4-33)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.054  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice hearing.  Whenever a
petition is filed with the City Manager or designee by at least five
residents of the city charging that any structure exists in violation of this
subchapter or whenever it appears to the City Manager or designee, upon
inspection, that any structure exists in violation hereof, the officer shall,
if the officer’s preliminary investigation discloses a basis for the
charges, issue a cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest
in the structure a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the City Manager or designee at a place therein
fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of the hearing
shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition
relating to the structure. Any person desiring to do so may attend the
hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
hearings before the City Manager or designee.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing.



      (1)   After the notice and hearing, the City Manager or
designee shall state in writing the officer’s determination whether the
structure violates this subchapter.



      (2)   If the City Manager or designee determines that the
dwelling is in violation the officer shall state in writing the officer’s
findings of fact to support the determination, and shall issue and cause to
be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner
to either repair, alter and improve the structure or else remove or demolish
the same within a specified period of time not to exceed 90 days.



   (C)   Failure to comply with order.



      (1)   In personam remedy.  If the owner of any structure
shall fail to comply with an order of the City Manager or designee within the
time specified therein, the City Manager or designee may submit to the City
Council at its next regular meeting a resolution directing the City Attorney
to petition the Superior Court for an order directing the owner to comply
with the order of the City Manager or designee, as authorized by G.S. §
160A-446(g).



      (2)   In rem remedy.  After failure of an owner of a
structure to comply with an order of the City Manager or designee within the
time specified therein, if injunctive relief has not been sought or has not
been granted as provided in division (C)(1) above, the City Manager or
designee shall submit to the City Council an ordinance ordering the City
Manager or designee to cause the structure to be removed or demolished, as
provided in the original order of the City Manager or designee, and pending
the removal or demolition, to placard the dwelling as provided by G.S. §
160A-443.



      (3)   Enforcement and penalties.  See § 150.999.



      (4)   Petition to Superior Court by owner.  Any person
aggrieved by an order issued by the City Manager or designee shall have the
right, within 30 days after issuance of the order to petition the Superior
Court for a temporary injunction restraining the City Manager or designee
pending a final disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).



(Prior Code, § 4-34)  (Ord passed 8-9-1984; Ord. CCTA-01-91, passed
8-8-1991)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.055  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   Complaints or orders issued by the City Manager shall be served upon
persons either personally or by first class mail, but if the whereabouts of
the persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the City
Manager or designee, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the City
Manager or designee shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving
of the complaint or order upon the person may be made by publication in a
newspaper having general circulation in the city at least once, no later than
the time at which personal service is required under § 150.054. Where
service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or
order.



(Prior Code, § 4-35)  (Ord passed 8-9-1984; Ord. O-56-97, passed 9-4-1997)



§ 150.056  IN REM ACTION BY CITY MANAGER OR DESIGNEE; PLACARDING.



   (A)   After failure of an owner of a structure to comply with an
order of the City Manager or designee issued pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter, and upon adoption by the City Council of an ordinance
authorizing the directing the officer, to do so, as provided by G.S. §
160A-443(5) and § 150.054(C) of this code, the City Manager or designee
shall proceed to cause the structure either to be repaired or else removed or
demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the City Council and shall cause
to be posted on the main entrance of the structure a placard prohibiting the
use or occupation of the structure. Use or occupation of a building so posted
shall constitute a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Each ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register
of Deeds of the county and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner
in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. § 160A-443(5).



(Prior Code, § 4-36)  (Ord passed 8-9-1984)



§ 150.057  COSTS OF LIEN ON PREMISES.



   (A)   As provided by G.S. § 160A-443(6), the amount of the cost of
any removal or demolition caused to be made or done by the Inspector pursuant
to this subchapter shall be a lien against the real property upon which the
cost was incurred.



   (B)   The lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be
enforced and the costs collected as provided by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10
(§§ 160A-216 et seq.).



(Prior Code, § 4-37)  (Ord passed 8-9-1984)



§ 150.058  ALTERNATE REMEDIES.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this subchapter by
criminal process, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not
prevent the enforcement of any other remedies provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws.



(Prior Code, § 4-38)  (Ord passed 8-9-1984)



§ 150.059  DEMOLITION PERMIT AND BOND.



   (A)   A demolition permit shall be required for the removal of any
structure. Any application for demolition of a structure 12,500 square feet
or greater in size shall be accompanied by a demolition plan and the
signature of the property owner. Such demolition plan may be prepared by
either the property owner or a representative of the property owner and shall
be binding upon subsequent property owners.



   (B)   The plan shall require the following:



      (1)   Identification of all above and below ground structures
on the site including any wells and the applicant’s plan for their future
use or closure;



      (2)   Any plans by the applicant for on-site burning of any
materials;



      (3)   Removal of all mowing obstructions, construction debris
and materials and removal of all above ground structural foundations on the
footprint of the building(s) to be removed unless the applicant demonstrates
that the foundation is to be reused in the redevelopment of the property with
such redevelopment beginning within six months of the issuance of the
demolition permit;



      (4)   Such materials shall be removed within one month of the
removal of the structure(s). The property owner has the sole responsibility
for the removal of such materials. The city is not responsible for removal of
such materials;



      (5)   Upon demolition, sewer line(s) must be satisfactorily
capped off by the property owner and/or contractor and inspected by the City
Public Works Department Distribution and Collection Division and all
utilities must be disconnected or capped;



      (6)   Paved parking areas may be retained on site, although
the property owner is required to maintain such areas so that they do not
detract from the overall appearance of the property;



      (7)   Upon demolition, the lot where the demolition has
occurred shall be seeded and mulched, sodded or hydro-seeded with a silt
fence installed to prevent and eliminate erosion in accordance with NCDENR
specifications. This silt fence must be maintained in place until the lot has
a vegetative cover of at least 80%. Any resulting holes (e.g., from basement
levels) must be filled and returned to normal grade. The requirement for
seeding, mulching, hydro-seeding or sodding may be waived at the discretion
of the Zoning Administrator’s satisfaction if the applicant demonstrates to
the Zoning Administrator’s satisfaction that redevelopment of the property
will begin within six months of the issuance of the demolition permit;



      (8)   The anticipated schedule for demolition activities;



      (9)   A description of the applicant’s plans for ongoing
post-demolition maintenance of the lot;



      (10)   All applications for demolition permits for
structure(s) greater than 12,500 square feet in size shall be accompanied by
payment of a secure bond in the form of cash, personal check, certified
check, cashier’s check or surety bond in the amount of $4 per square foot
of building area. Any company that writes the surety bond must be licensed by
the State of North Carolina and have been rated A or higher by A. M. Best
Company. Any bond in the form of cash or personal, certified or cashier’s
check will be refunded within 30 days upon satisfactory completion and
inspection of the subject property by the Zoning Administrator. Demolition
activities involving structure(s) on a site with either individual total or
cumulative total building area greater than 12,500 square feet are subject to
this provision. In addition, demolition activities conducted in multiple
phases on a site are subject to this provision if the cumulative square
footage of the structures to be demolished exceeds 12,500 square feet.



      (11)   The maximum secure bond amount required for any
demolition, regardless of the size of the structure shall not exceed
$1,000,000.



      (12)   Structures on sites owned by local, state and federal
governmental entities are exempt from this provision.



      (13)   Any demolition work to be performed as part of a new
construction / redevelopment project and included as part of the scope of the
work listed on the building permit application for the new construction shall
not be required to provide a secured bond separate and apart from the new
building permit.



      (14)   Failure on the part of the property owner or his or her
contractor to completely demolish, remove and clear the premises as
stipulated in the demolition plan after 30 days notice by the Zoning
Administrator shall be cause for forfeiture of the bond.



      (15)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this section
shall subject the violator to penalties, enforcement and abatement as
provided in this code of ordinances.



(Ord. O-02-11, passed 5-5-2011)  Penalty, see § 150.999



MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS



§ 150.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASEMENT.  A portion of a building which is located partly underground
having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of
the adjoining ground.



   CELLAR.  A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or
wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.



   DETERIORATED.  A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and can
be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this subchapter, at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value,
as determined by finding of the Director.



   DILAPIDATED.  A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and cannot
be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this subchapter, at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value,
as determined by finding of the Director.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities or the
Director’s designee.



   DWELLING.  Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to
be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary
housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a DWELLING.



   DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMINGHOUSE, ROOMING UNIT or PREMISES. 
These terms construed as though they were followed by the words “or any
part thereof.”



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



   EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Inspector.



   GARBAGE.  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   HABITABLE ROOM.  A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.



   INFESTATION.  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests in a number as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to the public.



   INSPECTOR.  The Director as herein defined or Building Inspector or
any agent of the Director who is authorized to act by the Director.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING.  Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.



   OCCUPANT.  Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking
or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care or control of a building,
or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   OWNER.  Any person who alone, or jointly, or severally with others:



      (1)   Shall have title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with
or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or



      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the
owner. Any person representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter and of rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if the person were the owner.



   PLUMBING.  All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units
(mechanical sink grinder), waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing
machines, catch basin, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer or gas line.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  The city housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or the state
relating to health, fire, building regulations or other activities concerning
dwellings in the city.



   ROOMING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   ROOMINGHOUSE.  Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to
three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or
father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.



   RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage and ashes, and the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.



   SUPPLIED.  Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under the control
of, the owner or operator.



   TEMPORARY HOUSING.  Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached
to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than 30 consecutive days.



   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.  Conditions exist in a dwelling which
violate or do not comply with one or more of the minimum standards of fitness
or one or more of the requirements established by this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-50)



§ 150.071  FINDINGS; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared
that there exist in the city dwellings which are unfit for human habitation
due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and
other calamities, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, and due
to other conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, and
dangerous and detrimental to the health, safety and morals and otherwise
inimical (harmful) to the welfare of the residents of the city.



   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the city as authorized by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 6,
it is the purpose of this subchapter to establish minimum standards of
fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for
human habitation, as expressly authorized by G.S. § 160A-444.



(Prior Code, § 4-51)



§ 150.072  MINIMUM STANDARDS OF FITNESS FOR DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS.



   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held
out for use as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum
standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of §§
150.073 through 150.078. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to
another for occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling
unit which does not comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for
human habitation and all of the requirements of §§ 150.073 through 150.078.



(Prior Code, § 4-52)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.073  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STRUCTURAL CONDITION.



   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists,
rafters or other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, and shall
not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged and shall not have holes or cracks
which might admit rodents.



   (B)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.



   (C)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation
supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged.



   (D)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or
appurtenances shall be maintained in a condition that they will not fall or
collapse.



   (E)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall
be provided.



   (F)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways
shall be finished of suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable
household methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness and shall be maintained
in a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy
between various spaces.



   (G)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors
and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be weathertight and watertight.



   (H)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are
defective, deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in a condition or
location as to constitute a fire hazard.



   (I)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors or wood floors
on the ground.



(Prior Code, § 4-53)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.074  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   Plumbing system.



      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water
supply and to the public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system.



      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen
sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet and adequate supply of both cold
water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.



      (3)   All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the
State Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in
good working order.



      (4)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within
the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water
closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording
privacy to the user.



   (B)   Heating system.  Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have
facilities for providing heat in accordance with either division (B)(1) or
(B)(2) below:



      (1)   Central and electric heating systems.  Every central or
electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling
unit to which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70°F measured at
a point three feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.



      (2)   Other heating facilities.  Where a central or electric
heating system is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be
provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents whereby
heating appliances may be connected so as to heat all habitable rooms with a
minimum temperature of 70°F measured three feet above the floor during
ordinary winter conditions.



   (C)   Electrical system.



      (1)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for
electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall
contain at least two floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles,
connected in a manner as determined by the State Electric Code. There shall
be installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace
room at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. In
the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable
room, each habitable room shall contain at least three floor or wall-type
electric convenience receptacles.



      (2)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple
dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when
natural daylight is not sufficient.



      (3)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be
maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and
installed in accordance with the State Electrical Code.



(Prior Code, § 4-54)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.075  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR VENTILATION.



   (A)   General.  Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor
area of the room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any a room and light obstructing structures are located less than
five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of
the room, a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and
shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top
of the room, the total window area of the skylight shall equal at least 15%
of the total floor area of the room.



   (B)   Habitable rooms.  Every habitable room shall have at least
one window or skylight which can easily be opened, or any other device as
will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window size as
required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation.



   (C)   Bathroom and water closet rooms.  Every bathroom and water
closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements
for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system.



(Prior Code, § 4-55)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.076  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SPACE, USE AND LOCATION.



   (A)   Room sizes.  Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the
minimum room size in each habitable room as required by the State Residential
Building Code.



      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square
feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet
of additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at
least 75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional
occupant.



      (2)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area
for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of
floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.



   (B)   Ceiling height.  At least one-half of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and
six inches.



   (C)   Floor area calculation.  Floor area shall be calculated on
the basis of habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within
the dwelling unit may count for not more than 10% of the required habitable
floor area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height
is less than four and one-half feet, shall not be considered as part of the
floor area computing the total area of the room to determine maximum
permissible occupancy.



   (D)   Cellar.  No cellar shall be used for living purposes.



   (E)   Basements.  No basement shall be used for living purposes
unless:



      (1)   The floor and walls are substantially watertight;



      (2)   The total window area, total openable window area and
ceiling height are equal to those required for habitable rooms; and



      (3)   The required minimum window area of every habitable room
is entirely above the grade adjoining the window area, except where the
window or windows face a stairwell, window well or accessway.



(Prior Code, § 4-56)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.077  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Exterior foundation, walls and roofs.  Every foundation
exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weathertight and
rodentproof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be
capable of affording privacy; shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall
shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to prevent the
entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather.



   (B)   Interior floor, walls and ceilings.  Every floor, interior
wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodentproof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.



   (C)   Windows and doors.  Every window, exterior door, basement or
cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and
rodentproof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.



   (D)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances.  Every inside and outside
stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall
be kept in sound condition and good repair.



   (E)   Bathroom floors.  Every bathroom floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so
as to permit the floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (F)   Supplied facilities.  Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment or utility which is required under this subchapter shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.



   (G)   Drainage.  Every yard shall be properly graded so as to
obtain thorough drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water.



   (H)   Noxious weeds.  Every yard and all exterior property areas
shall be kept free of species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or
detrimental to health.



   (I)   Egress.  Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate
means of egress as required by the City Fire Prevention Code.



(Prior Code, § 4-57)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.078  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS AND
INFESTATIONS.



   (A)   Screens.  In every dwelling unit, for protection against
mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every door opening directly from a
dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have supplied and installed screens and
a self-closing device; and every window or other device with openings to
outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be
supplied with screens installed.



   (B)   Rodent control.  Every basement or cellar window used or
intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement
which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens
installed or any other approved device as will effectively prevent their
entrance.



   (C)   Infestation.  Every occupant of a dwelling containing a
single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every
occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling
unit shall be responsible for the extermination whenever the occupant’s
dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever infestation is caused by
failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodentproof or reasonably
insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in
any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two
or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner.



   (D)   Rubbish storage and disposal.  Every dwelling and every
dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for
storage of rubbish as required by city ordinances, and the owner, operator or
agent in control of the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
the removal of rubbish.



   (E)   Garbage storage and disposal.  Every dwelling and every
dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility,
which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink
grinder) in each dwelling unit, for the use of the occupants of each dwelling
unit, or an approved outside garbage can as required by city ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 4-58)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.079  MINIMUM STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ROOMINGHOUSES; EXCEPTIONS.



   All of the provisions of this subchapter, and all of the minimum
standards and requirements of this subchapter, shall be applicable to
roominghouses, and to every person who operates a roominghouse, or who
occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any
roominghouse, except as provided in the following divisions.



   (A)   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities.  At least
one water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to
an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be
supplied for each four rooms within a roominghouse wherever the facilities
are shared. All the facilities shall be located within the residence building
served and shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and
shall be not more than one story removed from any of the persons sharing the
facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
hot and cold water at all times. The required facilities shall not be located
in a cellar.



   (B)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes.  Every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor area and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area
for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of
floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.



   (C)   Sanitary conditions.  The operator of every roominghouse
shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and
ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the
roominghouse; and shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance
of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which
the roominghouse is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.



   (D)   Sanitary facilities.  Every water closet, flush urinal,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by division (A) of this section
shall be located within the roominghouse and within a room or rooms which
afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms, and which are
accessible from a common hall and without going outside the roominghouse or
through any other room therein.



(Prior Code, § 4-59)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.080  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   (A)   Public areas.  Every owner of a dwelling containing two or
more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises
thereof.



   (B)   Cleanliness.  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit and premises thereof which the person occupies and controls.



   (C)   Rubbish and garbage.  Every occupant of a dwelling or
dwelling unit shall dispose of all of the person’s rubbish and garbage in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the supplied storage facilities.
In all cases the owner shall be responsible for the availability of rubbish
and garbage storage facilities.



   (D)   Supplied plumbing fixtures.  Every occupant of a dwelling
unit shall keep all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable
care in the proper use and operation of same.



   (E)   Care of facilities, equipment and structure.  No occupant
shall wilfully destroy, deface or impair any of the facilities or equipment,
or any part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit.



(Prior Code, § 4-60)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.081  DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES.



   The Director of Public Works and Utilities is hereby designated as the
officer to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and to exercise the
duties and powers herein prescribed. It shall be the duty of the Director:



   (A)   To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect
dwellings and dwelling units, located in the city, in order to determine
which dwellings and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for
the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this subchapter with respect to
the dwellings and dwelling units;



   (B)   To take action, together with other appropriate departments
and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect
rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated;



   (C)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
subchapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness herein prescribed; and



   (D)   To perform any other duties as may be herein prescribed.



(Prior Code, § 4-61)



§ 150.082  POWERS OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES.



   The Director is authorized to exercise powers as may be necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this
subchapter, including the following powers in addition to others herein
granted:



   (A)   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation;



   (B)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence;



   (C)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations
and inspections; provided, the entries shall be made in a manner as to cause
the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; and



   (D)   To appoint and fix the duties of the officers, agents and
employees as the Director deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-62)



§ 150.083  INSPECTIONS; DUTY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   For the purpose of making inspections, the Director of Public Works and
Utilities is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable
times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or
occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or the person in
charge thereof, shall give the Director free access to the dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit, and its premises at all reasonable times for the
purposes of the inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a
dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or the owner’s
agent or employee, access to any part of the dwelling or dwelling unit, and
its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-63)



§ 150.084  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation, notices, hearing.  Whenever a
petition is filed with the Director by a public authority or by at least five
residents of the city charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit
for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Director, upon
inspection, that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation,
the Director shall, if the preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
the charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in
interest in a dwelling or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Director at a
place therein fixed, not less than ten, nor more than 30 days after the
serving of the complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the
right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
Notice of the hearing shall also be given to at least one of the persons
signing a petition relating to the dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may
attend the hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The
rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Director.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing.  After the notice and hearing, the
Director shall state in writing the Director’s determination whether the
dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, and if so, whether
it is deteriorated or dilapidated.



      (1)   If the Director determines that the dwelling or dwelling
unit is deteriorated, the Director shall state in writing the findings of
fact in support of the determination, and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to repair,
alter and improve the dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum
standards of fitness established by this subchapter within a specified period
of time, not to exceed 90 days. The order may also direct and require the
owner to vacate and close the dwelling or dwelling unit until the repairs,
alterations and improvements have been made.



      (2)   If the Director determines that the dwelling is
dilapidated, the Director shall state in writing the findings of fact to
support the determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an order directing and requiring the dwelling unit to comply
with the minimum standards of fitness established by this subchapter, or else
vacate and remove or demolish the same within a specified period of time, not
to exceed 90 days.



   (C)   Failure to comply with order.



      (1)   In personam remedy.  If the owner of any deteriorated
dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Director
to repair, alter or improve the same within the time specified therein, or if
the owner of a dilapidated dwelling shall fail to comply with an order of the
Director to vacate and close, and remove or demolish the same within the time
specified therein, the Director shall submit to the City Council at its next
regular meeting a resolution directing the City Attorney to petition the
Superior Court for an order directing the owner to comply with the order of
the Director, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).



      (2)   In rem remedy.  After failure of an owner of a
deteriorated dwelling or dwelling unit, or of a dilapidated dwelling, to
comply with an order of the Director within the time specified therein, if
injunctive relief has not been sought or has not been granted as provided in
division (C)(1), the Director shall submit to the City Council an ordinance
ordering the Director to cause the dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired,
altered, improved, or vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as
provided in the original order of the Director, and pending the removal or
demolition, to placard the dwelling as provided by G.S. § 160A-443 and §
150.085 of this chapter.



      (3)   Enforcement and penalties.  See § 150.999.



   (D)   Appeals from orders of Director.  An appeal from any decision
or order of the Director may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby. Any
appeal from the action of the Director shall be taken within ten days from
the rendering of the decision or service of the order, and shall be taken by
filing with the Director and with the Zoning Board of Adjustment a notice of
appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon
the filing of any notice of appeal, the Director shall forthwith transmit to
the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision
appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the Director
refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, the
Director’s decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When
any appeal is from a decision of the Director requiring the person aggrieved
to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement
until the hearing by the Board, unless the Director certifies to the Board,
after the notice of appeal is filed with the Director, that by reason of the
facts stated in the certificate a copy of which shall be furnished the
appellant, a suspension of the Director’s requirement would cause imminent
peril to life or property, which case the requirement shall not be suspended
except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon
not less than one day’s written notice to the Director, by the Board or by
a court of record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. § 160A-446(f) and
division (E) below of this section.



      (1)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
all appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision or order appealed from, and may make a decision and order as in
its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all
the powers of the Director, but the concurring vote of four members of the
Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the
Director. The Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in any
case where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the subchapter, to adapt the
application of the subchapter to the necessities of the case to the end that
the spirit of the subchapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare
secured and substantial justice done.



      (2)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review
by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



   (E)   Petition to Superior Court by owner.  Any person aggrieved by
an order issued by the Director or a decision rendered by the Board shall
have the right, within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering the
decision, to petition the Superior Court for a temporary injunction
restraining the Director pending a final disposition of the cause, as
provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).



(Prior Code, § 4-64)  (Ord. CCTA-01-91, passed 8-8-1991)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.085  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   Complaints or orders issued by the Director shall be served upon
persons, either personally or by first class mail, but if the whereabouts of
the persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Director in
the exercise of reasonable, diligence, the Director shall make an affidavit
to that effect, and the serving of the complaint or order upon the person may
be made by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper, (printed and published and circulating) in the city. Where service
is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceeding shall be posted in
a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.



(Prior Code, § 4-65)



§ 150.086  IN REM ACTION BY DIRECTOR; PLACARDING.



   (A)   After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to
comply with an order of the Director issued pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter, and upon adoption by the City Council of an ordinance
authorizing and directing the Director to do so, as provided by G.S. §
160A-443(5) and § 150.084 hereof, the Director shall proceed to cause the
dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered or improved to comply with
the minimum standards of fitness established by this subchapter, or to be
vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of
the City Council and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the
dwelling or dwelling unit a placard with the following words: “This
building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this
building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful.” Occupation of a
building so posted shall constitute a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Each ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register
of Deeds in the county wherein the property is located, and shall be indexed
in the name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S.
§ 160A-443(5).



(Prior Code, § 4-66)



§ 150.087  COSTS A LIEN ON PREMISES.



   As provided by G.S. § 160A-443(6), the amount of the cost of any
repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition, caused to be made or done by the Director pursuant to § 150.086
shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred.
The lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be enforced and the
costs collected as provided by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10.



(Prior Code, § 4-67)



§ 150.088  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   None of the provisions of this subchapter shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and
to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this
chapter by criminal process as authorized by G.S. § 14-4 and § 150.090
hereof, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent
the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws.



(Prior Code, § 4-68)



§ 150.089  COUNCIL TO HEAR APPEALS.



   All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the Director
pursuant to § 150.084(D) shall be heard and determined by the City Council.
As the appeals body, the Council shall have power to fix the times and places
of its meetings, to adopt necessary rules of procedure and any other rules
and regulations which may be necessary for the proper discharge of its
duties. The Council shall perform the duties prescribed by § 150.084(D) and
shall keep an accurate journal of all its proceedings.



(Prior Code, § 4-69)



§ 150.090  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISION.



   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this subchapter
is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code
of the city, the provision which established the higher standard or more
stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the residents of the city shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 4-70)



MINIMUM NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING STANDARDS



§ 150.100  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, and shall apply in
the interpretation and enforcement of this subchapter:



   BASIC STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS. The parts of a building which provide the
principal strength, stability, integrity, shape and safety of the building,
including, but not limited to, plates, studs, joists, rafters, stringers,
stairs, sub-flooring, flooring, sheathing, lathing, roofing, siding, window
frames, door frames, porches, railings, eaves, chimneys, flashing, masonry
and all other essential components.



   BUILDING. Any structure, place, or any other construction built for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind or
any part of such structure, shelter or property.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A code enforcement officer of the City of
Lincolnton or any agent of the code enforcement officer who is authorized by
the code enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   NONRESIDENTIAL. Any building or structure or portion of a building or
structure occupied or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part, for a use
other than a dwelling, home, residing place, living space or sleeping space
for one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently.



   OCCUPANT. Any person who is a tenant or has actual possession of a
nonresidential building or structure or part thereof.



   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a
nonresidential building or structure, or part thereof.



   OWNER. Any person who alone, or jointly, or severally with others:



      (1)   Shall have title in fee simple to any nonresidential
building or structure, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof; or



      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any nonresidential
building or structure as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor,
executrix, administrator, administration, trustee or guardian of the estate
of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be
bound to comply with the provisions of this subchapter and of rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he or she were
the owner.



   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations, and corporations
who have interests of record in a nonresidential building or structure and
any who are in possession thereof.



   PREMISES. Any lot or parcel of land inclusive of any building or
improvements located thereon. Safe means a condition which is not likely to
do harm to humans or to real or personal property.



   STRUCTURALLY SOUND. Substantially free from flaw, defect, decay or
deterioration to the extent that the building or structure or structural
member is capable of adequately or safely accomplishing the purpose for which
it was intended or designed.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or placed upon a property which is
supported by the ground or which is supported by any other structure, except
a currently operable licensed vehicle.



   UNSAFE. A condition which is reasonably likely to do harm to humans or
to real or personal property if not corrected or stopped.



   VACANT INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE. Any building or structure designed for the
storage of goods or equipment in connection with manufacturing processes,
which has not been used for that purpose for at least one year and has not
been converted to another use.



   VACANT MANUFACTURING FACILITY. Any building or structure previously
used for the lawful production or manufacturing of goods, which has not been
used for that purpose for at least one year and has not been converted to
another use.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.101  PURPOSE.



   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and its
citizens, it is the purpose of this subchapter to establish minimum standards
of maintenance, sanitation, and safety relating to nonresidential buildings
or structures, as expressly authorized by G.S. 160A-439. This subchapter
provides for the repair, closing or demolition of nonresidential buildings or
structures as a result of a public necessity caused by conditions that are
dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.102  APPLICABILITY AND COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all
nonresidential buildings or structures which are now in existence or which
may be built within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   Every nonresidential building or structure and the premises on
which it is situated shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter,
whether or not such building or structure shall have been constructed,
altered, or repaired before or after the enactment of this subchapter, and
irrespective of any permits or licenses which have been issued for the use or
occupancy of the building or structure or for the installment or repair of
equipment or facilities. This section establishes minimum standards for all
nonresidential buildings and structures and does not replace or modify
standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration, or
use of the building or structure, equipment or facilities contained therein.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.103  MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES.



   All nonresidential buildings and structures shall be free of all
conditions that are dangerous and injurious to the public health, safety, and
welfare of occupants or members of the general public. Without limitation of
the foregoing requirement, the existence of any of the following conditions
shall be deemed to be dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare for
which a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of
such building or structure and must be corrected in accordance with the
provisions of this section:



   (A)   Exterior walls that are not structurally sound, free from
defects and damages, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. Where a
wall of a building has become exposed as a result of demolition of adjacent
buildings, such wall must have all doors, windows, vents, or other similar
openings closed with material of the type comprising the wall. The exposed
wall shall be painted, stuccoed or bricked and sufficiently weatherproofed to
prevent deterioration of the wall.



   (B)   Roofs shall be kept structurally sound and shall be maintained
in such a manner so as to prevent rain or other objects from penetrating into
the interior of the building.



   (C)   Such damage by fire, wind, or other causes as to render the
building unsafe.



   (D)   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions, or disrepair,
which is dangerous to the health and safety of the occupants or members of
the general public.



   (E)   Buildings and structures including their environs that have
accumulations of garbage, trash, or rubbish, which creates health and
sanitation problems. All garbage and solid waste shall be in approved
containers or stored in a safe and sanitary manner.



   (F)   Buildings and structures that have loose and insufficiently
anchored overhanging objects, which constitute a danger of falling on persons
or property.



   (G)   Buildings and structures that have cracked or broken glass,
loose shingles, loose wood, crumbling stone or brick, loose or broken
plastic, or other dangerous objects or similar hazardous conditions.



   (H)   Buildings and structures that have objects and elements
protruding from building walls or roofs, which are unsafe or not properly
secured or which can create a hazard such as abandoned electrical boxes and
conduits, wires, sign brackets and other brackets, and similar objects.



   (I)   Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, or fire escapes
which are not structurally sound. All exterior porches, landings, balconies,
stairs, and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or railings
properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the
same shall be kept sound, in good repair, and free of defects.



   (J)   Windows containing broken or cracked glass that could be in
danger of falling or shattering.



   (K)   All openings originally designed as windows, doors, loading
docks, or other means of egress or ingress which have been temporarily closed
by boarding or other manner in a nonsecure manner so as to allow unauthorized
admittance. If an opening is temporarily closed by boarding to secure the
building or structure, the boarding shall be trim fit, sealed to prevent
water intrusion, and the building or structure shall be maintained in a state
that secures the building or structure from any unauthorized admittance from
humans, animals, or birds.



   (L)   Any combination of conditions which in the judgment of the
code enforcement officer renders any building or structure dangerous or
injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of occupants or members
of the general public.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.104  DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   The code enforcement officer is hereby designated as the public officer
to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and to exercise the duties and
powers herein prescribed. It shall be the duty of the code enforcement
officer:



   (A)   To investigate the conditions of nonresidential buildings and
structures in the city and to inspect nonresidential buildings and structures
located in the city in order to determine which nonresidential buildings and
structures are not being maintained so that the health and safety of its
occupants or members of the general public are jeopardized and for the
purpose of carrying out the objectives of this section with respect to such
nonresidential buildings and structures;



   (B)   To take such action, together with other appropriate
departments and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect
the repair or demolition of nonresidential buildings and structures which
have not been properly maintained in compliance with minimum standards
established by this section;



   (C)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
subchapter and an inventory of those non-residential buildings and structures
which have not been properly maintained in compliance with the minimum
standards established by this section;



   (D)   To perform such other duties as may be herein prescribed.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.105  POWERS OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   The code enforcement officer is authorized to exercise such powers as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and
provisions of this section, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:



   (A)   To investigate nonresidential buildings and structures in the
city to determine whether they have been properly maintained in compliance
with the minimum standards established by this section so that the safety or
health of the occupants or members of the general public are not jeopardized;



   (B)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence;



   (C)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations
and inspections provided that such entries shall be made in accordance with
law and in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the
persons in possession; and



   (D)   To appoint and fix duties of such officers, agents, and
employees as the code enforcement officer deems necessary to carry out the
purposes of this section.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.106  INSPECTIONS.



   For the purpose of making inspections, the code enforcement officer is
hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times,
nonresidential buildings and structures. If entry upon the premises for
purposes of investigation is necessary, such entry shall be made pursuant to
a duly issued administrative search warrant in accordance with G.S. 15-27.2
or with permission of the owner, the owner’s agent, a tenant, or other
person legally in possession of the premises.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.107  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation. Whenever it appears to the code
enforcement officer that any nonresidential building or structure has not
been properly maintained so that the safety or health of its occupants or
members of the general public are jeopardized for failure of the property to
meet the minimum standards established by this subchapter, the code
enforcement officer  shall undertake a preliminary investigation. 



   (B)   Complaint and hearing. If the preliminary investigation
discloses evidence of a violation of the minimum standards established by
this section, the code enforcement officer shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner of and parties in interest in the nonresidential building or
structure a complaint. The complaint shall state the charges and contain a
notice that a hearing will be held before the code enforcement officer at a
place therein fixed, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the
serving of the complaint, that the owner and parties in interest shall be
given the right to answer the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint;
and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall
not be controlling in hearings before the code enforcement officer.



   (C)   Procedure after hearing.



      (1)   If, after notice and hearing, the code enforcement
officer determines that the nonresidential building or structure has been
maintained in that the property meets the minimum standards established by
this subchapter, the code enforcement officer shall state in writing findings
of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof a copy of said determination.



      (2)   If, after notice and hearing, the code enforcement
officer determines that the nonresidential building or structure has not been
properly maintained so that the safety or health of its occupants or members
of the general public is jeopardized for failure of the property to meet the
minimum standards established by this section, the code enforcement officer
shall state in writing findings of fact in support of that determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order in
accordance with the provisions of division (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section
and subject to the limitations set forth in §§ 150.108 and 150.109.



      (3)   If the code enforcement officer determines that the cost
of repair, alteration, or improvement of the building or structure would not
exceed 50% of its then-current value, then the code enforcement officer shall
state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and
issue an order that requires the owner, within a reasonable time specified in
the order, to either:



         (a)   Repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential
building or structure in order to bring it into compliance with the minimum
standards established by this section; or



         (b)   Vacate and close the nonresidential building or
structure for any use.



      (4)   If the code enforcement officer determines that the cost
of repair, alteration, or improvement of the building or structure would
exceed 50% of its then-current value, then the code enforcement officer shall
state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and
issue an order that requires the owner, within a reasonable time specified in
the order, to either:



         (a)   Repair, alter or improve the nonresidential
building or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards
established by this section; or



         (b)   Remove or demolish the nonresidential building or
structure.



   (D)   Failure to comply with order and ordinances.



      (1)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to either
repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential building or structure or vacate
and close the nonresidential building or structure, City Council may adopt an
ordinance ordering the code enforcement officer to cause such nonresidential
building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved in order to bring
it into compliance with the minimum standards established by this section or
to be vacated and closed. The property shall be described in the subchapter.
The section shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds and
shall be indexed in the name of the property owner(s) in the grantor index. 



      (2)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish the nonresidential building or structure, City Council may adopt an
ordinance ordering the code enforcement officer to cause such nonresidential
building or structure to be removed or demolished. No ordinance shall be
adopted to require removal or demolition of a nonresidential building or
structure until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to
bring it into conformity with the minimum standards established by the City
Council.  The property shall be described in the ordinance. The ordinance
shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds and shall be indexed
in the name of the property owner(s) in the grantor index. 



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.108  LIMITATIONS ON ORDERS AND ORDINANCES - HISTORIC LANDMARK OR
HISTORIC DISTRICT.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if the
nonresidential building or structure is designated as a local historic
landmark,  listed in the National Register of Historic Places or located in
a locally designated historic district or in a historic district listed in
the National Register of Historic Places and the City Council determines,
after a public hearing, that the nonresidential building or structure is of
individual significance or contributes to maintaining the character of the
district, and the nonresidential building or structure has not been condemned
as unsafe, an order issued by the code enforcement officer  pursuant to §
150.107(C)  and an ordinance approved by City Council pursuant to §
150.107(D) may require that the nonresidential building or structure be
vacated and closed until it is brought into compliance with the minimum
standards established by this section.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.109  LIMITATIONS ON ORDERS AND ORDINANCES - VACANT MANUFACTURING
FACILITY OR VACANT INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an order issued by
the code enforcement officer pursuant to § 150.107(C) and an ordinance
approved by City Council pursuant to § 150.107(D) may not require repairs,
alterations, or improvements to be made to a vacant manufacturing facility or
a vacant industrial warehouse to preserve the original use. The order and
ordinance may require such building or structure to be vacated and closed,
but repairs may be required only when necessary to maintain structural
integrity or to abate a health or safety hazard that cannot be remedied by
ordering the building or structure closed for any use.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.110  VACATED AND CLOSED NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   (A)   (1)   If the City Council has adopted an ordinance or the
code enforcement officer has issued an order requiring the building or
structure to be repaired or vacated and closed and the building or structure
has been vacated and closed for a period of two years pursuant to the
ordinance or order, then if the City Council finds that the owner has
abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the building or
structure and that the continuation of the building or structure in its
vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, and
welfare of the city in that it would continue to deteriorate, would create a
fire or safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would
attract persons intent on criminal activities, or would cause or contribute
to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, then City
Council may, after the expiration of the two-year period, adopt an ordinance
and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following:



         (a)   If the cost to repair the nonresidential building
or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards is less
than or equal to 50% of its then current value, the ordinance shall require
that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the building or structure
within 90 days; or



         (b)   If the cost to repair the nonresidential building
or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards exceeds
50% of its then current value, the ordinance shall require the owner to
demolish and remove the building or structure within 90 days.



      (2)   In the case of a vacant manufacturing facility or a
vacant industrial warehouse, the building or structure must have been vacated
and closed pursuant to an order or ordinance for a period of five years
before City Council may take action under this section. The ordinance shall
be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in
the name of the property owner in the grantor index.



   (B)   If the owner fails to comply with the requirements of the
ordinance within 90 days, the code enforcement officer shall demolish and
remove the nonresidential building or structure.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.111  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by the code enforcement officer
under this subchapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by
registered or certified mail and, in conjunction therewith, may be served by
regular mail. When the manner or service is by regular mail in conjunction
with registered or certified mail, and the registered or certified mail is
unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office
within ten days after mailing, service shall be deemed sufficient. The person
mailing the complaint or order by regular mail shall certify that fact and
the date thereof, and such certificate shall be conclusive in the absence of
fraud. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.



   (B)   If the identities of any owner or the whereabouts of persons
are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the code enforcement officer in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the code enforcement officer makes an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the
unknown owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper
having general circulation in the city at least once no later than the time
at which personal service would be required under the provisions of this
section. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby
affected.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.112  INTERIM ACTION BY THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   After failure of an owner of a nonresidential building or structure to
comply with an order of the code enforcement officer issued pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter and upon adoption by the City Council of an
ordinance authorizing and directing the owner to do so, as provided by G.S.
160A-439(f) and § 150.107(D) of this section, the code enforcement officer
shall proceed to cause such nonresidential building or structure to be
repaired, altered, or improved to comply with the minimum standards
established by this section, or to be vacated and closed or to be removed or
demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the City Council. The code
enforcement officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
nonresidential building or structure which is to be vacated and closed a
placard with the following words: “This building is unfit for any use; the
use or occupation of this building for any purpose is prohibited and
unlawful.” Any person who occupies or knowingly allows the occupancy of a
building or structure so posted shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.113  COSTS, A LIEN ON PREMISES.



   (A)   As provided by G.S. 160A-439(i), the amount of the cost of any
repairs, alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition, caused to be made or done by the code enforcement officer
pursuant to §§ 150.107 (D) or 150.110 shall be a lien against the real
property upon which such costs were incurred. Such lien shall be filed, have
the same priority, and be enforced and the costs collected as provided by
G.S. 160A, Article 10. The amount of the costs shall also be a lien on any
other real property of the owner located within the city limits except for
the owner's primary residence. The additional lien provided in this
subdivision is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money
judgment.



   (B)   If the nonresidential building or structure is removed or
demolished by the code enforcement officer, the code enforcement officer
shall offer for sale the recoverable materials of the building or structure
and any personal property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to
the building or structure and shall credit the proceeds of the sale, if any,
against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining
shall be deposited in the superior court by the code enforcement officer,
shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by
the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
decree of the court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or
limit in any way the power of the governing body to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or
otherwise.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.114  EJECTMENT.



   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a
nonresidential building or structure, the code enforcement officer may file a
civil action in the name of the city to remove the occupant. The action to
vacate shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by
filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying the
nonresidential building or structure. The Clerk of Superior Court shall issue
a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain
time, date, and place not to exceed ten days from the issuance of the summons
to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as
provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor,
and if on its return it appears to have been duly served and if at the
hearing the code enforcement officer produces a certified copy of an
ordinance adopted by the City Council pursuant to G.S. 160A-493(f) and §
150.107(D) to vacate the occupied nonresidential building or structure, the
magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and all
persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the nonresidential building or
structure be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for
summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from any judgment
entered under this subsection by the magistrate may be taken as provided in
G.S. 7A-228, and the execution of the judgment may be stayed as provided in
G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a nonresidential building or
structure who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary
ejectment  proceeding pursuant to this subsection unless the occupant was
served with notice, at least 30 days before the filing of the summary
ejectment proceeding, that the City Council has ordered the code enforcement
officer to proceed to exercise his duties under G.S. 160A-493(f) and §
150.107 (D) to vacate and close or remove and demolish the nonresidential
building or structure.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.115  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   Neither this subchapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the City of Lincolnton to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or
otherwise, or to enforce this subchapter by criminal process as authorized by
G.S. 14-4 and § 150.118 of this subchapter  and the enforcement of any
remedy provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.116  APPEALS PROCESS.



   (A)   Within 30 days following receipt of an order from the code
enforcement officer any person receiving such order, believing that the
literal application of the ordinance will cause undue hardship or has been
misconstrued, wrongly interpreted or applied, may appeal in writing to the
City of Lincolnton Board of Adjustment for such relief as may be granted,
after investigation of the grounds thereof, by way of a reasonable extension
of time or a variation from strict compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter. The circumstances justifying such findings related to hardship
are:



      (1)   Inability to comply within the time period provided in
this subchapter due to clearly documented severe financial distress;



      (2)   The clear and significant non-availability of services
or equipment with which to comply, without fault of the applicant; or



      (3)   Other extenuating circumstances showing a good faith
intention on the part of the applicant or another to comply when able to do
so.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Adjustment may petition the Superior Court of Lincoln County for an
injunction. Any such petition must be filed with Superior Court of Lincoln
County within 30 days from the date of the Board's decision.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.117  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this subchapter
is found to be in conflict with any other ordinance or code of the city, the
provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement
for the promotion and protection of health and safety of the citizens of the
city shall prevail.



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.118  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential
building or structure to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or
improve the same, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same,
upon order of the code enforcement officer  duly made and served in
accordance with the provisions of this section, within the time specified in
such order, and each day that any such failure, neglect or refusal to comply
with such order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential building or
structure, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to §
150.107(C) of this section, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same
after the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration,
improvement, or its vacation and closing, and each day that such occupancy
continues after such prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.



   (B)   The violation of any provision of this section shall
constitute a misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. 14-4.



   (C)   In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies provided by
this section, any owner of a nonresidential building or structure that fails
to comply with an order of the code enforcement officer within the time
specified therein, shall be subject to a civil penalty in accordance with §
150.999(C).



(Ord. - -, passed 3-2-2017)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Abandoned structures.



      (1)   If the owner of any structure shall fail to comply with
an order of the City Manager or designee within the time specified therein,
in addition to other remedies cited in §§ 150.050 through 150.058 for the
enforcement of its provisions and pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(b), the
regulations and standards in §§ 150.050 through 150.058 may be enforced
through the issuance of civil penalties by the City Manager or designee.



      (2)   Subsequent citations for the same violation may be
issued by the City Manager or designee if the offender does not correct the
violation within three days of the time specified therein (except as
otherwise provided in a warning situation).



      (3)   The following penalties are hereby established.



 

Warning citation
 

Correct violation within ten days



First citation
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Second citation (citations for same offense)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Third and subsequent citation for same offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule per day




 



      (4)   If the offender fails to pay penalties which have been
cited within five days after the offender has been cited, the city may
recover the penalties in a civil action in the nature of debt.



      (5)   The above remedies are cumulative, and the city may
pursue any or all of the same at its discretion. Each day that the violation
exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Prior Code, § 4-34)



   (C)   Minimum housing standards.



      (1)   After failure of an owner of a deteriorated dwelling or
dwelling unit, or of a dilapidated dwelling, to comply with an order of the
Director within the time specified therein, in addition to other remedies
cited in §§ 150.070 through 150.090 for the enforcement of its provisions
and pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(b), the regulations and standards in §§
150.070 through 150.090 may be enforced through the issuance of civil
penalties by the Director or designee.



      (2)   Subsequent citations for the same violation may be
issued by the Director or designee if the offender does not correct the
violation within three days of the time specified therein (except as
otherwise provided in a warning situation).



      (3)   The following penalties are hereby established.



 

Warning
 

Correct violation within ten days



First citation
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Second citation for same offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Third and subsequent citations for same offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule per day




 



      (4)   If the offender fails to pay penalties which have been
cited within five days after the offender has been cited, the city may
recover the penalties in a civil action in the nature of debt.



      (5)   The above remedies are cumulative, and the city may
pursue any or all of the same at its discretion. Each day that the violation
exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Prior Code, § 4-64)



   (D)   Violations; penalty.  It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter,
or improve the same, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same,
upon order of the Director duly made and served as herein provided, within
the time specified in the order, and each day that any failure, neglect or
refusal to comply with the order continues it shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or
dwelling unit, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to §
150.084, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time
prescribed in the order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its
vacation and closing, and each day that the occupancy continues after the
prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Prior Code, § 4-71)



(Ord. O-05-05, passed 7-7-2005; Ord. O-07-05, passed 10-6-2005)



CHAPTER 151:  FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



Section



Purpose and Applicability



   151.001   Title



   151.002   Applicability



   151.003   Authority and mission



   151.004   Code and amendments



   151.005   Jurisdiction



   151.006   Effective date



   151.007   Definitions and abbreviations



Permit, Application and Review



   151.020   Definition



   151.021   Permits required



   151.022   Information required with application



   151.023   Plan review



   151.024   Sprinkler/standpipe systems



   151.025   Fire alarm systems



   151.026   Automatic fire suppression systems



Permit Types



   151.040   General



   151.041   Storage tank permits



   151.042   Open burning permits within 100 feet of a structure



   151.043   Fireworks permit



   151.044   Other permits



   151.045   Operational permits



   151.046   Construction permits



   151.047   Exception



Fee Administration



   151.060   Fee schedule



General Provisions



   151.075   Fire lanes



   151.076   Fire hydrants (located on commercial and residential
property)



   151.077   Hazardous materials disclosure



   151.078   Display of address numbers



   151.079   High-piled combustible storage and high-rack storage
systems



   151.080   Key boxes



   151.081   Smoke detectors for rental property; landlords and tenants



Haunted Houses



   151.095   Haunted houses



   151.096   Permit required



   151.097   Permit issuance procedure



   151.098   Inspection and revocation of permit



   151.099   Regulations regarding the use of Halloween haunted houses



Decorative Materials



   151.110   Decorative materials in assemblies, churches, businesses,
educational, institutional and mercantile occupancies, covered malls, hotels,
motels, dormitories and boarding houses



Violations



   151.125   Notice of violation



   151.126   Civil citation



   151.127   Summary abatement



   151.128   False alarms



   151.129   Open burning violations



   151.130   Carelessness with fire



   151.131   Accumulations of waste materials



   151.132   Unsafe or defective buildings or systems



   151.133   Code violations



Scheduled Inspections



   151.145   Inspections



   151.146   Annual inspections



   151.147   Inspections to be done once every two years



   151.148   Inspections to be done once every three years



   151.149   Frequency rates for inspections



Reporting a Hazard or Violation



   151.160   Hazards or violations



   151.161   How to report a hazard or violation



   151.162   Required information for complaints



   151.163   Records



 



   151.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Forms



   Appendix B:   References



PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY



§ 151.001  TITLE.



   These regulations shall be known as the Fire Prevention and Protection
Chapter.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.002  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings
and occupancies in the North Carolina Building Code General Construction and
the North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention § 102 and §§ 151.145
through 151.149. The provisions of this code, North Carolina Building Code
Fire Prevention (NCBCFP) and this chapter shall apply equally to existing
buildings as well as new buildings.



   (B)   All one- and two-family dwellings and any buildings for use by
any farmer are exempt from operational permit fees. See also exceptions to
applicability NCBCFP § 102A.



   (C)   No one is exempt from construction permits, open burning
permits or special use permits as defined in NCBCFP § 105 and § 151.040 of
this chapter.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.003  AUTHORITY AND MISSION.



   The NCBCFP and this chapter shall be enforced by the City Fire Marshal
and his or her authorized representatives or as otherwise provided herein.
The mission of the Fire Marshal’s office is to minimize the risk of fire
and other hazards to the life and property of the citizens of the city.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.004  CODE AND AMENDMENTS.



   For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire, explosion or exposure to hazardous
materials, the North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention, including
Chapter 1 of the Code, the permits chapter, along with the state amendments
of the Code is hereby adopted by reference and is set forth herein as the
Fire Code for the city. Any amendments to the aforementioned NCBCFP, which
are adopted, amended, and published by the North Carolina State Building Code
Council, shall be effective in the city at the time the amendments are
declared in effect by the North Carolina State Building Code Council.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.005  JURISDICTION.



   In accordance to the General Statutes of the state and the provisions
of this chapter, it will be the responsibility of the Fire Marshal’s office
to issue all fire prevention permits, conduct all fire inspections for the
county and enforcement of the NCBCFP and this chapter.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.006  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall become effective on January 1, 2009.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.007  DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.



   (A)   Generally.  Words used in the present tense include the
future. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. Words
in the feminine and neuter gender include the masculine. The singular number
includes the plural and plural number includes the singular.



   (B)   Words not defined.  Words not defined herein shall have the
meanings stated in the North Carolina Building Code General Construction,
North Carolina Electrical Code, North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, North
Carolina Gas Code, North Carolina Mechanical Code or North Carolina Plumbing
Code. Words not defined in the North Carolina Building Codes shall have the
meanings stated in the Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as
revised.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALTER or ALTERATION.  Any change or modification in construction
or occupancy.



      AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  A mechanically operated device that is used
to convey persons in any direction as a form of amusement.



      APPEALS.  An applicant for a permit, or permit holder, as
appropriate, may appeal the Fire Marshal’s office refusal to issue, or
decision to revoke a permit. Appeals must be made in writing within 30 days
of interpretation. All appeals of the this chapter shall be made to the City
Manager’s office. Any appeals of the North Carolina Building Code Fire
Prevention shall follow the prescribed methods as set forth in the G.S. §§
143-140 and 143-141.



      ASPHALT KETTLE.  Any vessel or container used to process, heat,
hold for heating or dispense flammable or combustible roofing materials that
are in liquid form or will take form as a result of being exposed to a vessel
or container.



      BONFIRE.  An outdoor fire. BONFIRES may be used for ceremonial
and religious purposes (schools, civic groups, churches). Materials used for
BONFIRES must also comply with the EPA regulations.



      BURNING BAN.  Warning issued for any outdoor burning when
conditions or local circumstances make these fire hazardous.



      CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.  At the completion of this work done
under a permit, the appropriate contractor must put in writing that all work
done met or exceeded all Codes (NCBCFP, NPFA or this chapter) that applied to
that particular permit.



      CIVIL CITATION.  Is a written notice of any violations of the
North Carolina Fire Prevention Code or this chapter.



      CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.  A construction permit allows the applicant
to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by
§ 105.6 of the NCBCFP and this chapter.



      DECORATIVE MATERIAL.  Materials such as curtains, draperies,
streamers, surface coverings applied over the building interior finish for
decorative, acoustical or other effect, and also cloth, cotton batting,
straw, vines, leaves, trees and plastic used for decorative effect. It shall
not include floor coverings, ordinary window shades or material one-fortieth
of one inch (0.64mm) or less in thickness applied directly to and adhering
tightly to a base.



      FEES.  A charge for professional services, licenses, permits and
the like. FEES will be according to current schedule as adopted by the City
Council.



      FINES.  A sum of money paid as a penalty. The penalties for
violations of this chapter and the North Carolina State Building Codes will
be based on the current city civil citations fee schedule as adopted by the
City Council.



      FIRE FLOW TESTING.  Are tests conducted on water distribution
systems to determine the rate of flow available at various locations for fire
fighting purposes.



      FIRE HYDRANT.  A device used to gain access to water from a
supply source.



      FIREWORKS.  Devices used for noisy effects or brilliant
displays. All FIREWORKS for private use must meet the North Carolina Fire
Prevention Code, this chapter and G.S. § 14-414.



      GOVERNING BODY.  A city, county, state, agency or other
political government subdivisions or entity authorized to administer and
enforce the provisions of this code, as adopted or amended.



      GPM.  Gallons per minute.



      HAUNTED HOUSE.  Are any building with several rooms or one room
displaying scary scenes or scenes that are to represent life-like scenes and
is used by organizations or individuals for fundraisers or profit. All
HAUNTED HOUSES must follow §§ 151.095 through 151.099 and the North
Carolina Fire Prevention Codes.



      INTER-DEPARTMENTAL APPROVAL.  Approval between other departments
for different projects or jobs. Before any permits are issued for any
projects it will be the responsibility of the contractor to obtain approval
from the Building and Land Development Department, Environmental Health, Fire
Marshal’s office and/or any other department(s) that may issue permits.



      KIOSKS.  A small structure open at one or more sides used to
display or sell merchandise.



      NCBCFP.  North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention.



      NFPA.  National Fire Protection Association.



      NUISANCE BURNING.  When during a burn, the smoke and/or odors
create a neighborhood nuisance, causes physical irritation exacerbating a
documented medical condition, visibility impairment, evidence of soot or ash
on property or structure other than the property on which the burning is
done, the smoke and odors do not rise, hangs close to the ground, crosses a
street or highway and causes a hazard or three or more separate businesses or
homes complain during the burning it shall be ceased and all fires will be
extinguished.



      OPEN BURNING.



         (a)   All open burning done within 100 feet of a
structure.



         (b)   The burning of any matter in a manner that the
products of combustion resulting from the burning are emitted directly into
the atmosphere without passing through a stack, chimney or permitted air
pollution control device.



         (c)   Bonfires are also covered under OPEN BURNING.



      OPERATIONAL PERMIT.  An operational permit allows an applicant
to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by §
105.6 of the NCBCFP and this chapter for either a prescribed period or until
renewed or revoked.



      PLAN REVIEW.  A review process used for the determination of
compliance with this chapter and the Fire Code, and shall be completed within
a reasonable time of receipt of the plans after they are received in our
office. This plan review shall not apply to one- and two- family dwellings.
Shall apply to all buildings and occupancies in the North Carolina Building
Code General Construction and the North Carolina Building Code Fire
Prevention and §§ 151.145 through 151.149 of this chapter. The provisions
of this Code (NCBCFP and this chapter) shall apply equally to existing as
well as new buildings.



      STORAGE TANK.  Any tank used for storage of flammable or
combustible liquids or hazardous materials above or below ground.



      VIOLATION NOTICE.  The notice of violation specifies a period
during which the violator must correct the violation. If the violation is not
corrected within the specific time, the violator shall be guilty of a new and
separate offense.



      VIOLATIONS.  Anyone or anything that violates any of the
provisions of the NCBCFP or this chapter.



      WASTED TRIP FEE.  If an applicant does not have everything ready
for inspection or no one is there to allow inspection to be done, a fee will
be imposed for this violation.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



PERMIT, APPLICATION AND REVIEW



§ 151.020  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERMIT.  An official document issued by the Fire Marshal’s office
authorizing performance of a specified activity, use, operation or
installation. This includes, but is not limited to the following types: use
permit; special use permit; burning permit; operational permit; construction
permit and permits for fire protection systems; storage tanks; and any other
items needing a permit.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.021  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   In accordance with the detailed requirements of the city, a permit
shall be obtained from the Fire Marshal’s office pursuant to the procedure
set forth in Chapter 1 of the North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention,
along with the amendments and this chapter. Permits shall be obtained to
conduct those activities or operations as set forth in the permit and service
fee schedule as approved by the City Council. All permits will be issued on
an individual basis upon demonstration of compliance with the applicable Fire
Code regulations. Required operational, construction or special use permits
as defined by this chapter or the NCBCFP shall be issued before work is
started to erect, construct, enlarge, install, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert or demolish any building, structure or service system. Other
permits may be required to be issued in conjunction with the permits. These
may include zoning permits, building permits and/or food service permits. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any and all other
applicable permits before operating or undertaking the use for which the
permit was issued.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.022  INFORMATION REQUIRED WITH APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application.  An application for a permit shall be filed with
the Fire Marshal’s office on a form furnished for that purpose, provided by
the city and shall include the applicant’s answers in full to inquiries set
forth in these forms. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by
appropriate fees and the data as may be required by the Fire Marshal.



   (B)   Contractor’s license required.  When the General Statutes
requires that general construction, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire
protection or gas work be performed by the appropriately licensed
individual(s), no permit for that type work shall be issued to an unlicensed
person or firm.



   (C)   Drawings and specifications requirements.



      (1)   Two copies of drawings and specifications, drawn to
scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character
of work shall accompany the application for a permit. The plans shall be
included as a part of the submittals of the design of the overall building in
the event of new construction, and shall be provided as part of the
renovation plans, in the event renovation plans are required for the
structure. The plans are design plans and specifications and not shop
drawings by the manufacturer or installer. The drawings and specifications
shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to technical
properties of the materials, where the properties are essential to show
compliance with the technical codes.



      (2)   All information, drawings, specifications and
accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible
for the design.



      (3)   The Fire Marshal’s office may also request two copies
of the shop drawings of the specific system, as developed by the manufacturer
and installer of the system if it is deemed necessary by the complexity of
the proposed specific system.



   (D)   Additional data.  The Fire Marshal’s office and/or the
Building and Land Development Department may require details, computations,
stress diagrams, professional certification and other data necessary to
describe the construction or installation of a system.



   (E)   Fire resistive integrity.  Drawings and specifications for
all buildings shall indicate how required fire resistive integrity will be
maintained, where a penetration of a required fire resistive wall, floor or
partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing or
communication conducts, pipes and systems. The drawings shall indicate in
sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained.



   (F)   Structural integrity.  Drawings and specifications for all
buildings shall indicate how structural integrity, including lateral
stability, will be maintained where a penetration of a wall or floor or roof
takes place and where each wall, floor or roof assembly supports service
systems.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.023  PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   Generally.  Plan review shall apply to all buildings and
occupancies in the North Carolina Building Code General Construction and the
North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention and §§ 151.145 through 151.149
of this chapter. The provisions of this Code (NCBCFP and this chapter) shall
apply equally to existing as well as new buildings. This review will be for
the determination of compliance with this chapter and the Fire Code, and
shall be completed within a reasonable time of receipt of plans. The results
of this plan review shall be submitted to the Building and Land Development
Department. If the Fire Marshal’s review of these plans indicates the need
for a fire permit, as outlined in this chapter and the Fire Code or if there
are corrections to be made to the plans, the building permit shall not be
issued until the fire permit has been applied for or until the corrections
are made to the plans. This plan review shall not apply to one- and
two-family dwellings.



   (B)   Fees.  See permit fee schedule, § 151.060.



   (C)   Fines.  See civil citations fine schedule, § 151.060.



   (D)   Revocation.  The Fire Marshal may revoke a permit upon
determination that the permit holder, or any agents or employees of the
permit holder, has violated any provision of the North Carolina Building Code
Fire Prevention or of this chapter, or any stated condition of the permit.
The Fire Marshal shall advise the permit holder, in writing, of the reason
for the revocation.



   (E)   Appeals.  An applicant for a permit, or permit holder, as
appropriate, may appeal the Fire Marshal’s office refusal to issue, or
decision to revoke a permit. Appeals must be made in writing within 30 days
of interpretation. All appeals of this chapter shall be made to the City
Manager’s office. Any appeals of the North Carolina Building Code Fire
Prevention shall follow the prescribed methods as set forth in G.S. §§
143-140 and 143-141.



   (F)   Nontransferable.  Any permits issued shall not be
transferable. Permits shall be valid only as specified on the permit for the
time period, use and/or project specified.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.024  SPRINKLER/STANDPIPE SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Permit required.  A permit will be required to be obtained
from the Fire Marshal’s office for the installation of a new sprinkler and
or standpipe system. A permit will also be required for renovations or
modifications to any existing systems when more than 20 new or relocated
sprinklers are required to be added or modified.



   (B)   Permit issuance and fee.  The permit fee will be based on the
service and permit fee schedule. Once the plans are approved then a permit
will be issued to the contractor. The fee for the permit must be paid when
the permit is issued. A copy of the permit along with the approved set of
plans will be returned to the contractor.



   (C)   Application and plans required.  Plans, blueprints and/or
hydraulic calculations for the system being installed, along with a permit
application, shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal’s office for review and
approval prior to the issuance of a permit. No work may commence until a
permit has been issued. Two sets of all plans, blueprints and hydraulic
calculations shall be submitted. One set will be returned with the
appropriate remarks from the plan review and one set will be kept on file in
the Fire Marshal’s office. All submittals for review must be signed when
required by code or General Statute. Plans not signed when required will not
be reviewed. The set returned approved to the contractor will be the job
copy, and must be kept on the job site at all times. All drawings must be
prepared in accordance with NFPA standards. All plans must be drawn to scale
and accompanied by required sections and completely legible. Drawings not
legible or without complete information will be returned without review and
will require additional submittal. Fire resistive and structural integrity
must also be shown in detail and how it will be maintained.



   (D)   Inspections required.



      (1)   The Fire Marshal’s office must be notified at least 48
hours in advance to schedule any inspections. Inspections required include:



         (a)   Inspection of pressure testing of all piping;



         (b)   Rough-in inspection of any concealed piping;



         (c)   Inspection of any hydrants, yard or county to
ensure proper placement to meet code standards; and



         (d)   Final inspection and complete system testing.



      (2)   It will be the responsibility of the contractor to have
the necessary personnel present to conduct any tests.



   (E)   Renovations or remodeling work.



      (1)   When more than 20 sprinklers are added or relocated, a
set of shop drawings showing the extent of the renovation shall be submitted
to the Fire Marshal’s office. These drawings shall be reviewed and approved
in the same manner as for a new system. Two sets of all submittals will be
required. One set will be kept on file in the Fire Marshal’s office and one
set will be returned with the appropriate remarks from the plan review and
will be the job copies which must be on the job site at all times. All
drawings must be prepared in accordance with NFPA 13. All plans must be drawn
to scale and accompanied by required sections and completely legible.
Drawings not legible or without complete information will be returned without
review and will require additional submittal. Fire resistive and structural
integrity must also be shown in detail and how it will be maintained.



      (2)   The Fire Marshal’s office must be notified at least 48
hours in advance to schedule any inspections and must be notified if any
existing system is to be shut down for any renovations. When less than 20
sprinklers are added or modified the Fire Marshal’s office must be notified
that the work is being scheduled and a follow-up letter be provided to the
Fire Marshal’s office advising that the work has been completed by a
licensed fire sprinkler contractor in accordance with the appropriate North
Carolina Building Codes and NFPA standards.



   (F)   Materials test and certification.  Once a system has been
deemed approved by the Fire Marshal’s office, the contractor will be
responsible for issuing a materials test and certification letter to the Fire
Marshal’s office. This letter shall state that the system has been
installed in accordance with the appropriate NFPA Standards and North
Carolina Building Codes General Construction and North Carolina Building
Codes Fire Prevention along with the amendments of the North Carolina State
Building Code. The letter shall state that the system has been tested and all
materials used are approved for their use and the system is in full operation
and the system meets or exceeds the appropriate NFPA Standards and the of
North Carolina Building Codes. A letter shall be submitted for any new system
or any renovation work or when a permit has been issued.



   (G)   Inspection report and finalization.  An inspection report
will be completed after each inspection conducted on the sprinkler and/ or
standpipe system. A copy will be left with the contractor with the remaining
copies of the inspection report filed in the Fire Marshal’s office. Once
all the necessary requirements have been met for the sprinkler and/or
standpipe system, the Inspector may then consider the permit complete and
final and may note as such on the permit. No permit may be considered final
until all requirements including receipt of the permit fee are completed.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.025  FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Permit required.  A permit will be required to be obtained
from the Fire Marshal’s office for the installation of a new fire alarm
system or renovations to an existing fire alarm system.



   (B)   Permit issuance and fee.  The permit fee will be based on the
service and permit fee schedule found in the service and permit fee schedule,
§ 151.060. Once the plans are approved a permit will be issued to the
contractor. The permit fee must be paid when the permit is issued. A copy of
the plans and the permit will be returned to the contractor once the permit
fee is paid.



   (C)   Applications and plans required.  Prior to the issuance of an
alarm system permit, plans showing the alarm system installation or
renovations, along with a permit application, shall be submitted to the Fire
Marshal’s office for approval. The plans shall be included as a part of the
submittals of the design of the overall building in the event of new
construction, and shall be provided as part of the renovation plans, in the
event renovation plans are required for the structure. The plans are design
plans and specifications and not shop drawings by the manufacturer or
installer. These plans shall show the location and types of all devices,
alarm panels and equipment, various alarm zones, wiring methods, monitoring
and other specifications as necessary to ascertain the specific type of
system being required by the project. These plans and specifications should
be submitted for approval prior to the installation of any equipment or
wiring. Two sets of these plans shall be submitted. One set will be kept on
file at the Fire Marshal’s office and one set will be returned to the
designer of record for inclusion of any modifications into the shop drawing
process. The Fire Marshal’s office may also request two copies of the shop
drawings of the specific alarm system, as developed by the manufacturer and
installer of the system, if it is deemed necessary by the complexity of the
proposed fire alarm. In the event that two sets of shop drawings are
required, one set will be maintained at the Fire Marshal’s office while the
second set will be initialed and indicated as approved and returned to the
designer of record for transmittal of the information to the manufacturer and
to the installation contractor. All systems shall meet NFPA standards and any
other applicable NFPA requirements. Fire resistive and structural integrity
must also be show in detail how it will be maintained.



   (D)   Inspections required.  It will be the responsibility of the
alarm contractor to contact the Fire Marshal’s office at least 48 hours in
advance to schedule an inspection. An inspection will be required on all
rough-in wiring prior to any concealment by building finishes. A final
inspection will be conducted once the entire system is completed and ready
for operation. A complete check of all devices will be required such as
pull-stations, smoke detectors and the like. All zones in a structure or
premises shall be tested. It will be the responsibility of the contractor to
have the necessary personnel present to conduct the test.



   (E)   Materials test and certification.  Once the system has been
deemed approved by the fire official, the contractor will be responsible for
issuing to the Fire Marshal’s office a materials test and certification
letter. This letter shall state that the system has been installed, in
accordance to the appropriate NFPA Standards and North Carolina Building Code
General Construction and NCBCFP along with the amendments of the North
Carolina State Building Code, has been tested, all materials used are
approved for their use and the system is in full operation. This letter shall
also include a certificate of compliance as required by NFPA standards.



   (F)   Inspection report and finalization.  An inspection report
will be completed after each inspection conducted on the alarm system. A copy
will be left with the alarm contractor with the remaining copies of the
inspection report filed in the Fire Marshal’s office. Once all the
necessary requirements have been met for the alarm system, the Inspector may
then consider the permit complete and final and may note as such on the
permit. No permit may be considered final until all requirements including
receipt of the permit fee are completed.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.026  AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FIXED FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM.  An automatic fire suppression
system is a system containing a supply of an extinguishing agent that can be
automatically or manually activated to discharge through a distribution
system onto or into a protected hazard, equipment, process and the like.
Examples of these systems include as defined in the NCBCFP.



   (B)   Permit required.  A permit will be required to be obtained
from the Fire Marshal’s office for the installation of a new fire
suppression system or renovations to an existing fire suppression system.



   (C)   Permit issuance and fee.  The permit fee will be based on the
service and permit fee schedule. Once the plans are approved, then a permit
will be issued to the contractor. Once the permit fee is paid, then a copy of
the permit along with the approved plans will be returned to the contractor.



   (D)   Application and plans required.  Prior to the issuance of a
fire suppression system permit, plans showing the system installation or
renovations, along with a permit application, shall be submitted to the Fire
Marshal’s office for approval. These plans shall be shop drawings as
developed by the manufacturer or installation company for that particular
fire suppression system and shall be developed in complete detail. Two sets
of these plans shall be submitted. One set shall be kept on file at the Fire
Marshal’s office and one set will be returned to the contractor. One set of
the returned drawings shall be kept at the job site. These plans shall show
the location and type of all devices and equipment. The various alarm zones,
wiring methods, piping methods, monitoring and other criteria shall be
indicated. All systems shall meet NFPA requirements. Fire resistive and
structural integrity must also be shown in detail how it will be maintained.



   (E)   Inspection required.  It will be the responsibility of the
contractor to contact the Fire Marshal’s office at least 48 hours in
advance to schedule an inspection. An inspection will be required on all
rough-in wiring or piping prior to any concealment by building finishes. A
final inspection will be conducted once the entire system is completed and
ready for operation. A check of all devices will be required. Any system
utilizing pull-stations or cables with fusible links shall be tested for
proper operation for the fire official. The contractor shall conduct any
tests deemed necessary by the fire official to determine the system operation
capabilities. It will be the responsibility of the contractor to have the
necessary personnel present to conduct the test.



   (F)   Materials test and certification.



      (1)   Once the system has been deemed approved by the fire
official, the contractor will be responsible for issuing to the Fire
Marshal’s office a materials test and certification letter.



      (2)   This letter shall state that the system has been
installed in accordance to the appropriate NFPA standards and North Carolina
Building Codes along with amendments of the North Carolina State Building
Code. The letter shall state that the system has been tested and all
materials used are approved for their use and the system is in full operation.



   (G)   Inspection report and finalization.  An inspection report
will be completed after each inspection conducted on the automatic fire
suppression system. A copy will be left with the contractor with the
remaining copies of the inspection report filed at the Fire Marshal’s
office. Once all the necessary requirements have been met for the automatic
fire suppression system, the Inspector may then consider the permit complete
and final and may note as such on the permit. No permit may be considered
final until all requirements including receipt of the permit fee are
completed.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



PERMIT TYPES



§ 151.040  GENERAL.



   (A)   Generally.  Permits shall be in accordance with § 105 of the
North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention along with amendments and this
chapter.



   (B)   Permits required.  Permits required by this Code shall be
obtained from the Fire Marshal’s office. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid
prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises
designed therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection
by the Fire Code official.



   (C)   Types of permits.  There shall be three types of permits as
follows.



      (1)   Operational permit.  A permit that allows the applicant
to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by §
105.6 of NCBCFP and this chapter for either:



         (a)   A prescribed period; or



         (b)   Until renewed or revoked.



      (2)   Constructional permit.  A permit that allows the
applicant to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is
required by § 105.6 of NCBCFP and this chapter.



      (3)    Special use permits.  Special use permits are for
and/or allow special tests, inspections, certain applications, operations,
assemblies, to maintain, store or handle certain materials, special events
and services for which a permit is required by § 105.6 of NCBCFPC and this
chapter.



   (D)   Permits for the same location.  When more than one permit is
required for the same location, the Fire Code official is authorized to
consolidate the permits into a single permit, provided that each provision is
listed in that permit.



   (E)   Exception.  Tents used at funerals are exempt from all fees
and do not require any permits.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.041  STORAGE TANK PERMITS.



   (A)   Permit required.  A permit will be required to be obtained
from the Fire Marshal’s office for the removal or installation of new or
existing above ground or below ground storage tanks used for flammable,
combustible liquids or hazardous materials.



   (B)   Permit issuance and fee.  The permit fee will be based on the
service and permit fee schedule. Once the plans are approved, then a permit
will be issued to the contractor. Once the permit fee is paid, then a copy of
the permit along with the approved plans will be returned to the contractor.



   (C)   New installations; application and plans required.  Plans and
a permit application shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal’s office for
approval prior to issuance of the permit. Two sets of these plans shall be
submitted. One set will be kept on file at the Fire Marshal’s office. The
other set will have the notations from the plan review and will be returned
to the contractor to be kept on the job site. A permit shall be obtained for
the installation of stationary tanks for the storage of flammable and
combustible liquids or hazardous materials in stationary tanks. Plans shall
be submitted with each permit application. The plans shall include the method
of storage and dispensing, quantities and types of liquids to be stored,
distances from tanks and dispensers to property lines and buildings and
rights-of-way, vehicle access, fire appliances, collision barriers, design
and construction of tanks and tank supports, seismic design of tank supports,
secondary containment, tank venting and vapor recovery provisions, emergency
controls and any additional information required by the fire official.



   (D)   Inter-departmental approval.  It will be the responsibility
of the contractor to obtain approval from the Building and Land Development
Department, if required by them. Any electrical, building, plumbing or
mechanical permits required shall be obtained from the Building and Land
Development Department. Zoning compliance shall be obtained from the LCBLD.
These approvals shall be required prior to any issuance of the tank permit.



   (E)   Inspections required.



      (1)   It will be the responsibility of the contractor to
contact the Fire Marshal’s office at least 48 hours in advance to schedule
an inspection.



         (a)   An inspection will be required on all rough-in
wiring or piping prior to any concealment.



         (b)   Testing and inspection of tank pressure test (all
underground tanks will require an inspection prior to and after installation
into the excavated burial area).



         (c)   A final inspection will be conducted once the
entire system is completed and ready for operation.



         (d)   A check of all devices will be required.



         (e)   The contractor shall conduct any tests deemed
necessary by the fire official to determine the system operation capabilities.



      (2)   It will be the responsibility of the contractor to have
the necessary personnel present to conduct the test.



   (F)   Materials test and certification.  Once a system has been
deemed approved by the Fire Marshal’s office, the contractor will be
responsible for issuing to the Fire Marshal’s office a materials test and
certification letter. This letter shall state that the system has been
installed in accordance to the appropriate NFPA Standards and North Carolina
Building Codes along with amendments of the North Carolina State Building
Code. The letter shall state that the system has been tested and all
materials used are approved for their use and the system is in full operation
and the system meets or exceeds the appropriate NFPA Standards and North
Carolina Building Codes. A letter shall be submitted for any new system or
any renovation work or when a permit has been issued.



   (G)   Inspection report and finalization.  An inspection report
will be completed after each inspection has been conducted on the storage
tank installation. A copy will be left with the contractor with the remaining
copies of the inspection report filed at the Fire Marshal’s office. Once
all the necessary requirements have been met for the storage tank system, the
Inspector may then consider the permit complete and final and may note as
such on the permit. No permit may be considered final until all requirements
including receipt of the permit fee are completed.



   (H)   State registration.  All tanks installed underground shall be
registered with the State Department of Environmental, Health and Natural
Resources, Division of Environmental Management, Ground Water Section. A copy
of the registration shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal’s office prior
to the final inspection.



   (I)   Abandonment and removal.



      (1)   All storage tanks shall be abandoned or removed in
accordance with NCBCFP.



      (2)   A letter of certification of abandonment or removal
shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal’s office. A copy of soil testing and
analysis shall be submitted with this letter. This information shall be
submitted prior to final approval by the Fire Marshal’s office.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.042  OPEN BURNING PERMITS WITHIN 100 FEET OF A STRUCTURE.



   (A)   Permits required.  Permits are required for burning of
leaves, tree branches or yard trimmings originating on the premises.



   (B)   Burning site requirements.



      (1)   The location of the material to be burned shall be a
minimum of 50 feet from any structure located on the property of which the
burning is done. If a possible hazard exists, the fire official may require
this distance to be increased.



      (2)   Piles of material to be burned should be done in a safe
manner. This would also include bonfires for different events. Bonfires used
for ceremonial and religious purposes (schools, civic groups, churches) may
take place after 6:00 p.m. when all regulations are met.  Materials used for
bonfires must also comply with the EPA regulations and COLFPPO.



      (3)   An area ten feet wide shall be cleared completely around
the material to be burned.



      (4)   Only natural materials, such as limbs, brush, grass,
leaves or wood may be burned. Heavy oils, asphalt materials, polar solvents,
treated lumber, trash, paper or items containing natural or synthetic rubber
or any materials other than plant growth shall not be burned.



      (5)   A competent person shall constantly attend the fire
until the fire is extinguished.



      (6)   A garden hose with suitable water supply or other fire
extinguishing equipment, as deemed acceptable by the fire official, shall be
readily available for immediate use during the course of the fire until the
fire is extinguished.



   (C)   Permit issuance procedure.  Outdoor burning which includes,
but is not limited to bonfires, clearing land in certain areas, burning
leaves and brush or other burning that does not meet the State Forest
Services requirements, may require the following.



      (1)   A site inspection may be required before burning is to
be done.



      (2)   The applicant shall verify all information and shall
read all the rules and regulations on the open burning permit. The applicant
will then be required to sign the permit acknowledging the understanding and
responsibility to obey these regulations.



      (3)   It will be the responsibility of the applicant to keep
this permit available at the burn site at all times.



   (D)   Nuisance burning.



      (1)   If any time during the burning, the smoke and/or odors
create a neighborhood nuisance by causing physical irritation exacerbating a
documented medical condition, visibility impairment, evidence of soot or ash
on property or structure other than the property on which the burning is
done, the smoke and odors do not rise, hangs close to the ground, crosses a
street or highway and causes a hazard, and businesses or homes complain, the
burning shall be ceased and all fires will be extinguished.



      (2)   If at any time during the burning, the regulations
regarding open burning are not met or are neglected in any way, the fire
shall be extinguished.



      (3)   All open burning which includes but is not limited to
brush, limbs, leaves, farm lands, fields and clearing of land shall stop in
the event of a burning ban issued by the State Forest Service or the city’s
Fire Marshal office in conjunction with the State Forest Service.



      (4)   Wilful neglect and/or wilful violations of the Fire
Prevention Code shall be subject to a civil citation. Any action shall be
brought to the Fire Marshal with proper documentation to be acted upon.



   (E)   Burning ban.



      (1)   In the event that the city’s Fire Marshal’s office
issues a ban on outdoor burning within 100 feet of a structure, then in
accordance to state law all open burning permits issued shall be deemed
invalid with no issuance of any new permits until the ban is lifted by the
city’s Fire Marshal’s office.  During this ban, no open burning shall be
conducted at all within 100 feet of a structure; this includes any outdoor
burning at residences. A civil citation may be issued for violations.



      (2)   A burning ban on outdoor burning within 100 feet of a
structure may be issued by the city’s Fire Marshal’s office in the event
that atmospheric conditions or local circumstance make the fire hazardous.
Atmospheric conditions that warrant a burning ban include, but are not
limited to:



         (a)   Extended periods of low humidity (below 50%);



         (b)   High winds;



         (c)   Elevated temperatures; and



         (d)   Lack of substantial rainfall.



      (3)   Local conditions that may warrant a burning ban include,
but are not limited to:



         (a)   Flammable and/or combustible liquid spills or
leaks close to a burning site;



         (b)   A hazardous materials incident where the proximity
of the burn site could cause a possible ignition source or prove hazardous to
operations controlling the incident; and



         (c)   The proximity of adjacent structures or other
hazards.



      (4)   In the event a burning ban is issued, all permit holders
shall be notified through the news media and in person that the permit is
invalid and fires shall be extinguished immediately. In conjunction with
North Carolina Forest Service burning ban the city’s Fire Marshal’s
office shall issue a burning ban of all open burning within 100 feet of a
structure and all fires shall be extinguished immediately. The local press
shall be notified by the Fire Marshal’s office that the ban is in effect
and that no permits will be issued until the ban is lifted and no open
burning will be allowed.



      (5)   Any burning ban issued by the Fire Marshal’s office
shall be repealed in the same manner.



   (F)   Extinguishing illegal fires, nuisance burning and fires when
burning bans are in effect or all other fires that fall under these
regulations, the N.C.B.C. and the state regulations.



      (1)   The responding Fire Department has the authority to
extinguish any fires that does not meet this chapter, the N.C.B.C., state
regulations which includes but are not limited to illegal fires, nuisance
burning, fires when burning bans are in effect.



      (2)   The Fire Marshal’s office or its authorized
representative has the authority to extinguish any fires that do not meet
these regulations, the N.C.B.C., state regulations which include but are not
limited to illegal fires, nuisance burning, fires when burning bans are in
effect. If any citations are to be issued that fall under these regulations
it will be done by the Fire Marshal’s office.



      (3)   The Fire Marshal’s office or its authorized
representative does not have to be present to extinguish the fire(s). If the
owner or person(s) burning refuses to let the Fire Department extinguish the
fire(s) then the Fire Department can have the Fire Marshal’s office paged
and a representative from that office will respond to assist the Fire
Department.



      (4)   The Fire Marshal’s office will respond to any nuisance
burning when the person will not allow the Fire Department to extinguish the
fire.



      (5)   The Fire Marshal or a representative of that office will
respond to any illegal burning when needed. The Fire Marshal or a
representative of that office does not need to be present to extinguish the
fire. The Fire Department can extinguish the fire and fax any information
about the fire to the Fire Marshal’s office and they will investigate it.
If there is a problem with the person who is burning illegally, the Fire
Marshal or a representative of that office will respond to assist the Fire
Department.



      (6)   If any citations are to be issued that fall under these
regulations or N.C.B.C. it will be conducted by the Fire Marshal’s office.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.043  FIREWORKS PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   In accordance to the Fire Prevention Code, no person
shall use or explode any fireworks for public display without having first
obtained a permit from the Fire Marshal’s office and meeting the
requirements of the Fire Prevention Code.



      (2)   A permit fee in accordance to the permit and fee
schedule shall be required prior to issuance of the permit and shall be
collected by the Fire Marshal’s office at the time of application for the
permits.



   (B)   Permit issuance procedure.



      (1)   Any person wishing to obtain a permit for fireworks for
public display shall first submit an application with the Fire Marshal’s
office and pay the designated fee.



      (2)   Under the Fire Prevention Code, the permit holder shall
furnish a bond or certificate of insurance in an amount deemed adequate by
the fire official for the payment of damages.



      (3)   The fire official responsible for making the site
inspections shall make inspections as deemed necessary to assure the site is
in compliance.



      (4)   Once the fire official is satisfied that the site is
ready and in compliance with the provisions of the Fire Code, then the permit
shall be issued. The permit shall not be transferable. The permit shall be
valid only as specified as per the conditions of the permit.



   (C)   Permit revocation.



      (1)   If due to atmospheric conditions or other conditions
that may cause a danger to life and/or property from the display of the
fireworks, or if there is a burning ban in place, the Fire Marshal may revoke
the permit.



      (2)   In the event that a permit is revoked due to atmospheric
conditions, the applicant shall be entitled to a full refund of the permit
fee.



      (3)   Failure to abide by the rules and regulations of the
Fire Code shall be subject to a civil citation and immediate revocation of
the permit. In this case, the permitee shall be entitled to no refund of the
permit fee.



   (D)   Fireworks on display; permit required.



      (1)   In accordance to the COLFPPO, it shall be unlawful for
any person to possess, store, offer for sale, sell at retail, without having
first obtained a permit if one is required, from the Fire Marshal’s office
and meeting the requirements of the COLFPPO and NCBCFP. All fireworks offered
for sale must meet those allowed by G.S. § 14-414 and NCBCFP.



      (2)   A permit fee in accordance to the permit and fee
schedule shall be required prior to issuance of the permit and shall be
collected by the Fire Marshal’s office at the time of application for the
permits.



   (E)   Seizure and disposal of fireworks.  The fire official shall
seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all
stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation
of North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention, North Carolina Building Code
and G.S. § 14-414. Failure to abide by the rules and regulations of the Fire
Code shall be subject to a civil citation.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.044  OTHER PERMITS.



   Other permits needed according to Chapter 1, § 105.6 of the North
Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention along with all amendments and these
regulations in order to perform an operation or task will need to be obtained
from the Fire Marshal’s office. Any violation of Chapter 1 or other
chapters of the North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention along with
amendments or this chapter, a civil citation can be issued.



   (A)   Application for permit.  Applications for permits shall be
made to the Fire Marshal on forms provided by the city and shall include full
and complete answers from the applicant to inquiries set forth in the forms.
The appropriate fees shall accompany applications for permits, if a fee is
required, and the data as may be required by the Fire Marshal. All
applications will be available at the Fire Marshal’s office. Failure to
submit an application shall be just cause to deny issuance of a permit.



   (B)   Review and issuance.  The Fire Marshal shall review all
applications submitted. An onsite inspection shall be conducted to determine
compliance with applicable provisions of the Fire Code. If an application for
a permit is rejected by the Fire Marshal, the applicant shall be advised in
writing of the reasons for the rejection. Permits for activities requiring
the applicant to provide evidence of financial responsibility to the
jurisdiction shall not be issued unless proof of required financial
responsibility in the form of a bond or letter of credit is furnished.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.045  OPERATIONAL PERMITS.



   The following is a list of jobs/tasks that will need operational
permits:



   (A)   Amusement buildings;



   (B)   Aviation facilities;



   (C)   Carnivals and fairs;



   (D)   Covered mall buildings;



   (E)   Exhibits and trade shows;



   (F)   Explosives (blasting, storage, manufacturing and the like);



   (G)   Fireworks;



   (H)   Flammable and combustible liquids;



   (I)   Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging;



   (J)   Hazardous materials;



   (K)   HPM facilities;



   (L)   High-piled or high rack storage;



   (M)   Liquid or gas fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly
buildings;



   (N)   Open burning;



   (O)   Open flames and candles (churches are exempt);



   (P)   Organic coatings;



   (Q)   Places of assembly (churches are exempt);



   (R)   Private hydrants;



   (S)   Pyrotechnic special effects material;



   (T)   Pyroxylin plastic;



   (U)   Spraying or dipping;



   (V)   Storage of scrap tires and tire by products;



   (W)   Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies (exceeding
200/400 square feet);



   (X)   Tire rebuilding plants; and



   (Y)   Waste handling (wrecking yards, junk yards, waste material
handling facilities).



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.046  CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.



   (A)   The following is a list of jobs/tasks that will need a
construction permit for the business to do the job or task. (These permits
must be issued before work begins.)



      (1)   Automatic fire extinguishing systems and related
equipment;



      (2)   Compressed gases;



      (3)   Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment;



      (4)   Fire pumps and related equipment;



      (5)   Flammable and combustible liquids;



      (6)   Hazardous materials;



      (7)   Industrial ovens;



      (8)   L.P. gas;



      (9)   Private hydrants;



      (10)   Spraying or dipping;



      (11)   Standpipe systems and related equipment; and



      (12)   Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies.



   (B)   The permit fee shall be based upon the service and permit fee
schedule.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.047  EXCEPTION.



   Tents used at funerals are exempt from all fees and do not have to get
any permits.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



FEE ADMINISTRATION



§ 151.060  FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Fees will be according to the current schedule as adopted by
the City Council.



   (B)   An individual permit with appropriate permit fee shall be
charged for each event or project.



   (C)   Special use permit fees for specific events, projects or time
periods shall be for the amount specified for that particular permit.



   (D)   Special use permits may not be combined.



   (E)   For a use permit, an appropriate permit fee shall be charged.



   (F)   For new fire alarm/sprinkler/standpipe/fire suppression
systems, an appropriate permit fee shall be charged.



   (G)   For renovations to fire alarms/sprinklers/standpipe/fire
suppression systems, an appropriate permit fee shall be charged.



   (H)   For new installations and removals of storage tanks used for
flammable/combustible liquids or hazardous materials, an appropriate permit
fee shall be charged.



   (I)   For places of assembly, see service and permit fee schedule.
Churches, schools, county operations and buildings, city operations and
buildings and emergency services organizations (fire; rescue; EMS; state,
county and city jails; detention centers; correction facilities and state,
county, city law enforcement agencies) are exempt from operational permit
fees. They may still need to get the necessary permits depending on the
operation when they are needed.



   (J)   Tents used at funerals are exempt from all fees and do not
have to get any permits.



   (K)   No one is exempt from any construction permit fees or special
use permit fee, except as listed in § 102A of NCBCFPC.



   (L)   Permits shall be in accordance with § 105 of the North
Carolina Building Fire Code along with amendments and the Lincoln County fire
prevention and protection ordinance.



   (M)   Service and permit fee schedule.



      (1)   Generally.  Permits shall be in accordance with § 105
of the North Carolina Building Code – Fire Prevention and its appendixes
along with amendments and this chapter.



      (2)   Permits required.  Permits required by this Code and
chapter shall be obtained from the fire official. Permit fees, if any, shall
be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the
premises designed therein at all times and shall be readily available for
inspection by the Fire Code official.



      (3)   Types of permits.  There shall be three types of
permits as follows.



         (a)   Operational permit.  An operational permit allows
the applicant to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is
required by § 105.6 of NCBCFPC and this chapter for either:



            1.   A prescribed period; or



            2.   Until renewed or revoked.



         (b)   Construction permit. A construction permit allows
the applicant to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit
is required by § 105.6 of NCBCFPC and this chapter.



         (c)    Special use permits.  Special use permits are
for and/or allow special tests, inspections, certain applications,
operations, assemblies, to maintain, store or handle certain materials,
special events and services for which a permit is required by § 105.6 of
NCBCFPC and this chapter.



   (N)   Service and permit fee schedule for operational permits.



 


Operational and Special Use Permits

 

Fee





ABC permit (change of use, renter or business requiring ABC permit fire
inspection)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Amusement buildings
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Aviation facilities
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Carnivals and fairs
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Burning permits
 




   Residential and farms
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Burning for Fire Department training
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Bonfire
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Commercial (must meet all state, NCBCFPC and this chapter guidelines)
 




      Clearing of lots to build houses (per lot fee)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



      Clearing of lots to build commercial and industry (per site fee)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Covered mall buildings
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Display of gasoline-powered equipment in covered malls
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Exhibits and trade shows
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Explosives
 


   Blasting permits
 


      48 hours
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



      90 days
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Year round storage and manufacturing permits
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Fireworks for public display, outdoors
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Fireworks for public display, indoors
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Hazardous materials
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



HPM facilities
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



High-piled or high-rack storage
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Liquid or gas fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Open flames and candles (churches are exempt)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Organic coatings
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Places of assembly (churches are exempt)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Pyrotechnic special effects material and shows
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Pyroxylin plastic
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Special assemblies such as gun shows, craft shows and the like
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Spraying or dipping operations
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Storage of scrap tires and tire by-products
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Temporary tents, structures or stands used for displays of fireworks
 




   7-day permit
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   14-day permit
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   30-day permit
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Tents and canopies
 




   Tents for public usage exceeding 200/400 sq. ft.
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Use of air structures
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Temporary kiosks or displays for merchandising
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Tire rebuilding plants
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Waste handling (wrecking yards, junk yards, waste material handling
facilities)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule





 



   (O)   Service and inspection fee schedule.



 


Service and Inspection

 

Fees





Boarding houses
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Day care centers
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Dormitories
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Family care homes
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Foster homes
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Fraternities and sororities
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Institutional (health care facilities)
 




   Group homes (5 or less)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Group homes (6 or more)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Hospitals
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Nursing homes
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Rest homes
 

as set forth in the fee schedule





 



   (P)   Service and permit fee schedule for construction permits.



 


Construction Permit

 

Fees





New alarm system installations and certification test
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



New fixed fire suppression system installations and certification test
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



New sprinkler systems (20 heads or more)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



New standpipe systems
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Renovations of standpipe systems
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Renovations of fixed fire systems
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Renovations of alarm systems
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Renovations of sprinkler systems (20 or more heads)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Storage tanks used for flammable/combustible liquids or hazardous materials

   (aboveground and underground)
 




   Removal (per tank)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   New installations (per tank)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Inspection of the retrofitting of storage tanks and pipes containing or used
for flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Preliminary plans review
 


   Up to 5,000 sq. ft.
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   5,001 to 10,000 sq. ft.
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   10,001 to 25,000 sq. ft.
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   25,001 to 100,000 sq. ft.
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Over 100,000 sq. ft.
 

as set forth in the fee schedule





 



   (Q)   Administrative fees.



 


Service

 

Fee





Copy data to diskette
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Fire flow test
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Hydrant installations (private contractors only)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



Wasted trip fee for permit inspections (not having everything ready)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



After hours inspection fee
 




   First hour
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Each one-half hour after first hour
 

as set forth in the fee schedule





 



   (R)   Any person or contractor beginning work on any project
requiring a permit prior to obtaining that permit will be subject to a civil
citation and double permit fee.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.075  FIRE LANES.



   (A)   Fire lanes requirement.  In accordance with the Fire Code,
the Fire Marshal shall have the authority to designate fire lanes necessary
for fire apparatus accessibility.



   (B)   Marking.  All designated fire lanes shall be marked as
specified by the Fire Marshal. A “no parking” sign of the type specified
by the Fire Marshal shall be installed adjacent to the fire lane perimeter.
Additional signs shall be posted at intervals not exceeding 75 feet.



   (C)   Previously designated fire lanes.  All fire lanes previously
designated and described by the city prior to this amendment shall remain as
fire lanes and maintained as such. The parking of motor vehicles or other
obstruction of a required fire lane shall be prohibited at all times per the
Fire Code.



   (D)   Violation.  Any person who shall park in a fire lane shall be
subject to a civil citation, issued by the law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.076  FIRE HYDRANTS (LOCATED ON COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY).



   (A)   No person shall remove, tamper with, paint (change the color
of the hydrant so that it does not meet the NFPA standards for hydrant
marking) or render any fire hydrant inoperative or inaccessible except as may
be necessary during emergencies, maintenance, drills, training, prescribed
testing or when permitted by the fire official.



   (B)   No person shall place or keep any fence, growth (trees,
flowers, shrubs, plants and the like) stones, signs, trash or other material
near any fire hydrant that would prevent the hydrant from being immediately
discernible or in any other manner hinder the Fire Department from gaining
immediate access to a fire hydrant. A clear space of not less than three feet
shall be provided on all sides of a fire hydrant.



   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle, boat, trailer or any other
item or permit it to stand, whether attended or unattended, within 15 feet in
either direction of a fire hydrant.



   (D)   Hydrants to be used as fire protection shall have as a minimum
2 two and one-half-inch outlets and 1 four and one-half-inch outlet. This
would allow the minimum requirements of the Insurance Service Office. Pipe
systems should be arranged in loops whenever possible. The City Public Works
Department will be in charge of making the decision on the minimum water
supply piping size to ensure the city has the necessary water pressure needed
to meet the water flow requirements at the hydrant. The size of the pipe is
recommended to be as follows: no pipe less than six inches in diameter is to
be used as a main water supply line; no less than six-inch pipe to be used
for two outlet hydrants or to supply the hydrant from the main; eight-inch or
larger pipe to be used if possible it is a dead-end main or if more than one
hydrant is to be supplied; 12-inch or larger pipe to be used for the primary
main as much as possible. Hydrants should be set plumb with the centerline of
their outlets about 18 inches above the ground. When hydrants are installed
before grading is complete, the final grade line and accessibility should be
considered.



   (E)   Although the installation of fire hydrants is usually
performed by Water Department personnel, the Water Department shall check
with the Fire Marshal’s office for the location, spacing and distribution
of the fire hydrant. This will ensure that the city is meeting the NFPA
standards and the Insurance Service Office requirements. By meeting these two
requirements, the city will be providing the most adequate water supply for
fire protection for the citizens of the city who live and work in that area.
The maximum distance between hydrants shall not exceed 1,000 feet. In closely
built areas, subdivisions, townhouses, commercial/industrial with lot
frontage 100 feet or less than 500 feet or less will be the maximum distant
between hydrants. Hydrants should be located as close to the street and
intersections as possible. Hydrants that must be located in areas subject to
heavy traffic need protection against damage from collision. (Hydrants must
be inspected and approved prior to final plot approval.)



   (F)   Hydrant testing and maintenance.  Due to requirements by the
insurance rating services and other requirements by the insurance industry,
the hydrants shall be serviced a minimum of once a year. The Water Department
and/or Fire Department will be overseeing this section. The following is a
list of guidelines to go by to perform those requirements:



      (1)   Clean around hydrant (this would include removing weeds
and the like);



      (2)   Remove small caps and check gaskets in caps (rotate or
replace as necessary);



      (3)   Open hydrant slowly and flush hydrant with caps off;



      (4)   Close hydrant slowly (do not over-tighten the hydrant
when closing);



      (5)   Brush or clean hydrant cap threads as needed and
lubricate the cap threads;



      (6)   Oil hydrant (lubricant used to oil hydrant and cap
threads will be a food grade grease);



      (7)    Replace caps and energize (open slowly) hydrant.
Completely open hydrant slowly and wait ten to 15 seconds before closing
hydrant;



      (8)   Check for any leaks;



      (9)    Close hydrant slowly;



      (10)   Fill out proper paperwork (hydrant maintenance sheet).
Make any notes of work that needs to be done; and



      (11)   Proceed to next hydrant.



   (G)   Fire flow testing and marking of hydrants.



      (1)   Fire flow tests are conducted on water distribution
systems to determine the rate of flow available at various locations for fire
fighting purposes.



      (2)   Additional benefit derived from fire flow tests is the
indication of possible deficiencies (such as tuberculation of piping or
closed valves or both), which can be corrected to ensure adequate fire flows
as needed.



      (3)   All hydrants in each fire district shall be flow tested.
All equipment used and the testing procedure need to be done by NFPA
Standards.



   (H)   Marking of hydrants. Once all flow tests have been completed
and the flows for each hydrant have been determined, then each hydrant will
need to be marked according to the NFPA Standards.



   (I)   Public hydrants.



      (1)   All barrels are to be chrome yellow except in cases
where another color has already been adopted. The tops and nozzle caps should
be painted with the following capacity - indicating color scheme to provide
simplicity and consistency with colors used in signal work for safety, danger
and intermediate condition:



 

Class AA (1,500 gpm or greater)
 
Light blue


Class A (1,000 gpm to 1,499 gpm)
 
Green


Class B (500 gpm to 999 gpm)
 
Orange


Class C (less than 500 gpm)
 
Red



 



      (2)   For rapid identification at night, the top of the
hydrant and the caps shall be marked with a reflective-type material.



   (J)   Private hydrants.  Marking on all private hydrants (yard
hydrants) within private enclosures shall be painted solid red with caps
colored coded as required. When private hydrants are located on public
streets, they shall be painted solid red with caps colored coded as required
to distinguish them from public hydrants. See reference manual for private
hydrant marking procedures.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



Cross-reference:



   Flow test procedures for city fire hydrants, see Ch. 151, Appendix B,
Attachment D



   Public fire hydrant marking guidelines, see Ch. 151, Appendix B,
Attachment E



§ 151.077  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   Specification.  Hazardous materials disclosure shall be as
specified in G.S. §§ 95-173 through 95-218.



   (B)   Hazard identification signs.



      (1)   The increasing use of a wide variety of chemicals, many
of which introduce problems other than flammability, lead to the need for a
simple hazard identification system. The purpose of a system would be to
safeguard the lives of those individuals who may be concerned with fire and
spills occurring in these facilities or businesses. This system provides
simple, readily recognizable and easily understood markings, which will give,
at a glance, a general idea of the inherent hazards of any material and the
order of severity of these hazards as they relate to fire prevention,
exposure and control. Its objectives are to provide an appropriate alerting
signal and on the spot information to safeguard the lives of the Fire
Department, rescue squad, EMS members and law enforcement during emergencies
at these facilities. It will also make employees aware of the potential
hazards and bring the facility into compliance with Hazardous Chemicals Right
To Know Act.



      (2)   The 704 symbols are usually seen on the exterior
surfaces of buildings and aboveground storage tanks. The 704 symbols shall be
required to identify any area that is deemed to be a hazard. This
determination is to be made by the Fire Marshal.



         (a)   Signs required.  Per the Fire Code, hazard and
identification signs as outlined in NFPA 704 shall be placed accordingly at
all entrances to and in locations where hazardous materials are stored,
handled or used in excess of the exempt amounts.



         (b)   Size of signs and types.  The size and type of
signs used to identify hazardous materials shall be of the type and size
specified in NFPA standard. A reference guide on the sizes of signs and
signals will be made available to the public from the Fire Marshal’s office
upon request.



            1.   The NFPA adopted the 704 system of
identifying hazardous materials in 1961.



            2.   The 704 system provides hazards as they
relate to fire prevention, fire exposure and fire control.



            3.   The colors, which are diamond shaped,
indicate the following type hazards:



               a.   Blue - Health;



               b.   Red - Flammability of the products;



               c.   Yellow - Reactivity of products; and



               d.   White - Specific information entered
here.



            4.   Numbers range from zero through four and are
inserted on the diamond-shaped colors (blue, red and yellow) to indicate the
degree of hazards present, zero being the least hazardous to four being the
most hazardous.



            5.   Notations are also used in the white diamond
to indicate special hazards. Materials which demonstrate unusual reactivity
with water, shall be identified with the letter “W” with a horizontal
line through the center of the “W”. Materials which posses oxidizing
properties shall be identified by the letters OXY. Materials possessing
radioactivity hazards shall be identified by the standard radioactivity
symbol.



            6.   Symbols are indicated for the most dangerous
hazardous material when more than one type of hazardous material is present.



            7.   Although 704 symbols are subject to change,
depending on changes in the area of storage or use of hazardous materials,
they should be removed from an area only when hazardous materials are no
longer present.



            8.   Symbols should be located where they can be
readily seen by responding Fire Departments and other emergency agencies and
located as near as is practical to the area of the hazard.



            9.   The sign must be easily seen from the
roadway. The sign must be a minimum of 30 by 30 inches in size (type and size
specified in NFPA standard).



            10.   A current material safety data sheet for all
chemicals stored on the property should be put in a waterproof container
located near the entrance to the property.



            11.   The owners of the business will be given 60
days from date of inspection to comply.



            12.   Storage of hazardous materials. Hazardous
materials which, when mixed, react violently or evoke toxic vapors or gases
or which, in combination, become hazardous by reason of toxicity, oxidizing
power, flammability or other properties shall be separated from each other in
storage by distance, partitions or other approved manner so as to preclude
accidental contact between them.



            13.   Warning signs. The Fire Marshal may require
warning signs wherever hazardous materials are stored, processed or handled.
The warning signs shall be conspicuously lettered in accordance with NFPA
standard.



            14.   Exception. This section shall not apply to
hazardous materials in transport, which are placard in accordance with
Department of Transportation regulations or applicable provisions of other
NFPA Codes and Standards listed in the NFPA Manuals.



   (C)   Warning signs required in coin-operated dry cleaning
establishments.  Each coin-operated dry cleaning establishment using the
solvent mentioned below shall display prominently upon or near each dry
cleaning machine a sign warning the public of the danger of excessive solvent
vapor inhalation or prolonged or repeated contact with skin or eyes can be
harmful of the dry cleaning solvent known as perchloroethylene.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.078  DISPLAY OF ADDRESS NUMBERS.



   All new and existing buildings shall display their assigned address
numbers in accordance the North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention along
with all amendments and the County Addressing and Road Naming Ordinance.
Minimum number size for single-family or duplex structures must be three
inches in height. Minimum number size for all other structures must be six
inches in height. Numbers for all commercial, business, public assembly,
educational and any other structures that is open to the public must be
posted on the building face that is readily visible from the road from the
number is assigned. Unit designators must be posted at each unit within three
feet of the front entrance of the unit. In the event that a structure or its
posted number is not visible from the road from which the number is assigned,
the number must also be posted at or near every driveway or access to the
structure. Violation of this section can result in a civil citation being
issued.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.079  HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE AND HIGH-RACK STORAGE SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Any facility utilizing a rack storage system of more than one
level shall be considered to fall under the definition of “in-out dry
storage facility.”



   (B)   Factors such as method and height of stock piling,
combustibility of materials, fuel load and rate of heat release, areas and
size of piles, aisles, automatic fire extinguishing systems, smoke removal
systems, fire protection and fire separations, and access requirements will
be determined by using the North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention along
with amendments; North Carolina Building Code along with amendments; NFPA
303, NFPA 307, NFPA 30A, NFPA 230, NFPA 231 and NFPA 13 of the National Fire
Protection Association Standards and any other codes and standards that deal
with these types of facilities.



      (1)   The contractor or owner of building will also need to
obtain a permit through the Fire Marshal’s office for this type of building.



      (2)   Plans for this type of building must be reviewed by the
Fire Marshal’s office and approved before permits can be issued.



      (3)   Prior to occupancy, buildings housing high-rack storage
systems shall be approved by the Fire Marshal’s office.



      (4)   Storage of boats and other equipment in these type
buildings shall meet the requirements of the North Carolina State Building
Codes and the NFPA 303 §§ 5-2.1 a-h; 5-2.3 e-g and 5-2.4 a 1-6.



      (5)   North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention along with
amendments and NFPA 303, 307 and 30A covers the areas of operational hazards
that will need to be met. (This includes working, storage and fueling of the
boats.)



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.080  KEY BOXES.



   The fire official shall have the authority to require a key box to be
installed in an accessible location where access to or within a structure or
area is difficult because of security, in accordance with the NCBCFP.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.081  SMOKE DETECTORS FOR RENTAL PROPERTY; LANDLORDS AND TENANTS.



   For this section of COLFPPO it will reference back to the following
sections of G.S. Chapter 42:



   (A)   G.S. Chapter 42, Article 5, Residential Agreements;



   (B)   G.S. § 42-42(a)(5);



   (C)   G.S. § 42-43(a)(7); and



   (D)   G.S. § 42-44(a), (a1), (a2).



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



Cross-reference:



   Reference for copies of G.S. §§ 42-42(a)(5); 42-43(a)(7) and 42-44
(a), (a1), (a2), see Ch. 151Appendix B, Attachment A



Statutory reference:



   Landlord and Tenant Act, see G.S. Chapter 42



HAUNTED HOUSES



§ 151.095  HAUNTED HOUSES.



   Halloween haunted houses present a difficult problem in trying to meet
the provisions of the Fire Code and maintain a safe environment. The
following provisions will be required to be met to assure the safety of all
persons participating and attending Halloween haunted houses.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.096  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A special use permit shall be required to be obtained from the Fire
Marshal’s office for anyone wishing to open a Halloween haunted house to
the public. The permit fee shall be based upon the service and permit fee
schedule. This permit shall be completed on a special use permit form.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.097  PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The person wishing to obtain a special use permit for the
haunted house shall first contact the Fire Marshal’s office. An appointment
for a fire inspection shall be made to inspect the building planned to be
used as a haunted house. The permit fee should be paid at this time.



   (B)   A copy of the guidelines for use of haunted houses will be
given to the applicant. The fire inspection should not be conducted until the
requirements for safety systems of the building are in place and the facility
is ready for use. If all requirements are met then a permit will be issued at
that time.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.098  INSPECTION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   At any time the haunted house is open to the public, a fire
inspection can be conducted by a fire official to assure compliance with all
guidelines and the Fire Code.



   (B)   In the event that the specified guidelines and/or the Fire
Code regulations are not being met, then the person who obtained the special
use permit will be subject to a civil citation. If the violations are of a
severe nature as to be hazardous to the lives and/or well-being of the
public, then the fire official may revoke the special use permit, which will
terminate the further use of the haunted house. If the violations are
corrected, then the special use permit may be reinstated with no charge.



   (C)   In the event a special use permit is revoked and the occupant
refuses to comply with the required regulations, a refund of the permit fee
will not be allowed.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.099  REGULATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF HALLOWEEN HAUNTED HOUSES.



   (A)   A scaled sketch showing locations and widths of egress and
exits is required. A log showing a description, event, performance dates and
times and name of person or persons responsible for the event.



   (B)   Emergency exits shall be provided throughout the structure to
ensure the safe and prompt egress of occupants in the event of an emergency.
These exits shall not be covered or concealed in any way and shall be
available for immediate use without any type of hindrance. These exits shall
be marked “EXIT.” All exit signs shall be of a florescent type with
minimum size three-inch letters. The fire official may require lighted exits
and emergency lights if he or she deems it necessary. All staff personnel
shall know the location of all exits and the proper procedures to follow when
leading people to an exit.



   (C)   Workers are to be stationed at or near each exit while the
haunted house is opened to the public.



   (D)   All exits must remain unlocked and unblocked while the
structure is occupied.



   (E)   The haunted house must have workers in each room at all times
of operation. Each worker shall have a flashlight and hand-held alarm
(whistle, horn and the like) to warn of an emergency.



   (F)   All steps, ramps or outside porches shall be lighted at all
times.



   (G)   Lights shall be installed in all areas of the structure that
will be occupied. They shall be turned on in the event of an emergency to
provide sufficient light for a safe means of exiting the building.



   (H)   Multi-purpose portable fire extinguishers shall be installed
near each exit and throughout the structure so that the maximum travel
distance to an extinguisher does not exceed 25 feet. All fire extinguishers
shall be rated ten pounds ABC extinguisher.



   (I)   All staff shall know the location and be trained in the use of
all fire extinguishers.



   (J)   No combustible or flammable liquid type equipment to be used
in structure.



   (K)   No open flame, candle(s) or pyrotechnics shall be used within
the structure or near proximity (50 feet) of the structure.



   (L)   No smoking shall be allowed within the structure or within 50
feet of the structure. (No smoking signs must be posted within the structure
and around the structure.)



   (M)   The use of straw, hay, live vegetation, moss, vines, split
bamboo, leaves, cloth, foam plastics, paper, cotton batting and other similar
material shall not be used unless the materials are flame resistant as
determined by the Fire Prevention Code. The fire official will need to
approve any items used and the flame retardant chemical used to treat those
items.



   (N)   Spliced electrical cords, homemade switching devices and/or
open junction boxes and connections shall not be permitted. Extension cords
shall not be used as a wiring method.



   (O)   The number of persons allowed inside the structure will be
based on the size of the structure. Each group shall be lead through the
structure by a competent staff person. There shall be at least one empty room
in between each group. All staff persons leading groups shall be familiar
with all the guidelines required for haunted houses.



   (P)   In the event of an emergency, a warning signal will be sounded
to notify all occupants to evacuate the structure.



   (Q)   There shall be a meeting each night with all personnel who
will be working that night prior to opening the structure to the public to go
all rules and regulations that need to be followed including emergency
evacuation procedures.



   (R)   Other considerations for the safety of the public that may be
necessary such as decorations, fire lanes and the like shall be enforced by
the fire official.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



DECORATIVE MATERIALS



§ 151.110  DECORATIVE MATERIALS IN ASSEMBLIES, CHURCHES, BUSINESSES,
EDUCATIONAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND MERCANTILE OCCUPANCIES, COVERED MALLS, HOTELS,
MOTELS, DORMITORIES AND BOARDING HOUSES.



   (A)   All decorative material shall be noncombustible, inherently
flame resistant, or treated and maintained flame resistant when tested.



   (B)   The use of pyrotechnics in the performing arts in conjunction
with theatrical, musical or similar productions before an audience,
performers or support personnel shall follow all state building codes and
NFPA Standards, as referenced in Appendix B, Attachment G following this
chapter.



   (C)   Natural cut Christmas trees shall be treated and maintained
flame resistant throughout their use.  Exception: Christmas trees located in
areas protected by approved automatic sprinkler system.



   (D)   Live Christmas trees with their roots protected by an earth
ball may be permitted, provided they are maintained in a fresh condition and
are not allowed to become dry.



   (E)   Artificial Christmas trees shall be labeled or otherwise
identified or certified by the manufacturer as being “flame retardant” or
“flame resistant.”



   (F)   Only UL listed electrical lights and wiring shall be used on
Christmas trees and similar decorations.



   (G)   Electrical lights are prohibited on metal artificial Christmas
trees.



   (H)   Open flames shall not be located on or within the height of
the Christmas tree or other similar combustible materials.



   (I)   Natural cut Christmas trees shall not be located near heating
vents or other fixed or portable heating devices that could cause the tree to
dry out or to be ignited.



   (J)   When installing cut Christmas trees indoors, the tree shall
have the bottom end of the trunk cut off at least one inch above the end to
help the tree absorb water. The tree shall be placed in a suitable stand with
adequate water. The water level shall be checked and maintained on a daily
basis. The tree shall be removed from the building immediately upon evidence
of dryness.



   (K)   Cotton cannot be used as decorative material. A cotton
substitute, magic glass or similar product, which is fire retardant, may be
used.



   (L)   Decorations cannot block passageways, exits or fire protection
equipment. If in doubt about where one can and cannot place decorations,
contact the Fire Marshal’s office at 704-736-8516.



   (M)   Door decorations shall not exceed 50% of the door space. Use
only non-combustible or flame retardant materials.



   (N)   Do not cover any corridor wall with decoration that would
exceed 25% of the wall space. Noncombustible or flame retardant materials
shall be used. Nothing shall be used that can be an obstruction.



   (O)   Facilities shall have written certification that items were
treated to make them fire retardant.



   (P)   Candle safety.



      (1)   Candles must never be used on a tree or place near an
evergreen tree.



      (2)   Candles are to be mounted in a secure and non-flammable
base that will not tip over.



      (3)   Adequate safeguards are to be provided to avoid danger
or ignition of combustible materials or injury to occupants.



      (4)   Candles shall not be left unattended or where small
children can reach them.



      (5)   Any and all live vegetation used shall be of flame
resistant materials or shall be rendered flame resistant by treating with a
fire retardant coating and maintained flame resistant.



      (6)   Candles shall not block or impede exit widths.



      (7)   Immediately upon completion of the service all flames
shall be properly extinguished.



      (8)   Permits are required for use of candles in public
places. Churches are exempt. All others contact the Fire Marshal’s office
for the permits.



   (Q)   The above guidelines shall also apply to scenery used in all
stage productions.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



Cross-reference:



   Use of pyrotechnics before a proximate audience, see Ch. 151, Appendix
B, Attachment G



VIOLATIONS



§ 151.125  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   A notice of violation is to be considered a warning citation for Fire
Code violations.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.126  CIVIL CITATION.



   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the North
Carolina Fire Code or this chapter adopted by the City Council or fail to
comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved there under or any certificate
or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been submitted
within the 30-day period of interpretation, or who shall fail to comply with
an order as affirmed or modified by the Fire Marshal or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein shall severally for
each violation and noncompliance respectively, be subject to penalties as
specified in the service and permit fee schedule approved by the City
Council. These penalties shall be recovered by the city in a civil action in
the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalties within a period
of 30 days after the issuance of the notice of violation. The notice of
violation shall be in writing, signed by the Fire Marshal and/or the fire
official charged with the enforcement of the North Carolina Fire Code or this
chapter, and shall be delivered or mailed to the offender either at his or
her residence or place of business or at the location where the violation
occurred. Each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense. Any action to recover the penalties may be joined in an action for
appropriate equitable remedy, including injunctions and orders of abatement
and including an action to recover damages by the city in abating,
correcting, limiting and otherwise dealing with the harmful effects of the
offending action.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.127  SUMMARY ABATEMENT.



   The Fire Marshal shall have the authority to summarily abate any
condition that is in violation of any provision of the Fire Code and/or
LCFPPO and that presents an immediate fire hazard to life or property.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.128  FALSE ALARMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to give, signal or transmit or for
any person to cause or permit to be given, signaled or transmitted, in any
manner any false alarm.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.129  OPEN BURNING VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   A civil citation may be issued if any of the parts of the open
burning section of this chapter or the North Carolina Building Code Fire
Prevention along with amendments are violated.



   (B)   The citation will be based on the violation.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.130  CARELESSNESS WITH FIRE.



   No person shall wilfully/deliberately, or through carelessness or
negligence, set fire to or cause the burning of any material, in a manner as
to endanger the safety of any person or property.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



Cross-reference:



    Carelessness with Fire Citation Form, see Ch. 151, Appendix A, Form I



§ 151.131  ACCUMULATIONS OF WASTE MATERIALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to accumulate or store combustible waste
matter beneath manufactured homes or recreational vehicles or at any other
place within a recreational vehicle park or manufactured home community.



   (B)   (1)   Roofs, courts, yards, vacant lots and open spaces
shall be kept free and clear of deposits or accumulations of waste paper,
hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter, combustible waste or rubbish of any kind.



      (2)   All weeds, grass, vines or other growth, when same
endangers property, or is liable to be set fire to, shall be cut down and
removed by the owner or occupant of the property.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.132  UNSAFE OR DEFECTIVE BUILDINGS OR SYSTEMS.



   (A)   All buildings or service systems, which are unsanitary,
constitute a fire hazard, or constitute a hazard to safety or health, bad
conditions of walls, overload floors, defective construction, decay, unsafe
wiring or heating system, inadequate means of egress are considered unsafe.



   (B)   All unsafe building or service systems shall be abated by
repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions
of the technical codes.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



Cross-reference:



   Copies of G.S. §§ 153A-365 through 153A-371, see Ch. 151, Appendix B,
Attachment B



Statutory reference:



   Action in event of failure to take corrective action, see G.S. §
153A-368



   Appeal; finality of order not appealed, see G.S. § 153A-370



   Defects in buildings to be corrected, see G.S. § 153A-365



   Failure to comply with order, see G.S. § 153A-371



   Order to take corrective action, see G.S. § 153A-369



   Removing notice from condemned building, see G.S. § 153A-367



   Unsafe buildings condemned, see G.S. § 153A-366



§ 151.133  CODE VIOLATIONS.



   Code violations will be based on this chapter and the State Building
Codes.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



SCHEDULED INSPECTIONS



§ 151.145  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The city’s Fire Marshal’s office will respond to any fire
safety-related or Fire Code complaint made to that office. Otherwise,
inspections of occupancies and businesses will be provided per the North
Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention according to the schedule in §§
151.146 through 151.148.



   (B)   Frequency rates for inspection of occupancies as mandated by
the General Statutes shall supersede this schedule.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.146  ANNUAL INSPECTIONS.



   The following are done a minimum of once a year.



   (A)   Annual.



      (1)   Hazardous;



      (2)   Institutional;



      (3)   High rise;



      (4)   Assembly;



      (5)   Private school;



      (6)   Day care centers;



      (7)   Common areas of residential (one- and two-family); and



      (8)   Interior common areas (only) of dwelling units of
multi-family occupancies.



   (B)   Assembly occupancy (annual).



      (1)   Amusement park building;



      (2)   Auditorium (less than 1,000 capacity);



      (3)   Auditorium (1,000 or greater capacity);



      (4)   Bowling alleys;



      (5)   Court rooms;



      (6)   Dance hall;



      (7)   Night club;



      (8)   Exhibit halls;



      (9)   Libraries;



      (10)   Meeting centers;



      (11)   Haunted houses;



      (12)   Motion picture theaters;



      (13)   Museums;



      (14)   Passenger depots;



      (15)   Public assembly hall;



      (16)   Recreation facility;



      (17)   Restaurant;



      (18)   Stadiums;



      (19)   Grandstands; and



      (20)   Tents.



   (C)   Educational (schools are done a minimum of two times a year).



      (1)   Public elementary;



      (2)   Public middle; and



      (3)   Public high school.



   (D)   Hazardous occupancy (annual).



      (1)   Chemical processing and/or storage manufacturing
facility;



      (2)   Compressed/flammable/combustible gas storage
distribution facility;



      (3)   Dry cleaners;



      (4)   Explosive facility storage-use;



      (5)   Manufacturing, distribution, flammable/combustible
liquid processing-storage;



      (6)   Manufacturing, flammable/combustible liquid-storage
distribution centers;



      (7)   Hazardous material handling and processing storage
facility;



      (8)   Hazardous production material facility;



      (9)   Hazardous material waste disposal facility;



      (10)   L.P. and natural gas distribution facility; and



      (11)   Laboratories/research development centers.



   (E)   Institutional occupancy (annual).



      (1)   Correction facilities;



      (2)   Detention centers;



      (3)   Detoxification facilities;



      (4)   Hospitals/mental hospitals;



      (5)   Jails;



      (6)   Reformatories;



      (7)   Residential custodial facilities;



      (8)   Nursing homes; and



      (9)   Day care centers.



   (F)   Residential occupancy (annual).



      (1)   Apartment houses (commons area);



      (2)   Boarding houses;



      (3)   Day care homes;



      (4)   Dormitories;



      (5)   Fraternities and sororities;



      (6)   Group homes (not classified as Group I);



      (7)   Hotels/motels; and



      (8)   Residential care facilities (not classified as Group I).



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.147  INSPECTIONS TO BE DONE ONCE EVERY TWO YEARS.



   Divisions (A) and (B) are done a minimum of every two years. Industrial
and educational, except public schools, done a minimum of twice a year.



   (A)   Educational above the twelfth grade.  Every two years.



   (B)   Industrial occupancy (every two years).



      (1)   Assembly plant;



      (2)   Factory;



      (3)   Furniture/woodworking;



      (4)   Manufacturing facility;



      (5)   Processing plant;



      (6)   Textile; and



      (7)   Fabrication facility.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.148  INSPECTIONS TO BE DONE ONCE EVERY THREE YEARS.



   The following are done a minimum of every three years:  business;
mercantile; storage; and churches and synagogues.



   (A)   Assembly occupancy (every three years).  Church and
synagogues.



   (B)   Business occupancy (every three years).



      (1)   Automobile dealerships (no service work);



      (2)   Automobile dealerships (with service work);



      (3)   Automotive self-service stations (no service work);



      (4)   Automotive full-service stations;



      (5)   Automotive repair garages;



      (6)   Car washes;



      (7)   Dry cleaning (not classified as hazardous);



      (8)   Florists and nurseries;



      (9)   Greenhouses;



      (10)   Laboratories (not classified as hazardous);



      (11)   Laundries (full and self-service);



      (12)   Machine shops;



      (13)   Print shops;



      (14)   Telephone exchanges;



      (15)   Offices; and



      (16)   Radio and TV stations.



   (C)   Mercantile occupancy (every three years).  Fireworks
provision to be added if the facility sells or stores for sale.



      (1)   Convenience stores (dispenses flammable/combustible
liquids);



      (2)   Department stores;



      (3)   Drug stores;



      (4)   Markets;



      (5)   Retail stores;



      (6)   Shopping centers;



      (7)   Sales rooms;



      (8)   Covered malls;



      (9)   Supermarkets/grocery stores; and



      (10)   Wholesale stores (other than warehouse).



   (D)   Storage occupancy (every three years).



      (1)   Aircraft hangers;



      (2)   Helistops;



      (3)   Private garages;



      (4)   Storage warehouse; and



      (5)   Wholesale warehouse.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.149  FREQUENCY RATES FOR INSPECTIONS.



    The fire safety inspections are provided free of charge. The only fees
that the business will incur are for certain permits when they are required.
All jobs or tasks required by North Carolina Building Codes along with
amendments and this chapter that require a permit to do a job or task, a
civil citation can be issued if the permit is not obtained.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



REPORTING A HAZARD OR VIOLATION



§ 151.160  HAZARDS OR VIOLATIONS.



   The Fire Marshal’s office will respond to any complaint regarding a
life safety hazard, illegal burning and any other Fire Code violation or fire
ordinance violation in the city.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.161  HOW TO REPORT A HAZARD OR VIOLATION.



   A hazard or violation may be reported at any time. It may be reported
directly to the Fire Marshal’s office during normal working hours. After
normal working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the County
Communications Center on its non-emergency number.



 

Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
 
Call 704-736-8920


Weekdays after 5:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m.
 
Call 704-735-8202


Weekends and holidays
 
Call 704-735-8202



 



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.162  REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR COMPLAINTS.



   All complaints will require the following information to be recorded in
order for the complaint to be processed:



   (A)   Name of the person filing the complaint;



   (B)   Address and phone number of person filing complaint;



   (C)   Location of hazard or violation; and



   (D)   Type of problem, hazard or violation.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.163  RECORDS.



   A written record of all complaints will be maintained in the Fire
Marshal’s office. A report will be attached to the complaint stating any
violations or hazards found and what actions were taken.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  The penalties for violations of this chapter and
the North Carolina State Building Codes will be based on the current city
civil citations schedule.



   (B)   Issuance of notice of violations or civil citations by Fire
Inspectors.



      (1)   State certified Fire Inspectors of the city’s Fire
Marshal’s office are empowered to issue notices of violation and civil
citations when the Fire Inspectors have reasonable cause to believe that any
person or business has violated any provision of the North Carolina State
Building Code, Fire Prevention Code, as amended, or this chapter. The notice
of violation or civil citation may be delivered in person to the violator or,
if the violator cannot be readily found, the notice of violation or civil
citation may be mailed by certified mail. The notice of violation or civil
citation shall specify the penalty to be imposed on the violator and shall
direct the violator to appear to the Fire Marshal’s office within 30 days
to pay the penalty or, alternatively, to pay the penalty by mail.



      (2)   The notice of violation may specify a period (minimum of
30 days and maximum of 90 days) during which the violator must correct the
violation. If the violation is not corrected within the specific time, the
violator shall be guilty of a new and separate offense.



      (3)   Violation(s) consisting of locked and/or blocked exits,
impedance of the occupants to quickly evacuate a structure or premise, or
conditions posing imminent danger to the occupants on or about the premise or
violation(s) of occupancy limits established pursuant to the North Carolina
State Building and/or Fire Code must be fixed corrected during the time of
the inspection if at all possible.



      (4)   On a first or second offense, if the violator does not
pay the penalty within 30 days after issuance of the notice of violation or
civil citation, a delinquency charge as set forth in the fee schedule will be
added to the amount specified in the notice of violation or civil citation
and the notice of the delinquency charge shall be mailed to the violator. A
criminal summons or warrant may be issued if the penalty plus delinquency
charge are not paid within five days after the date of the delinquency notice.



      (5)   On a third offense of the same code violation during the
same calendar year, there is a per day civil fee until the violation is
corrected. If the penalty and delinquency charge are not paid within the time
allowed, the Fire Marshal’s office may have a criminal summons issued
against the violator for the violation of the NCSBC, NCBCFP, as amended, or
this chapter. Upon conviction, the violator shall be subject, in addition to
any criminal penalty the court may impose pursuant to the provisions
contained in the NCSBC or this chapter, to the penalty specified in the
notice of violation or civil citation and the delinquency charge.



   (C)   Civil citations.



 



(1)   Violation(s) of the North Carolina Fire Code, Building Code and/or
city code including all referenced enforceable material contained within (may
issue citation)**


   First offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Second offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Third and any subsequent offenses (per each day that violation
continues)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



(2)   Violation(s) of occupancy limits established pursuant to the North
Carolina State Building and/or Fire Code (may issue citation)**


   First offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Second offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Third and any subsequent offenses (per each day that violation
continues)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



(3)   Violation(s) consisting of locked and/or blocked exits, impedance of
the occupants to quickly evacuate a structure or premises, or conditions
posing imminent danger to the occupants on or about the premises (shall issue
citation)**


   First offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Second offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Third and any subsequent offenses (per each day that violation
continues)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



(4)   Violation(s) of the open burning section of this chapter, the city
permit section and the State Fire Code (may issue)**


   First offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Second offense
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



   Third offense (per each day that violation continues)
 

as set forth in the fee schedule



** Any violation incurred more than a year after issuance of the initial
citation shall be treated as a first offense for purposes of establishing and
imposing penalties.




 



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



APPENDIX A:  FORMS



Form:



   I.   Carelessness with fire citation form



   II.   Civil citation form



   III.   Open burning permit form and guidelines



   IV.   Reporting a hazard or violation form



FORM I:  CARELESSNESS WITH FIRE CITATION FORM.



For a printer-friendly, PDF version, click: Form I



   Carelessness With Fire



   (Within 100 Feet of A Structure)



   No person shall, wilfully/deliberately, or through carelessness or
negligence, set fire to or cause the burning of any material, in a manner as
to endanger the safety of any person or property.



   Elements:   A person is guilty of this offense if:



      (1)   He or she wilfully, deliberately, or through
carelessness or negligence;



      (2)   Sets on fire, or causes to be set on fire or cause the
burning of



      (3)   Any material or object - name the material or object:



   (examples are: any structure, woods, brush, grass, land or fields, any
vehicle, any furniture, clothes, toys or goods, wares or personal property of
any kind.)



      (4)   In a manner as to endanger the safety of any person or
property.



   (1)   Choose one or more:   Wilfully; Deliberately; Carelessly;
Negligently.



   (2)   Choose one or more:   Set Fire To; Cause To Be Set Fire;
Cause the Burning Of.



   (3)   Describe the material which was burned:



   (4)   Name the person and/or describe the property which was
endangered:



   (5)   Describe the manner in which the fire was set and how the
person and/or property was endangered:



Punishment:   ** Violation of this section of this Code, (may issue)



 

First offense
 
$50


Second offense
 
$100


Third offense and each offense thereafter
 
$200



 



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



FORM II:  CIVIL CITATION FORM.



For a printer-friendly, PDF version, click: Form II



   The notice of violation may specify a period during which the violator
must correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within the
specific time, the violator shall be guilty of a new and separate offense.




CITY OF LINCOLNTON





FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION ORDINANCE





CIVIL CITATION




The following civil citation is hereby issued to:



Name:
____________________________________________________________________________



Address:
__________________________________________________________________________



Occupancy:
________________________________________________________________________



Vehicle License #:
__________________________________________________________________



Place of violation:
__________________________________________________________________



Date: ___________________________  Time:
__________________________________________



You are in violation of Section (s)
_____________________________________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__



in that (describe acts, omissions, or conditions which constitute violation):



This citation is issued for a violation which occurred or existed on
_________________ at the following
location:____________________________________________ and was investigated
by: _____________________________________ Title: _________________________.



This violation(s) subjects you to a civil penalty in the amount of $
_____________ which must be paid within 30 days. If this penalty is not paid
within 30 days of the date and time shown below, a delinquency charge of $10
will be added. A criminal summons or warrant may be issued if the penalty
plus delinquency charge are not paid within 5 days after the date of the
delinquency notice.



Penalty continues at $ __________ per day until the violation (s) have
corrected.



This citation, was issued at  __________ (a.m.) (p.m.), the ______ day of
__________, _______,



and must be paid at the Fire Marshal’s office, at 116 West Sycamore St. by
5:00 p.m. on _______________.



Issued By: ________________________________________________



Title: ____________________________________________________



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



FORM III:  OPEN BURNING PERMIT FORM AND GUIDELINES.



For a printer-friendly, PDF version, click: Form III




CITY OF LINCOLNTON OPEN BURNING PERMIT





(Within 100 Feet of a Structure or Bonfires)




I do hereby give permission to
_______________________________________________to burn 
_____________________________________ at ________________________________.



Burning is to follow all EPA regulations, North Carolina Forestry Service
Statutes, and the city’s fire prevention and protection regulations.



Open burning of leaves, tree branches or yard trimmings originating on the
premises of private residences and burned on those premises in areas where no
public pickup facilities are available and the burning is done between 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and shall not create a nuisance. Bonfires used for
ceremonial and religious purposes (schools, civic groups, churches) may take
place after 6:00 p.m. when all regulations are meet. Materials used for
bonfires must also comply with the EPA regulations.



Burning to take place on (day)  ___________________ 
(date)______________________and shall not create a nuisance. If three or more
separate complaints from businesses or homes are received during the burning,
it shall be ceased and all fires will be extinguished.



________________________________         _________________________



Responsible Party                           Issued
By



Burning under authority of this permit does not release the permit holder
from complying with EPA (North Carolina Air Pollution Control Requirements),
North Carolina Forest Service Statues and the city’s fire prevention and
protection regulations.



If at any time during the burning, the regulations regarding open burning are
not met or are neglected in any way, the fire shall be extinguished and a
civil citation may be issued.



I have read the guidelines for open burning and received a copy of those
guidelines.



________________________________   __________________________________



Responsible Party                     Witnessed By




GUIDELINES FOR BURNING PERMITS





(Within 100 feet of a Structure or for Bonfires)




Initial:



______   Yard trimmings only (leaves, limbs, grass, vines and the like).



______   Must originate on the premises.



______   Burning is done between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



______   Bonfires may be done after 6:00 p.m. (Bonfires must meet bonfire
requirements.)



______   There are no public trash pickup facilities.



______   Fire must be at least 50 feet from any structure and must not
spread to within 50 feet.



______   Fire must not create a nuisance when burned.



______   A competent person shall constantly attend the fire until the
fire is extinguished.



______   Must provide fire control tools to match the size of the pile
being burned (garden hoses, rakes, shovels, extra help and the like).



______   No rubbish or waste material are to be burned (furniture, old
tires, shingles and the like).



______   Piles of material shall not exceed 30 feet in diameter, ten feet
in height, or 10,000 cubic feet.



______   An area ten feet wide shall be cleared completely around the
material to be burned.



______   A copy of the air quality regulations has been furnished.



______   I was advised that this permit does not release me from
compliance with all open burning regulations.



______   If a burning ban has been issued all fires shall be extinguished
immediately.



______   If at any time during the burning, the regulations regarding open
burning are not met or are neglected in any way, the fire will be
extinguished and a civil citation may be issued.



__________________________________         ___________________________
____



      Responsible
Party                        Witnessed By



__________________________________



         Date




CITY OF LINCOLNTON OPEN BURNING PERMIT





(Commercial land clearing of lots to build homes, businesses or industry)





***Clearing of land for farming purposes is exempt from permit fees,





but any required regulations still must be met***




I do hereby give permission to
_______________________________________________to burn 
_____________________________________ at ________________________________.



Burning is to follow all EPA regulations, North Carolina Forestry Service
statutes, and the city’s fire prevention and protection regulations.



Open burning of leaves, tree branches, brush or yard trimmings originating on
the premises and burned on those premises in areas where no public pickup
facilities are available and the burning is done between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
P.M. and shall not create a nuisance.  Bonfires used for ceremonial and
religious purposes (schools, civic groups, churches) may take place after
6:00 p.m. when all regulations are meet. Materials used for bonfires must
also comply with the EPA regulations.



Burning to take on (day)  ___________________ 
(date)________________________and shall not create a nuisance.  If three or
more separate complaints from businesses or homes are received during the
burning, it shall be ceased and all fires will be extinguished.



________________________________      _________________________



Responsible Party                     Issued By



Burning under authority of this permit does not release the permit holder
from complying with EPA (North Carolina Air Pollution Control Requirements),
North Carolina Forest Service Statues and the city’s fire prevention and
protection regulations.



If at any time during the burning, the regulations regarding open burning are
not met or are neglected in any way, the fire shall be extinguished and a
civil citation may be issued.



I have read the guidelines for open burning and received a copy of those
guidelines.



________________________________      __________________________________



   Responsible Party                     Witnessed By



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



FORM IV:  REPORTING A HAZARD OR VIOLATION FORM.



For a printer-friendly, PDF version, click: Form IV




CITY OF LINCOLNTON FIRE MARSHAL OFFICE





REPORTING A HAZARD OR VIOLATION




____________________________________________________________________________



Name of Person Filing Complaint



____________________________________________________________________________



Address of Person Filing Complaint



____________________________________________________________________________



Phone Number of Person Filing Complaint



Location of hazard (address - name of business - name of owner or operator if
known)



____________________________________________________________________________



____________________________________________________________________________



____________________________________________________________________________



____________________________________________________________________________



Type of problem, hazard or violation reported



_______________________________________________________________________________
_____



_______________________________________________________________________________
______



_______________________________________________________________________________
______



_______________________________________________________________________________
_______



A written record of all complaints will be maintained in the Fire Marshal’s
office. A report will be attached to the complaint stating any violations or
hazards found and what actions were taken.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



APPENDIX B:  REFERENCES



Attachment



   A.   Copy of G.S. §§ 42-42(a)(5) and (5a); 42-43 (a)(7) and 42-44
(a)(a1) and (a2)



   B.   Copy of G.S. §§ 153A-365 through 153A-371



   C.   Copy of G.S. §§ 143-140 and 143-141



   D.   Flow test procedures for city fire hydrants



   E.   Public fire hydrant marking guidelines



   F.   Private fire hydrant marking guidelines



   G.   Use of pyrotechnics before a proximate audience



ATTACHMENT A:  COPY OF G.S. §§ 42-42(a)(5) AND (5a); 42-43(a)(7) AND 42-44
(a)(A1) AND (A2)



G.S. § 42-42



   (a)   The landlord shall:



      (5)   Provide operable smoke alarms, either battery-operated
or electrical, having an Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc., listing or other
equivalent national testing laboratory approval and install the smoke alarms
in accordance with either the standards of the National Fire Protection
Association or the minimum protection designated in the manufacturer’s
instructions, which the landlord shall retain or provide as proof of
compliance. The landlord shall replace or repair the smoke alarms within 15
days of receipt of notification if the landlord is notified of needed
replacement or repairs in writing by the tenant. The landlord shall ensure
that a smoke alarm is operable and in good repair at the beginning of each
tenancy. Unless the landlord and the tenant have a written agreement to the
contrary, the landlord shall place new batteries in a battery-operated smoke
alarm at the beginning of a tenancy and the tenant shall replace the
batteries as needed during the tenancy, except where the smoke alarm is a
tamper-resistant, ten-year lithium battery smoke alarm as required by
subdivision (5a) of this subsection. Failure of the tenant to replace the
batteries as needed and shall not be considered as negligence on the part of
the tenant or the landlord.



      (5a)   After December 31, 2012, when installing a new smoke
alarm or replacing an existing smoke alarm, install a tamper-resistant,
ten-year lithium battery smoke alarm.  However, the landlord shall not be
required to install a tamper-resistant, ten-year lithium battery smoke alarm
as required by this subdivision in either of the following circumstances:



         (a)   The dwelling unit is equipped with a hardwired
smoke alarm with a battery backup.



         (b)   The dwelling unit is equipped with a smoke alarm
combined with a carbon monoxide alarm that meets the requirements provided in
subdivision (7) of this section.



G.S. § 42-43



   (a)   The tenant shall:



      (7)   Notify the landlord, in writing, of the need for
replacement of or repairs to a smoke alarm. The landlord shall ensure that a
smoke alarm is operable and in good repair at the beginning of each tenancy.
Unless the landlord and the tenant have a written agreement to the contrary,
the landlord shall place new batteries in a battery-operated smoke alarm at
the beginning of a tenancy and the tenant shall replace the batteries as
needed during the tenancy, except where the smoke alarm is a
tamper-resistant, ten-year lithium battery smoke alarm as required by G.S. §
42-42(a)(5a). Failure of the tenant to replace the batteries as needed shall
not be considered as negligence on the part of the tenant or landlord.



G.S. § 42-44



   (a)   Any right or obligation declared by this chapter is
enforceable by civil action, in addition to other remedies of law and in
equity.



      (a1)   If the landlord fails to provide, install, replace, or
repair a smoke alarm under the provisions G.S.(a)(5) within 30 days of having
received written notice from the tenant or any agent of State or local
government of the landlord’s failure to do so, the landlord shall be
responsible for an infraction and shall be subject to a fine of not more than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. After December 31,
2012, if the landlord installs a new smoke alarm or replaces an existing
smoke alarm, the smoke alarm shall be a tamper-resistant, ten-year lithium
battery smoke alarm, except as provided in G.S. § 42-42(a)(5a).  The
landlord may temporarily disconnect a smoke alarm in a dwelling unit or
common area for construction or rehabilitation activities when such
activities are likely to activate the smoke alarm or make it inactive.



      (a2)   If a smoke alarm is disabled or damaged, other than
through actions of the landlord, the landlords’ agents, or acts of God, the
tenant shall reimburse the landlord the reasonable and actual cost for
repairing or replacing the smoke alarm within 30 days of having received
written notice from the landlord or any agent of State or local government of
the need for the tenant to make such reimbursement. If the tenant fails to
make reimbursement within 30 days, the tenant shall be responsible for an
infraction and subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each violation. The tenant may temporarily disconnect a smoke
alarm in a dwelling unit to replace the batteries or when it has been
inadvertently activated.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



ATTACHMENT B:  COPY OF G.S. §§ 153A-365 THRU 153A-371.



G.S. § 153A-365  Defects in buildings to be corrected.



   If a local inspector finds any defect in a building, or finds that the
building has not been constructed in accordance with the applicable State and
local laws and local ordinance and regulations, or finds that a building
because of its condition is dangerous or contains fire-hazardous conditions,
he shall notify the owner or occupant of the building of its defects,
hazardous conditions, or failure to comply with the law.  The owner and the
occupant shall each immediately remedy the defects, hazardous conditions, or
violations of law in the property each owns.



G.S. § 153A-366  Unsafe building condemned.



   (a)   Residential building and nonresidential building or structure.
The inspector shall condemn as unsafe each building that appears to him to be
especially dangerous to life because of its liability to fire, bad conditions
of walls, overload floors, defective construction, decay, unsafe wiring or
heating system, inadequate means of egress, or other causes; he shall affix a
notice of the dangerous character of the building to a conspicuous place on
the exterior wall.



   (b)   Nonresidential building or structure. In addition to the
authority granted in subsection (a) of this section, an inspector may declare
a nonresidential building or structure within a community development target
area to be unsafe if it meets both of the following conditions:



      (1)   It appears to the inspector to be vacant or abandoned.



      (2)   It appears to the inspector to be in such dilapidated
condition as to cause or contribute to blight, disease, vagrancy, fire, or
safety hazard, to be a danger to children, or to tend to attract persons
intent on criminal activities or other activities that would constitute a
public nuisance.



   (c)   If an inspector declares a nonresidential building or
structure to be unsafe under subsection (b) of this section, the inspector
must affix a notice of the unsafe character of the structure to a conspicuous
place on the exterior wall of the building. For the purposes of this section,
the term “community development target area” means an area that has
characteristics of an urban progress zone under G.S. 143B-437.09, a
“nonresidential redevelopment area” under G.S. 160A-503(10), or an area
with similar characteristics designated by the board of commissioners as
being in special need of revitalization for the benefit and welfare of its
citizens.



   (d)   A county may expand subsections (b) and (c) of this section to
apply to residential buildings by adopting an ordinance. Before adopting the
ordinance, the county shall hold a public hearing and shall provide notice of
the hearing at least 10 days in advance of the hearing.



G.S. § 153A-367  Removing notice from condemned building.



   If a person removes a notice that has been affixed to a building by a
local inspector and that states the dangerous character of the building, he
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



G.S. § 153A-368  Action in the event of failure to take corrective action.



   If the owner of a building that has been condemned as unsafe pursuant
to G.S. 153A-366 fails to take prompt corrective action, the local inspector
shall by certified or registered mail to his last known address or by
personal service give him written notice:



   (1)   That the building or structure is in a condition that appears
to meet one or more of the following conditions:



      a.   Constitutes a fire or safety hazard.



      b.   Is dangerous to life, health, or other property.



      c.   Is likely to cause or contribute to blight, disease,
vagrancy, or danger to children.



      d.   Has a tendency to attract persons intent on criminal
activities or other activities that would constitute a public nuisance.



   (2)   That a hearing will be held before the inspector at a
designated place and time, not later than 10 days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner is entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and



   (3)   That following the hearing, the inspector may issue any order
to repair, close, vacate, or demolish the building that appears appropriate.



   If the name or whereabouts of the owner cannot after due diligence be
discovered, the notice shall be considered properly and adequately served if
a copy thereof is posted on the outside of the building in question at least
ten days before the day of the hearing and a notice of the hearing is
published at least once not later than one week before the hearing.



G.S. § 153A-369  Order to take corrective action.



   If, upon a hearing held pursuant to G.S. § 153A-368, the inspector
finds that the building is in a condition that constitutes a fire or safety
hazard or renders it dangerous to life, health, or other property, he shall
issue a written order, directed to the owner of the building, requiring the
owner to remedy the defective conditions by repairing, closing, vacating, or
demolishing the building or taking other necessary steps, within such period,
not less than 60 days, as the inspector may prescribe; provided, that where
the inspector finds that there is imminent danger to life or property, he may
order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be
feasible.



G.S. § 153A-370  Appeal; finality of order not appealed.



   An owner who has received an order under G.S. § 153A-369 may appeal
from the order to the board of commissioners by giving written notice of
appeal to the inspector and to the clerk within 10 days following the day the
order is issued. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the inspector is
final. The board of commissioners shall hear any appeal within a reasonable
time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.



G.S. § 153A-371  Failure to comply with order.



   If the owner of a building fails to comply with an order issued
pursuant to G.S. § 153A-369 from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to
comply with an order of the board of commissioners following an appeal, he is
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



ATTACHMENT C:  A COPY OF G.S. §§ 143-140 AND 143-141



   Appeal Process



   An applicant for a permit, or a permit holder, as appropriate, may
appeal the Fire Marshal’s refusal to issue, or decision to revoke a permit.
Appeals shall be in accordance with G.S. §§ 143-140 and 143- 141. Appeals
must be made in writing within 30 days of interpretation. All appeals shall
follow the prescribed method as set forth in these statutes not only as to
permits but also as to any interpretation or variation of the Fire Code.



G.S. § 143-140.  Hearings before enforcement agencies as to questions under
Building Code.



   (a)   Any person desiring to raise any questions under this Article
or under the North Carolina State Building Code shall be entitled to a
technical interpretation from the appropriated enforcement agency, as
designated in the preceding section. Upon request in writing by any such
person, the enforcement agency through an appropriated official shall within
a reasonable time provide a written interpretation, setting forth the facts
found, the decision reached and the reasons therefore. In the event of
dissatisfaction with such decision, the person affected shall have the
options of:



      (1)   Appealing to the Building Code Council or



      (2)   Appealing directly to the Superior Court, as provided in
G.S. § 143-141.



   (b)   If an interpretation under this section or under G.S.
143-141(b) changes after a building permit is issued, the permit applicant
may choose which version of the interpretation will apply to the permit,
unless such a choice would cause harm to life or property.



G.S. § 143-141.  Appeals to Building Code Council.



   (a)   Method of Appeal.  Whenever any person desires to take an
appeal to the Building Code Council from the decision of a State enforcement
agency relating to any matter under this Article or under the North Carolina
State Building Code, he shall within 30 days after such decision give written
notice to the Building Code Council through the Division of Engineering of
the Department of Insurance that he desires to take appeal. A copy of such
notice shall be filed at the same time with the enforcement agency from which
the appeal is taken. The chairman of the Building Code Council shall fix a
reasonable time and place for a hearing, giving reasonable notice to the
appellant and to the enforcement agency. Such hearing shall be not later than
the next regular meeting of the Council. The Building Code Council shall
thereupon conduct a full and complete hearing as to the matters in
controversy, after which it shall within a reasonable time give a written
decision setting forth its findings of fact and its conclusions.



   (b)   Interpretations of the Code.  The Building Code Council shall
have the duty, in hearing appeals; to give interpretations of such provisions
of the Building Code as shall be pertinent to the matter at issue. Where the
Council finds that an enforcement agency was in error in its interpretation
of the Code, it shall remand the case to the agency with instructions to take
such action as it directs. Interpretations by the Council and local
enforcement officials shall be based on a reasonable construction of the Code
provisions.



   (c)   Variations of the Code.  Where the Building Code Council
finds on appeal that materials or methods of construction proposed to be used
are as good as those required by the Code, it shall remand the case to the
enforcement agency with instructions to permit the use of such materials or
methods of construction. The Council shall thereupon immediately initiate
procedures for amending the Code as necessary to permit the use of such
materials or methods of construction.



   (d)   Further Appeals to the Courts.  Whenever any person desires
to take a appeal from a decision of the Building Code Council or from the
decision of an enforcement agency (with or without an appeal to the Building
Code Council), he may take an appeal either to the Wake County Superior Court
or to the Superior Court of the county in which the proposed building is to
be situated, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 150B of the General
Statutes.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



ATTACHMENT D:  FLOW TEST PROCEDURES FOR CITY FIRE HYDRANTS.



   1.   Purpose.  To establish a standard for the capacity flow
testing of fire hydrants. While there are several methods available to test a
hydrant, the following methods described are for single hydrant and two
hydrant testing procedures. During plan reviews the Fire Marshal’s office
will use both single hydrant and two hydrant methods for testing purposes.



   2.   Definition.  Water is the most available tool used for the
extinguishments of fires. The purpose of a Fire Department performing hydrant
flow test is to determine whether the water system can furnish adequate
amounts of water to meet the fire flow demands, based on the classification
of the occupancies in the immediate area.



   3.   Equipment needed.



      A.   Hydrant wrench - two.



      B.   Hydrant cap pressure gauge - one.



      C.   Pitot flow gauge (blade or barrel type) - one.



      D.   Hydrant form (to record information).



   4.   Procedure (one hydrant test method, not be used for plan review
flow requirements).



      A.   Select the hydrant to be tested.



      B.   Perform light maintenance.



      C.   Hydrant must be flushed prior to beginning flow test.



      D.   Choose which two and one-half-inch discharge will affect
landscaping, traffic and the like the most and place a pressure cap gauge on
this discharge. Open the hydrant fully. Note the pressure on the gauge. This
is the static pressure. Record the static pressure on the hydrant report
form. Close the hydrant slowly.



      E.   Take the two and one-half-inch-cap opposite the pressure
cap gauge off the hydrant. Install a barrel type pitot gauge on this
discharge opening if you have one.



      F.   Open the hydrant fully and note the pressure that is on
the cap gauge. This is the residual pressure. Record the residual pressure on
the hydrant report form.



      G.   Record the pressure reading on the barrel type pitot
gauge. The pressure reading shown is the flow pressure. Record the flow
pressure on the hydrant report form.



      H.   Close the hydrant slowly, remove all equipment and
replace all caps.



      I.   Attempt to reposition any disturbed landscaping materials.



      J.   Proceed to the next hydrant.







 



   5.   Procedure (two hydrant test method, to be used for plan review
flow requirements).



      A.   Select the hydrants to be tested.



      B.   Perform light maintenance.



      C.   Hydrants must be flushed prior to beginning flow test.



      D.   Choose which two and one-half-inch discharge will affect
landscaping, traffic and the like the least for flushing the hydrant. Open
the hydrant fully. Close the hydrant slowly after flushing the hydrant.
Attach the pressure cap gauge to the two and one-half-inch discharge. Open
the hydrant fully. Note the pressure on the gauge. This is the static
pressure. Record the static pressure on the hydrant report form.



      E.   On the second hydrant choose which two and one-half-inch
discharge will affect landscaping, traffic and the like the least for
flushing the hydrant. Open the hydrant fully. Close the hydrant slowly after
flushing the hydrant. Install a barrel type pitot gauge on this discharge
opening if you have one or use a pitot tube. Open the hydrant fully.



      F.   With both hydrants open fully note the pressure that is
on the pressure cap gauge. This is the residual pressure. Record the residual
pressure on the hydrant report form.



      G.   Record the pressure reading on the barrel type pitot
gauge. The pressure reading shown is the flow pressure. Record the flow
pressure on the hydrant report form.



      H.   Close both hydrants slowly, remove all equipment and
replace all caps.



      I.   Attempt to reposition any disturbed landscaping materials.



      J.   Proceed to the next hydrants.







 



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



ATTACHMENT E:  PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANT MARKING GUIDELINES.



   1.   Introduction.  To create a uniform marking system for
identifying the special characteristics of the public fire hydrants within
the city. The marking system shall be easily understandable.



   2.   Purpose.  To identify for all Fire Department personnel the
following fire hydrant characteristics:



      A.   Responsible owner, public or private;



      B.   To determine which fire hydrants shall or shall not be
used under fire incident conditions;



and



      C.   To evaluate the characteristics and necessary action
needed for limited water source fire hydrants.



   3.   Definition and usage.  For the purpose of this attachment, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT.  A fire hydrant that is located on private
property and is connected to a public water main by a water meter for billing
purposes and/or anti-backflow device by a pipe larger than six inches in
diameter.



      PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANT.  Any un-metered fire hydrant that is
maintained primarily by Water Department and is operational directly on a
city owned water main.



   4.   Color coding.  Color coding for hydrants will be:



      (1)   All barrels to be painted with a reflective type bright
yellow paint.



      (2)   The tops and nozzle caps shall be painted with the
flowing capacity - indicating color scheme to provide simplicity and
consistency with colors used in signal work for safety, danger and
intermediate condition.



      (3)   For rapid identification at night, the top of the
hydrant and caps shall be marked with a reflective-type material.



      (4)   The following codes will be used to mark the top and
caps of the hydrant.



 

Class AA (1,500 gpm or greater)
 
Light blue


Class A (1,000 gpm to 1,499 gpm)
 
Green


Class B (500 gpm to 999 gpm)
 
Orange


Class C (less than 500 gpm)
 
Red



 



   5.   Reference material.  NFPA Standards and COLFPPO.



   6.   Application area.  City of Lincolnton.



 


Public

 

Public

 

Public






 



 





Yellow/Caps colored to match flow
 
Yellow/Red
 
Yellow/Orange


Test: Yes
 
Test: Yes
 
Test: Yes


Owner Code: C
 
Owner Code: C
 
Owner Code: C


 
(Less than 500 gpm)
 
(500 to 999 gpm)



 



 


Public

 

Public






 





Yellow/Green
 
Yellow/Blue


Test: Yes
 
Test: Yes


Owner Code: C
 
Owner Code: C


(1000 to 1499 gpm)
 
(1500 gpm or greater)



 



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



ATTACHMENT F:  PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT MARKING GUIDELINES.



   1.   Introduction.  To create a uniform marking system for
identifying the special characteristics of the private fire hydrants within
the city. The marking system shall be easily understandable.



   2.   Purpose.  To identify for all Fire Department personnel the
following fire hydrant characteristics:



      A.   Responsible owner, public or private;



      B.   If the fire hydrant is boosted by a fire pump or not;



      C.   To determine which fire hydrants shall or shall not be
used under fire incident conditions; and



      D.   To evaluate the characteristics and necessary action
needed for limited water source fire hydrants.



   3.   Definition and usage.  For the purpose of this attachment, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      BOOSTED FIRE HYDRANT.  A private hydrant by the above
definition, that’s supply pressure is raised from a fire pump that is
operated as part of the fire suppression system on the private property.



         (1)   The property owner is responsible for repairs and
painting.



         (2)   Color for the hydrant will be red barrel with
white caps.



      LIMITED WATER SUPPLY HYDRANT.  A private hydrant by the above
definition, in which the water supply is established from a public water main
six inches or smaller in diameter and/or supplied by a static water source
(pond, lake, elevated, above ground or below ground tanks and the like).



         (1)   The property owner is responsible for repairs and
painting.



         (2)   Color for the hydrant will be red barrel with
yellow caps.



      PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT.  A fire hydrant that is located on private
property and is connected to a public water main by a water meter for billing
purposes and/or anti-backflow device by a pipe larger than six inch in
diameter.



      PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANT.  Any un-metered fire hydrant that is
maintained primarily by the Water Department and is operational directly on a
city owned water main.



         (1)   The property owner is responsible for repairs and
painting;



         (2)   Color for the hydrant will be red barrel with
green caps.



      YARD FIRE HYDRANT.  A fire hydrant that is not equipped with a
large diameter steamer connection for fire apparatus. Is equipped with only
two and one-half-inch thread connections or smaller.



         (1)   The property owner is responsible for repairs and
painting.



         (2)   These hydrants are to be used only to help boost
the fire suppression system.



         (3)   Color for the hydrant will be solid red barrel and
caps.



   4.   Reference material.  NFPA Standards and COLFPPO.



   5.   Application area.  City of Lincolnton.



 


Public

 

Private
(through water meter)

 

Private
(via meter and fire pump boosted)






 



 





Yellow/Caps colored to match flow
 
Red/Green
 
Red/White


Test: Yes
 
Test: No
 
Test: No


Owner Code: C
 
Owner Code: P
 
Owner Code: P



 



 


Private
(six inches and smaller main or limited supply)

 

Private
(two and one-half inch outlet yard hydrant)






 





Red/Yellow
 
All Red


Test: No
 
Test: No


Owner Code: P
 
Owner Code: None


 
(F.D. do not use)



 



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



ATTACHMENT G:  USE OF PYROTECHNICS BEFORE A PROXIMATE AUDIENCE.



   The following NFPA standards shall apply to the use of pyrotechnics in
the performing arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical or similar
productions before a proximate audience, performers or support personnel. The
following NFPA standards also provide requirements for the protection of
property operators, performers, support personnel and the viewing audiences
where flame effects are used indoors or outdoors. The purpose of this
standard is to provide minimum requirements to the operation and
manufacturers for safe operation of flame effects.



   The circumstances of each show or attraction can be unique and can
require individual evaluation when determining the need for protective
systems. Approval of all equipment, installation, operations or procedures
and the need for protective systems or measures will be with the local
authority having jurisdiction. (The Fire Marshal’s Office)



   The following standards and codes will be used to determine if all
requirements are being met.



 




North Carolina Building Code Fire Prevention



Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers
 
(NFPA 10)


Life Safety Code
 
(NFPA 101)


Flame Effects Before an Audience
 
(NFPA 160)


Explosive Materials Code
 
(NFPA 495)


Code for Model Rocketry
 
(NFPA 1122)


Code For Fireworks Display
 
(NFPA 1123)


Code for Manufacture, Transportation and Storage Fireworks/Pyrotechnic
 
(NFPA 1124)


Code for the Manufacture of Model Rocket and High Power Rocket Motors
 
(NFPA 1125)


Standard for the Use of Pyrotechnics before a Proximate Audience
 
(NFPA 1126)


Code for High Power Rocketry
 
(NFPA 1127)




 



   Some other codes and standards that may be used are NFPA 30, 54, 55,
58, 59A and 430.



   The above NFPA numbers or standards or subject to change as NFPA
updates their listings.



   The following information shall be made in writing and shall contain
the following information for fireworks displays and flame effects displays:



      1.   The name of the person, group or organization sponsoring
the production;



      2.   The dates and time of day of the production;



      3.   The name of the person actually in charge of firing the
pyrotechnics;



      4.   The number, names and ages of all assistants who are to
be present;



      5.   The qualifications of the pyrotechnic operator;



      6.   Copy of any applicable state and federal licenses held by
the operator or assistance(s);



      7.   Copy of the permittee’s insurance carrier or financial
responsibility;



      8.   The number and types of devices to be used;



      9.   A diagram of the grounds or facilities where the
productions is to be held NFPA 1126 Chapter 4 4.3.2 (k);



      10.   The manner and place of storage of the pyrotechnic
materials and devices;



      11.   The point of on-site assembly of pyrotechnic devices;



      12.   A material safety data sheet (MSDS) for the pyrotechnic
material(s) to be used;



The information along with some of the above information will be needed when
flame effects are being used indoors or outdoors:



      13.   The design criteria in NFPA 160 Appendix B;



      14.   The exact location of the production;



      15.   The flame effects classification;



      16.   A site plan showing the following:



         (a)   A narrative description of the flame effect;



         (b)   The location of flame effect devices to be fired
and their controls and control sequence;



         (c)   The area affected by the flame effect device;



         (d)   The location of the audience;



         (e)   The fuels and their estimated consumption;



         (f)   Air for combustion and ventilation for indoor
effects;



         (g)   Flammable material piping;



         (h)   Storage and holding areas and their capacities;



         (i)   Supplemental fire protection features;



         (j)   Means of egress;



         (k)   Documentation that combustible materials used for
construction of the flame effects have been rendered flame retardant;



         (l)   Operating instructions shall be available to the
authority having jurisdiction when flame effects are in use.



      17.   A walk-through and a representative demonstration of the
pyrotechnics shall be approved by the authority having jurisdiction before a
permit is approved; and



      18.   A walk-through and a representative demonstration of the
flame effects shall be provided and shall be approved by the authority having
jurisdiction before a permit is approved.



(Ord. O-02-08, passed 6-5-2008)



CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Statutory authority



   152.02   Findings of fact



   152.03   Statement of purpose



   152.04   Objectives



   152.05   Definitions



   152.06   Lands to which this chapter applies



   152.07   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas



   152.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit



   152.09   Compliance



   152.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   152.11   Interpretation



   152.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability



Administration



   152.25   Designation of floodplain administrator



   152.26   Floodplain development application; permit and
certification requirements



   152.27   Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator



   152.28   Corrective procedures



   152.29   Variance procedures



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   152.40   General standards



   152.41   Specific standards



   152.42   Standards for floodplains without established base flood
elevations



   152.43   Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE but without
established floodways or non- encroachment areas



   152.44   Floodways and non-encroachment areas



Legal Status Provisions



   152.55   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood
damage prevention provisions



   152.56   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits



   152.57   Effective date



 



   152.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   The legislature of the state has in G.S. Chapter 143, Article 21, Part
6; G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Parts 3, 5 and 8; and G.S. Chapter 160A,
Article 8 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council does ordain as set out in this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-76)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood prone areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to
floods or other hazards.



(Prior Code, § 4-77)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or that result in
damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
that serve those uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and all other development
that may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Prior Code, § 4-78)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.04  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are:



   (A)   To protect human life, safety and health;



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e.,
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets and
bridges) that are located in flood prone areas;



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of flood prone areas; and



   (G)   To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that
property is in a special flood hazard area.



(Prior Code, § 4-79)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.05  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the
same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.  Garages, carports and
storage sheds are common urban ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.  Pole barns, hay sheds
and the like qualify as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be
located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the
floor area or height of a building or structure.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  A determination of the water surface
elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When
the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be
obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state or other
source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies.  This elevation, when
combined with the freeboard, establishes the regulatory flood protection
elevation.



   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.



   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY.  A building, portion of a building or
exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or
chemically reactive products.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   DISPOSAL.  As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge,
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste
into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part
of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including groundwaters.



   ELEVATED BUILDING.  A non-basement building which has its lowest
elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings or columns.



   ENCROACHMENT.  The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION.  A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the initial effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD INSURANCE.  The insurance coverage provided under the National
Flood Insurance Program.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are
delineated.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if
appropriate), flood hazard risk zones and other flood data in a community
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  The FLOOD INSURANCE
STUDY report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary
and floodway maps (FBFMs), if published.



   FLOOD PRONE AREA.  See FLOODPLAIN.



   FLOODPLAIN.  Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.  The individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.  Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodplain management regulations and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances and other applications of police power.  This
term describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.



   FLOOD ZONE.  A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map
or flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in
the area.



   FREEBOARD. The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to
account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The base flood
elevation plus the FREEBOARD establishes the regulatory flood protection
elevation.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.  A facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water,
limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading
of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair.  The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY.  As defined in G.S. Chapter 130A,
Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment,
recycling, recovery or disposal of hazardous waste.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG).  The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls
of the structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. 



      (1)   Any structure that is:



         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



         (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of
historic landmarks in communities with a certified local government (CLG)
program; or



         (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical
significance of a historic district designated by a community with a
certified local government (CLG) program.



      (2)   Certified local government (CLG) programs are approved
by the U.S. Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina
Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation
Officer as having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966, as amended in 1980.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk or
patio slab immediately next to the building or deck support, after completion
of the building.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that
the enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MARKET VALUE.  The building value, not including the land value and
that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET
VALUE may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost
depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash
value); or adjusted tax assessed values.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of this chapter, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which
base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced.  Refer to each
FIRM panel to determine datum used.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management
regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to those structures.



   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA.  The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot, as designated in the flood insurance study report.



   POST-FIRM.  Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.



   PRE-FIRM.  Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.



   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND/OR NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to the
safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable
number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the
customary manner, of any navigable lake or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV).  A vehicle, which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



   REFERENCE LEVEL.  The top of the lowest floor for structures within
special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  The base flood elevation plus
the freeboard.  In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations
(BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of
freeboard.  In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 



   REMEDY A VIOLATION.  To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.  Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of
this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing
federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.



   SALVAGE YARD.  Any nonresidential property used for the storage,
collection and/or recycling of any type of equipment and including but not
limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.



   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY.  Any facility involved in the disposal
of solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).



   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE.  As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any
place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary
landfill or any other method.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  The land in the floodplain subject
to a 1% or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined
in § 152.07.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual START OF
CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas, liquid or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.  See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement.  This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not,
however, include either:



      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or
community health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the community Code Enforcement Official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.  A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications or other evidence of compliance required in §§ 152.25
through 152.29 and 152.40 through 152.44 is presumed to be in VIOLATION until
such time as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE).  The height, in relation to mean sea
level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of
riverine areas.



   WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. 
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



(Prior Code, § 4-80)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.06  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJs) if applicable,
of the city and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose
governing body agrees, by resolution, to that applicability.



(Prior Code, § 4-81)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.



   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North
Carolina and FEMA in its flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying
flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs), for Lincoln County dated August 16, 2007,
which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-82)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with
the provisions of § 152.07.



(Prior Code, § 4-83)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed
7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.09  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Prior Code, § 4-84)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed
7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions.  However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 4-85)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.11  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 4-86)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration.  Larger floods can and will occur.  Actual flood heights may
be increased by human-made or natural causes.  This chapter does not imply
that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within the
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 4-87)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 152.25  DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Planning Director or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to
as the “Floodplain Administrator,” is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-96)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.26  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION; PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application requirements.  Application for a floodplain
development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any
development activities located within special flood hazard areas.  The
following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply
for a floodplain development permit:



      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed
floodplain development:



         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of
the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures,
utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas,
drainage facilities and other development;



         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as
delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in § 152.07 or a
statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;



         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed
development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined
in § 152.07;



         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or
non-encroachment area(s) as determined in § 152.07;



         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as
set forth in §§ 152.07, 152.27 or 152.42;



         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and



         (g)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered
land surveyor or professional engineer.



      (2)   Proposed elevation and method thereof of all development
within a special flood hazard area including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;



         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any nonresidential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be floodproofed; and



         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.



      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form
81-65) with supporting data and an operational plan that includes, but is not
limited to, installation, exercise and maintenance of floodproofing measures;



      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include
details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this
chapter are met.  These details include but are not limited to:



         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable
(i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation,
open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and



         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with § 152.41(D)(3) when
solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE and A1-30.



      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest
floor;



      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems to
be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;



      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal
permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been
received;



      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles
and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions
of § 152.41(F) and (G) are met; and



      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects
of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if
not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation.



   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall
include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit;



      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the
proposed development in accordance with available data specified in § 152.07;



      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the reference level and all attendant utilities;



      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the protection of all public utilities;



      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;



      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development
shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse,
as applicable;



      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE
or A1-30; and



      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if applicable
(i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only).



   (C)   Certification requirements.



      (1)   Elevation certificates.



         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required prior to the actual start of any new construction.  It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean
sea level.  The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted.  Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by the
permit holder prior to the beginning of construction.  Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny
a floodplain development permit.



         (b)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required after the reference level is established.  Within seven calendar
days of establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty
of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean
sea level.  Any work done within the seven-day calendar period and prior to
submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk.  The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. 
Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed.  Failure
to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be
cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



         (c)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form
81-31) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate
of compliance/occupancy issuance.  It shall be the duty of the permit holder
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted.  Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance.  In some instances, another certification may be required to
certify corrected as-built construction.  Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to
withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.



      (2)   Floodproofing certificate.  If nonresidential
floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting
data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are
required prior to the actual start of any new construction.  It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and
all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level.  Floodproofing
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer or architect and certified by same.  The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan and the
inspection and maintenance plan.  Deficiencies detected by the review shall
be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval.  Failure to submit
the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to
deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with
the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate
of compliance/occupancy.



      (3)   Manufactured homes.  If a manufactured home is placed
within Zones A, AO, AE or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than
36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is
required in accordance with the provisions of § 152.41(C)(2).



      (4)   Alteration or relocation of watercourse.  If a
watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of the extent of
watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer’s certified
report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity
of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and
downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.



      (5)   Certification exemptions.  The following structures, if
located within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the
elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in divisions
(C)(1) and (C)(2) of this division (C):



         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
152.41(F)(1);



         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
152.41(G); and



         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet
meeting requirements of § 152.41(H).



(Prior Code, § 4-97)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed
7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.27  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:



   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue
permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard
areas to assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been
received;



   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Crime
Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of this notification to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);



   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
maintained;



   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment
areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
152.44 are met;



   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new
and substantially improved structures, in accordance with § 152.26(C);



   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of § 152.26(C);



   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities in accordance with the provisions of § 152.26(C);



   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure,
obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 152.26(C) and § 152.41(B);



   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, floodways or non-encroachment
areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. 
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this
subchapter;



   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with § 152.07, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation (BFE) data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area
data available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 152.42(B)(2), in order to administer the provisions
of this chapter;



   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no
floodway or non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with
§ 152.07, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data or
non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter;



   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a
structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood
hazard area is above the base flood elevation, advise the property owner of
the option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. 
Maintain a copy of the letter of map amendment (LOMA) issued by FEMA in the
floodplain development permit file;



   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this chapter and make these records available for public
inspection, recognizing that the information may be subject to the Privacy
Act of 1974, as amended;



   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress.  As the work
pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain
Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary
to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the
local ordinance and the terms of the permit.  In exercising this power, the
Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action;



   (P)   Issue stop-work orders as required.  Whenever a building or
part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in
violation of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to
be immediately stopped.  The stop-work order shall be in writing and
directed to the person doing or in charge of the work.  The stop-work order
shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the
stoppage and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. 
Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor;



   (Q)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required.  The
Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the
reason(s) for the revocation.  Permits shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans and specifications; for
refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit.  Any
floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable
state or local law may also be revoked;



   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard
areas within the jurisdiction of the community.  The Floodplain
Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour
for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;



   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of § 152.28;



   (T)   Review, provide input and make recommendations for variance
requests;



   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not be
limited to, the FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies
adopted in accordance with § 152.07, including any revisions thereto,
including letters of map change, issued by FEMA.  Notify state and FEMA of
mapping needs; and



   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including
letters of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision
(LOMR).



(Prior Code, § 4-98)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.28  CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator
finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her
duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation.  The
owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law
cited in the notification.



   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the
owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action,
the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by
certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by
personal service, stating that:



      (1)   The building or property is in violation of the
floodplain management regulations;



      (2)   A hearing will be held before the Floodplain
Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after
the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard
in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to
the matter; and



      (3)   Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may
issue an order to alter, vacate or demolish the building; or to remove fill
as applicable.



   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held
pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall
find that the building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance set forth in this chapter, he or she shall issue an
order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than
180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that
corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.



   (D)   Appeal.  Any owner who has received an order to take
corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body,
by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the
clerk within ten days following issuance of the final order.  In the absence
of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final.  The
local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may
affirm, modify and affirm or revoke the order.



   (E)   Failure to comply with order.  If the owner of a building or
property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no
appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished at the discretion of the Court.



(Prior Code, § 4-99)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed
7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.29  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Lincolnton Board of Adjustment as established by the city,
hereinafter referred to as the “Appeal Board,” shall hear and decide
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may
appeal the decision to the Court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A.



   (C)   Variances may be issued for:



      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures,
upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and
that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure;



      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet
the definition as stated in § 152.05, provided provisions of §
152.29(I)(2), (3) and (5) have been satisfied and the facilities are
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety; or



      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the
requirements of this section.



   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location
as defined under § 152.05 as a functionally dependent facility, where
applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets
and bridges.



   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.



   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives of this chapter.



   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation
(BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that
construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and
property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage.  The notification shall
be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance.



   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the state upon request.



   (I)   Conditions for variances:



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will
make the structure in violation of other federal, state or local laws,
regulations or ordinances.



      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway or non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development
permit approval.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities
or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards and chemical
storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas, provided
that all of the following conditions are met.



      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.



      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the
special flood hazard area.



      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or
floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal,
state and local laws.



      (5)   The city has notified the Secretary of the North
Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to
grant a variance at least 30 calendar days prior to granting the variance.



(Prior Code, § 4-100)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed
7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 152.99



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 152.40  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required.



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
and lateral movement of the structure.



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.



   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation.  These
include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes,
utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters and electric outlets/switches.



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.



   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair,
reconstruction or replacement of a building or structure existing on the
effective date of this chapter and located totally or partially within the
floodway, non-encroachment area or stream setback, provided there is no
additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in
the floodway, non-encroachment area or stream setback, and provided that the
repair, reconstruction or replacement meets all of the other requirements of
this chapter.



   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage facilities shall
not be permitted, except by variance as specified in § 152.29(J).  A
structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use
or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment
facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure
or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood
protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
152.26(C).



   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies
for which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.



   (O)    When a structure is partially located in a special flood
hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new
construction and substantial improvements.



   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or
in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the
provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest
base flood elevation shall apply.



(Prior Code, § 4-111)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed
7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.41  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data
has been provided, as set forth in § 152.07 or § 152.42, the following
provisions, in addition to the provisions of § 152.40, are required:



   (A)   Residential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in § 152.05.



   (B)   Nonresidential construction.  New construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no
lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
152.05.  Structures located in A, AE, AO and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed
to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided
that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy.  A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this division (B)
are satisfied.  The certification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator as set forth in § 152.26(C), along with the operational and
maintenance plans.



   (C)   Manufactured homes.



      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated
so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in § 152.05.



      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement, either by certified engineered foundation system or in accordance
with the most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for
Manufactured Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S.
§ 143-143.15.  Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an
elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the
chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. 
When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an
engineering certification is required.



      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall
meet the requirements of § 152.41(D).



      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of
all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas.
This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator
and the local Emergency Management coordinator.



   (D)   Elevated buildings.  Fully enclosed area, of new construction
and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:



      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but
shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. 
Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for
parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment
(standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or
elevator).  The interior portion of the enclosed area shall not be finished
or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;



      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant
materials;



      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE and A1-30, flood
openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  To meet this requirement,
the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:



         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides
of each enclosed area subject to flooding;



         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be
at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;



         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area,
each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to
automatically enter and exit;



         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be
no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade;



         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
flow of floodwaters in both directions; and



         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not
considered enclosures for regulatory purposes and therefore do not require
flood openings.  Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural
status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined
above.



   (E)   Additions/improvements.



      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures,
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more nonconforming than the existing structure; or



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications
to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.



      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures,
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; or



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



   (F)   Recreational vehicles.  Recreational vehicles shall either:



      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be
fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect type utilities and has no permanently attached
additions); or



      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.



   (G)   Temporary nonresidential structures.  Prior to the issuance
of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant
must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of the
structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood
warning notification.  The following information shall be submitted in
writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:



      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will
be permitted.  Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to
one year;



      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;



      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure
will be removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);



      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with
the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and



      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location
outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will
be moved.



   (H)   Accessory structures. 



      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages and
the like) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following
criteria shall be met:



         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human
habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);



         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be
temperature-controlled;



         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low
flood damage potential;



         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters;



         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with the provisions of § 152.40(A);



         (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be
installed in accordance with the provisions of § 152.40(D); and



         (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory
flood protection elevation in conformance with the provisions of §
152.41(D)(3).



      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150
square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an
elevation or floodproofing certificate.  Elevation or floodproofing
certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance
with § 152.26(C).



(Prior Code, § 4-112)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed
7-12-2007)



§ 152.42  STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD
ELEVATIONS.



   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A
and established in § 152.07, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the
provisions of § 152.40, shall apply:



   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a
distance of 20 feet each side from top of the bank or five times the width of
the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; and



   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria:



      (1)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from
other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within the
areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and
shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in §§ 152.40
and 152.41;



      (2)   When floodway data is available from a federal, state or
other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within
floodway areas shall also comply with requirements of §§ 152.41 and 152.44;



      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other
development proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if
development is greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured
home sites.  The base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by
reference in accordance with § 152.07 and utilized in implementing this
chapter; and



      (4)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available
from a federal, state or other source as outlined above, the reference level
shall be elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in § 152.05. All other applicable
provisions of § 152.41 shall also apply.



(Prior Code, § 4-113)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991; Ord. O-02-07, passed
7-12-2007)



§ 152.43  STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BFE BUT WITHOUT
ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.



   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is
available from another source, but neither floodway nor non-encroachment
areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the
FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within
these areas:



   (A)   Standards of §§ 152.40 and 152.41; and



   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is
designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or other development shall be permitted unless certification
with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is
provided, demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.



(Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.44  FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.



   (A)   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are
located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 152.07.  The
floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the
velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and
potential projectiles. 



   (B)   The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in
§§ 152.40 and 152.41, shall apply to all development within these areas:



      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:



         (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of
the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain
Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or



         (b)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has
been approved by FEMA.  A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be
obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment.



      (2)   If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all development
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this
chapter.



      (3)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except
replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, provided the following provisions are met:



         (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
152.41(C); and



         (b)   The non-encroachment standard of division (B)(1)
of this section.



(Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS



§ 152.55  EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION PROVISIONS.



   (A)   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of
the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted December 1,
1981 as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact
and continue to enforce without interruption of the existing provisions, so
that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and
may be enforced.  The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action,
suit or proceeding instituted or pending.  All provisions of the flood
damage prevention ordinance of the city enacted on December 1, 1981, as
amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.



   (B)   The date of the initial flood damage prevention ordinance for
each municipal jurisdiction within the county is as follows:  City of
Lincolnton—December 1, 1981.



(Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.56  EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under
the outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date
of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.57  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall become effective August 16, 2007.



(Ord. O-02-07, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions,
shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Any person who violates this chapter or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined as set forth in the fee schedule or imprisoned for not more than 30
days, or both.  Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.



(Prior Code, § 4-88)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1991)



CHAPTER 153:  UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE



Section



General Provisions



   153.001   Authority and enactment clause



   153.002   Short title



Jurisdiction



   153.015   Jurisdiction



   153.016   Purpose



Definitions



   153.030   Interpretation of terms and words



   153.031   Definitions of specific terms and words



General Requirements



   153.045   Customary home occupations



   153.046   Screening



   153.047   Landscaping



   153.048   Screening and landscaping required prior to issuance of
certificate of compliance



   153.049   Fences or walls permitted



   153.050   Lot to abut a dedicated street



   153.051   One principal building



   153.052   Visibility at intersections



   153.053   Temporary structures and uses



   153.054   Height calculations and exceptions



   153.055   Relief of front yard setback for certain dwellings



   153.056   Outdoor lighting



   153.057   Accessory structures



   153.058   Construction begun prior to adoption of chapter



   153.059   Reduction of lot and yard areas prohibited



   153.060   Use of manufactured homes and similar structures



   153.061   Uses not expressly permitted or conditional



   153.062   Location of required yards on irregular lots



   153.063   Vibration



   153.064   Noise



   153.065   Odor



   153.066   Yard sales



   153.067   Yard requirements not applicable to essential services,
Class I



   153.068   Accessory day care center



   153.069   Commercial vehicles



   153.070   Canopies in NB, GB, PB and GMC Districts



   153.071   Canopies and awnings in CB, CBT District



   153.072   Subdivisions in the R-25 District in excess of 35 lots



   153.073   Wrecked or junked vehicles



   153.074   Supplementary requirements for development in the Central
Business and Transitional Business Districts



   153.075   Supplemental regulations for retail establishments in
excess of 85,000 square feet gross floor area



Establishment of Zoning Districts



   153.090   Introduction



   153.091   General zoning districts



   153.092   Overlay districts



   153.093   CU parallel conditional use districts



Zoning District Regulations



   153.105   R-25 Rural Residential District



   153.106   R-15 Single-Family Low Density Residential District



   153.107   R-10 Single-Family Medium Density Residential District



   153.108   R-8 Single and Two-Family Medium Density Residential
District



   153.109   RMF Residential Multi-Family District



   153.110   R-O Residential Office District



   153.111   O-I Office Institutional District



   153.112   N-B Neighborhood Business District



   153.113   C-B Central Business District



   153.114   CBT Central Business Transitional District



   153.115   G-B General Business District



   153.116   P-B Planned Business District



   153.117   GMC General Manufacturing and Commercial District



   153.118   ROS Residential Office Single-Family



   153.119   MHO Manufactured Home Overlay District



   153.120   SH Special Highway Overlay District



   153.121   WSW Water Supply Watershed Overlay District



   153.122   Historic Overlay HO District



Nonconformities



   153.135   Purpose and applicability



   153.136   Nonconforming uses other than manufactured home parks,
signs and junk yards



   153.137   Nonconforming structures



   153.138   Nonconforming accessory structures and uses



   153.139   Nonconforming lots



   153.140   Screening and landscaping



   153.141   Nonconforming off-street parking and/or loading



   153.142   Nonconforming manufactured home (mobile home) parks



   153.143   Nonconforming signs



   153.144   Exceptions to required removal after a specified period of
time (amortization)



   153.145   Nonconforming junkyards



Signs



   153.160   General intent



   153.161   Sign illumination



   153.162   Unsafe signs



   153.163   Sign area



   153.164   Sign height



   153.165   Permit required and code compliance



   153.166   Signs not requiring permit



   153.167   Prohibited signs



   153.168   Signs permitted in all Residential (R) Districts



   153.169   Signs permitted in the O-I, N-B, G-B, P-B and GMC Districts



   153.170   Signs permitted in the C-B Central Business District and
the CBT Central Business Transitional District



   153.171   Signs in the SH Special Highway Overlay District



   153.172   Specifications for signs requiring a permit



   153.173   Hotel and lodging facilities sign provisions



   153.174   Additional provision for church signs



Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements



   153.185   Off-street parking requirements



   153.186   Driveways for all uses other than one or two-family
residential



   153.187   Off-street loading requirements



   153.188   Conditional use permits for off-street parking in
residential zones



Manufactured Home Parks



   153.200   Compliance with this part



   153.201   Manufactured home park site plan and application approval



   153.202   Standards



Planned Developments



   153.215   Planned residential developments



   153.216   Planned unit developments (mixed use)



   153.217   Application requirements and review procedures



   153.218   Planned developments in Water Supply Watershed Overlay
District; cluster developments



   153.219   Traditional neighborhood developments



   153.220   Transitional infill developments



Conditional Uses



   153.235   Conditional uses



   153.236   Procedures



   153.237   City Council decision



   153.238   Additional review criteria



   153.239   Binding effect



   153.240   Certificate of occupancy



   153.241   One-year limitation on re-application



   153.242   Change in conditional use permit



   153.243   Implementation of condition use permit



   153.244   Changes in conditional uses within shopping centers



Zoning Administration



   153.255   Administrator



   153.256   Certificate of compliance



   153.257   Designation of Class A status for placement of
manufactured homes on individual lots



   153.258   Site plan review requirements



   153.259   Right of appeal



   153.260   Remedies



   153.261   Complaints regarding violations



Board of Adjustment



   153.275   Powers, duties and procedures



   153.276   Administrative review



   153.277   Variances



   153.278   Relief to dimensional regulations for authentic
restoration or reconstruction of off-street parking requirements in an HO
Historic Overlay District



   153.279   Nonconformities



   153.280   Application procedure



   153.281   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment



Historic District Commission



   153.295   Creation



   153.296   Tenure



   153.297   Qualifications



   153.298   Meetings



   153.299   Attendance of meetings



   153.300   Rules of procedure



   153.301   Annual report, required



   153.302   Meeting minutes



   153.303   Commission powers



Amendments



   153.315   Amendments to text and map



   153.316   Additional provisions pertaining to parallel conditional
use zoning amendments



Legal Status Provisions



   153.330   Conflict with other laws



   153.331   Separability



   153.332   Effective date



Implementation of the Statutory Vested Right Provisions of G.S. § 160A-385.1



   153.345   Purpose



   153.346   Definitions



   153.347   Establishment of a zoning vested right



   153.348   Approval; procedures and approval authority



   153.349   Duration



   153.350   Termination



   153.351   Voluntary annexation



   153.352   Limitations



   153.353   Repealer



   153.354   Effective date



Subdivision Regulations



   153.370   Authority, purpose and conflict with other laws



   153.371   Plats to be approved



   153.372   Thoroughfare plan



   153.373   School sites on land use plan



   153.374   Zoning and other plans



   153.375   General procedure for plat approval



   153.376   Statement by owner



   153.377   Issuance of building permits on subdivision lots



   153.378   Waivers and modifications



   153.379   Plat shall be required on any subdivision of land



   153.380   Approval prerequisite to plat recordation



   153.381   Appeals



   153.382   Procedure for review of minor subdivisions



   153.383   Submission and review procedure for major subdivisions
sketch plan



   153.384   Preliminary major subdivision plat submission and review



   153.385   Final subdivision plat submission and review



   153.386   Planning unit developments (PUDs) and planned residential
developments (PRDs)



   153.387   Information to be contained in or depicted on preliminary
and final plats



   153.388   Recombination of land



   153.389   Resubdivision procedures



   153.390   General



   153.391   Suitability of land



   153.392   Name duplication



   153.393   Subdivision design



   153.394   Easements



   153.395   Street standards



   153.396   Water and sewer systems



   153.397   Stormwater drainage systems



   153.398   Other requirements



 



   153.999   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority to enact zoning provisions, see G.S. § 160A-381



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.001  AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE.



   Zoning provisions enacted herein are under the authority of G.S. §
160A-381, which extend to cities the authority to enact regulations that
promote the health, welfare and safety of the community. It is further
authorized under G.S. § 160A-382 that cities are allowed to regulate and
restrict the erection, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of
buildings, structures or land. This section further authorizes the
establishment of overlay districts in which additional regulations may be
imposed upon properties that lie within the boundary of that district. The
General Statutes also require that all regulations be uniform for each class
or type of building throughout each district, but that the regulations in one
district may differ from those in other districts.



(Prior UDO, § 1)



§ 153.002  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the zoning regulations
of the city.



(Prior UDO, § 2)



JURISDICTION



§ 153.015  JURISDICTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits
of the city and within the territory beyond the corporate limits as now or
hereafter fixed, the territory being more particularly described on the
city’s official zoning map as certified by the City Clerk. The area shall
also be referred to as the planning jurisdiction of the city. The planning
jurisdiction boundary lines shown on the map shall be incorporated and made a
part of this chapter as if fully set out herein.



(Prior UDO, § 3.1)



§ 153.016  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of the zoning regulations shall be to regulate the
height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the
size of yards and other spaces; the density of population; the location and
use of buildings, structures and land for trade and residence, and other
purposes, so as to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from
fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to
provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid
undue concentration of population; to promote desirable living conditions and
the sustained stability of neighborhoods; to discourage blight; to conserve
the value of buildings and land; to facilitate the adequate and economic
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
facilities and services; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land,
buildings, and other structures within the planning jurisdiction of this
chapter.



   (B)   The zoning districts as depicted on the city’s official
zoning map have been made with due consideration of future growth,
development, and change in land development according to objectives expressed
in the general plan for the development of the community, as well as with due
consideration of existing development and uses of land in the city and its
planning jurisdiction and uses of land in adjacent areas.



   (C)   These regulations and districts represent reasonable
consideration of the character of the districts and their peculiar
suitability for particular uses of land and have been made with a view to
preserving the existing environment and/or assuring the development of a
future environment that realizes the greatest possible use and enjoyment of
land on individual properties. This is balanced against the necessary
protection of the values of buildings and land and the use and enjoyment of
land on adjacent properties and with the objective of promoting and
protecting the public welfare through the regulation of land use and the
process of land development.



(Prior UDO, § 3.2)



DEFINITIONS



§ 153.030  INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS.



   (A)   Generally.  For the purpose of interpreting this chapter,
certain words or terms are herein defined. The definitions shall apply to the
usage of words throughout this chapter except where specifically exempted.
Definitions, as they are to be applied to specific sections of the chapter,
are found in §§ 153.121(B) and 153.346.



   (B)   Interpretation of terms and words.



      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.



      (2)   Words used in the singular number include the plural,
and words used in the plural number include the singular, unless the context
of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise.



      (3)   The word PERSON includes a firm, association,
organization, partnership, corporation, trust and company as well as an
individual.



      (4)   The word LOT includes the word PLOT or PARCEL.



      (5)   The word BUILDING includes the word STRUCTURE.



      (6)   The words SHALL and MUST are always mandatory (and not
merely directory). The word MAY is directory and not mandatory.



      (7)   The words USED or OCCUPIED as applied to any land or
building shall be construed to include the words INTENDED, ARRANGED, DESIGNED
OR DESIGNATED TO BE USED OR OCCUPIED.



      (8)   The word MAP or ZONING MAP or CITY ZONING MAP shall mean
the official zoning map of the City of Lincolnton, North Carolina.



      (9)   Any word denoting gender includes the female and the
male.



      (10)   The term CITY COUNCIL shall mean the City Council of
Lincolnton, North Carolina.



      (11)   The term PLANNING BOARD shall mean the Planning Board
of the City of Lincolnton, North Carolina.



      (12)   The term BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT shall mean the Board of
Adjustment of the City of Lincolnton, North Carolina.



      (13)   The term LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN shall mean the
Lincolnton land development plan adopted by the Lincolnton City Council on
July 13, 2003, and any amendments thereto.



      (14)   The term ADMINISTRATOR shall mean the Zoning
Administrator of the City of Lincolnton, North Carolina and/or the
Subdivision Administrator of the City of Lincolnton, North Carolina.
Furthermore, this position may also be referred to as the Unified Development
Administrator.



      (15)   The term PLANNING DEPARTMENT shall mean the Planning
Department of the City of Lincolnton, North Carolina.



      (16)   The term CITY MANAGER shall mean the City Manager of
the City of Lincolnton, North Carolina.



      (17)   The term DEEDS OFFICE shall mean the Office of the
Register of Deeds of Lincoln County, North Carolina.



      (18)   The term BUILDING SIDE shall include front, rear, right
and left sides unless otherwise noted.



      (19)   Where there is a discrepancy between the text in this
chapter and an illustration that is used to depict the text, the text shall
prevail.



(Prior UDO, § 4.1)



§ 153.031  DEFINITIONS OF SPECIFIC TERMS AND WORDS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Except
where specifically noted, the following is a list of terms and words used in
this chapter. All words not specifically defined in this chapter shall be
assigned their customary dictionary definitions. Additional definitions are
found in §§ 153.121(B) and 153.346.



   ABANDONMENT.  A use shall be deemed to be abandoned when:



      (1)   The use is discontinued for a consecutive period of 180
days;



      (2)   The premises are devoted to another use;



      (3)   When the characteristic equipment and furnishings of the
nonconforming nonresidential use have been removed from the premises and have
not been replaced by the same or similar equipment within 30 days; or



      (4)   Failure to take all positive action to resume the
nonconforming use with reasonable dispatch, including the failure to
advertise the property for sale or for lease.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure detached from the principal
structure on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal structure.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use customarily and clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with
the principal use or building.



   ADMINISTRATOR, UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT.  The administrative official(s)
appointed by the City Manager of the City of Lincolnton to administer this
chapter. This person(s) may also be referred to as the ADMINISTRATOR.



   ADULT CABARET.  Any place featuring topless dancers, go-go dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators or entertainers displaying SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS as defined by G.S. § 14-202.10 as the statute may be
amended from time to time, or other similar entertainers.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place as defined by G.S. § 14-202.10 as the
statute may be amended from time to time, including adult cabarets, except
that the definition of massage business shall not include any establishment
or business where massage is practiced that is a health club, exercise
studio, hospital, physical therapy business or other similar health-related
business. ADULT ESTABLISHMENT specifically includes, however, any massage
business where massages are rendered by any person exhibiting specified
anatomical areas. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS are those defined by G.S. §
14-202.10 as the statute may be amended from time to time.



   AGRICULTURE USES.  The commercial production, keeping or maintenance,
of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages
and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products;
poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine,
horses, ponies, mules, goats or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including
the breeding and grazing of any or all or the animals; bees and apiary
products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds,
including nuts and vegetables; nursery, floral and ornamental products; or
lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program.



   ALLEY.  A public or private way that affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.



   ALTERATION.  A change in the size, configuration, or location of a
structure; or a change in the use of a structure or lot from a previously
approved or legally existing size, configuration, location or use.



   ANIMAL HOSPITAL.  A place where animals are given medical or surgical
treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care
incidental to the hospital use. All facilities associated with an animal
hospital shall be located indoors.



   ANIMAL KENNEL.  A commercial enterprise where more than six dogs or
other domesticated animals are groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold.



   ARCADE, AMUSEMENT CENTER or GAME ROOM.  An establishment operated for
profit where two or more billiard tables or ten or more other type amusement
devices and/or games of skill such as video games, pinball or table games,
are provided for public use. This definition shall be construed to include
facilities for the conduct of bingo gaming as a principal use.



   ATRIUM HOUSE.  Attached or semi-attached one-story house on a small
lot, the lot having a small yard space that is surrounded by the house and
its privacy walls. As distinguished from the patio house, an ATRIUM HOUSE is
always one-story, its yard space and lot size is usually smaller, and it is
always attached (to another unit) in some fashion.



   AUTO HOBBYIST.  One who collects, repairs or alters automobiles to
which he or she holds title for enjoyment, and not for commercial purposes,
as an incidental, use on the premises where the person resides.



   AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP.  Any building, premises and land in which or
upon which a business is conducted that primarily involves the painting of
vehicles or external repairing of damaged vehicles.



   AUTOMOBILE GARAGE, REPAIR AND SERVICE.  Any building, premises and/or
land in which or upon which a business is conducted involving the maintenance
or servicing of vehicles.



   AUTOMOBILE PARTS SUPPLY STORE.  An establishment that sells new and/or
rebuilt automobile parts and accessories but does not include junkyards, used
auto parts sales, or the installation of parts.



   AWNING.  A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed
to a building in a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted from
a building to a flat position against the building, but not a canopy.



   BAIL BOND SERVICE. An establishment that provides surety, pledge money,
property or other financial transfers for the purpose of securing the release
from jail of an accused defendant pending trial.



   BANNER.  A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame,
possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to
plastic or fabric of any kind, excluding flags and emblems of political,
professional, religious, educational or corporate organizations.



   BED AND BREAKFAST.  A use that:



      (1)   Takes place within a building that at any time prior to
the establishment, was designed and used as a single-family residence;



      (2)   Consists of renting one or more dwelling rooms on a
daily basis to tourists, vacationers and similar transients;



      (3)   Where the provision of meals, if provided at all, is
limited to the breakfast meal, available only to guests; and



      (4)   Where the bed and breakfast operation is conducted
primarily by persons who reside in the dwelling unit, with the assistance of
not more than the equivalent of two full-time employees.



   BLOCK.  A piece of land bounded on one or more sides by streets or
roads.



   BOARDING HOUSE.  A building where, for compensation, rooms and/or
meals are provided for not less than three persons and not more than 12
persons; provided however, the operator or owner must reside within a
separate dwelling unit within the building.



   BUILDING.  An structure temporary or permanent, having a roof or other
covering supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing
or enclosure of any person, animal, process, equipment, goods, materials or
chattels of any kind or nature. The term BUILDING shall be construed as if
followed by the words OR PARTS THEREOF.



   BUILDING, ACCESSORY.  A building subordinate to the main building on a
lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or principal
building and located on the same lot therewith.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance from the mean elevation of the
finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of a flat
roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level
between eaves and ridges for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A building in which is conducted the principal
use on the lot on which the building is situated. In a residential district,
any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be deemed to be the PRINCIPAL
BUILDING on the lot where it is located.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  A line establishing the minimum allowable
distance between the nearest portion of any building, including porches, (but
excluding steps, ramps, bay windows, awnings, and HVAC equipment) and the
nearest edge of the street right-of-way when measured perpendicularly thereto.



   BUILDING WALL.  The entire surface area, including windows and doors,
of an exterior wall of a building. For the purposes of this chapter, the area
of a wall will be calculated for a maximum of 50 feet in height of a building.



   BULLETIN BOARD.  A sign used to announce meetings or programs to be
held on the premises of a church, school, auditorium, library, museum,
community recreation center, or similar noncommercial places of public
assembly.



   BUSINESS PARK.  A development on a tract of land which contains two or
more separate office buildings, constructed and managed in an integrated and
coordinated basis. A BUSINESS PARK may also be cited as an office park.



   CANOPY.  A permanent structure, other than an awning, attached or
unattached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons or
automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall. A CANOPY is not a
completely enclosed structure.



   CARNIVAL.  A traveling enterprise offering amusements.



   CEMETERY.  Property used for the internment of the dead, which use may
include the commercial sale and location of burial lots, crypts or vaults for
use exclusively on the subject property. A CEMETERY shall not be used for the
preparation or embalming of bodies or the cremation of bodies. Setbacks for
cemeteries shall be measured from the nearest structure or gravesite.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.  A certificate issued by the Historic
District Commission indicating its approval of plans for alteration,
construction, removal or demolition of a landmark or of a structure within a
HO - Historic Overlay District.



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.  A document issued by the city allowing the
occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has
been constructed or will be used in compliance with this chapter and all
other applicable regulations.



   CHECK CASHING ESTABLISHMENT. A business, other than a bank or financial
institution, that cashes checks, drafts, and money orders for a fee, service
charge, or other consideration regulated pursuant to the provisions of G.S.
Ch. 53, Art. 22.



   CHILD ADVOCACY CENTER.  A facility providing treatment and resources
for child abuse victims and non-offended family members. Facilities housed in
the center include staff offices, medical exam rooms, forensic interview
rooms and other similar facilities.



   CHURCH/HOUSE OF WORSHIP.  A building or structure, or group of
buildings or structures, which by design and construction are primarily
intended for conducting organized religious services whose site may include
an accessory area for the interment of the dead.



   CIRCUS.  A large enclosed area used especially for sports and animal
performances.



   CLUSTER HOUSING.  A development pattern where the dwelling units are
grouped or clustered on a density basis for the total land area of the
development, rather than spread evenly throughout the site on a lot-by-lot
basis. A CLUSTER HOUSING DEVELOPMENT includes permanent open space usually
owned and maintained by a homeowner’s association or the developer.



   COMMUNITY CENTER.  A building used for recreational, social,
educational and cultural activities, usually owned and operated by a public
or non-profit group or agency.



   CONDITIONAL USE.  Any use authorized by a conditional use permit.



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT (CUP).  A special authorization for a specific
use (other than a permitted use) within the zoning district, which is subject
to any special restrictions or conditions on its location, size, extent or
character of use as determined by the City Council in order to ensure
consistency with the intent and character of the zoning district in which the
use is located.



   CONDOMINIUM.  A building, or a group of buildings, in which units are
owned individually and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned
by all of the owners on a proportional basis.



   CONSTRUCTION.  The act of adding an addition to an existing structure
or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or
property.



   CONSTRUCTION TRAILER.  A structure standing on wheels towed or hauled
by another vehicle which is used for neither overnight nor year round
occupancy and is used exclusively at a construction project on a temporary
basis for office or storage purposes.



   CONTIGUOUS.  Next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary, or
portion thereof, which is contiguous including properties traversed or
separated by a road, stream, right-of-way or similar manmade or natural
configuration.



   CONTINUING CARE COMMUNITIES.  Also called LIFE CARE COMMUNITIES and
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITIES, these complexes include independent
living units (apartments, condominiums, or cottages), assisted living
(domiciliary care) facilities and/or nursing home beds. Residents may pay an
entry fee which purchases a housing unit that can be used for the rest of
their lives or units may be made available on a rental basis. If owned, the
unit often reverts back to the development owner upon the death of the
resident or surviving spouse.



   CONVENIENCE STORE.  A one-story retail store containing less than
3,600 square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell
primarily fuel, food (packaged and/or prepared), beverages and other
household supplies to customers who purchase a relatively few items (in
contrast to a super market). It is designed to attract, and depends upon, a
large volume of stop-and-go traffic. If fuel is sold, the sale of fuel shall
be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. See definition of
EXPRESS FUEL/MINI-MART.



   COPY SERVICE.  An establishment that provides photocopying, facsimile
transmission (FAX), typing and/or word processing services and may provide
light duty printing service through the use of small offset presses (e.g.,
printing of business cards, envelopes, forms, and other documents as opposed
to heavy duty commercial printing). No printing machine noises are heard or
vibrations felt outside the building in which a copy service is located.



   COUNTRY CLUB.  A land area and buildings containing recreational
facilities, clubhouses and usual accessory uses, open to members and their
guests.



   CROSSWALK.  A specially paved or marked path for pedestrians crossing
a road.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A street containing a turnaround at the end or the
turnaround located at the end of a street.



   CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION.  Any use of a commercial service
customarily conducted within a dwelling (except as otherwise specifically
provided for in this chapter) by the residents thereof, which is clearly
secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change
the character thereof or have any exterior physical, visual, audible or other
sensory evidence of the secondary use; where no power other than that used in
the home is used; where no signs other than one unlighted sign not in excess
of three square feet is displayed; where no merchandise or other articles are
stored in the open or in accessory resident buildings or are displayed for
advertising purposes; where no assistants other than family members are
employed or otherwise report for work; and which an area equivalent of not
more than 25% of the principal building is used.



   DAY CARE CENTER.  A place where daytime care is provided to six or
more children, older adults or adults with disabilities unrelated by blood or
marriage to, and not the legal wards or foster children of the attendant
adult, within an occupied residence. Care recipients who are related by blood
or marriage to the attendant adult shall not be counted as patrons of the DAY
CARE CENTER.



   DAY CARE CENTER, ACCESSORY.  A day care center facility located on the
premises or adjacent to the premises of an office use, institutional use,
commercial use, industrial use or group development for the primary purpose
of care for the dependents of employees of a commercial, office,
institutional or industrial use or of persons employed with a group
development. Two or more businesses may jointly operate or sponsor one
ACCESSORY DAY CARE CENTER. At least 50% of the clients enrolled shall be
dependent of employees of the establishment(s) or of businesses within the
group development sponsoring the facility.



   DAY CARE CENTER, SMALL GROUP.  A place where daytime care is provided
to not more than five children unrelated by blood or marriage to, and not the
legal wards or faster children of the attendant adult, within an occupied
residence. Children who are related by blood or marriage to the attendant
adult shall not be counted as patrons of the SMALL GROUP DAY CARE CENTER.



   DEMOLITION.  Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a
landmark or a structure on a lot or property.



   DENSITY GROSS.  A ratio expressed as the number of dwelling units per
gross acre. The ratio is derived by dividing the total number of dwelling
units by the total land area (in acres) used or proposed to be used for
purposes such as buildings, road, facilities and open spaces.



   DOMESTIC VIOLENCE SHELTER.  A structure providing temporary habitation
for not more than 15 people, including family members, who are victims of
domestic violence.



   DUPLEX.  See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED.  A single-family dwelling attached to two or more
one-family dwellings by common vertical walls.



   DWELLING, DETACHED.  A dwelling unit that is developed with open yards
on all sides including modular homes but not including manufactured homes.



   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.  A building, or portion thereof, used or
designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of
each other in separate dwelling units, including apartments, townhouses and
condominiums.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A detached building designed for or occupied
exclusively by one family, but not to include manufactured homes as defined
by this chapter.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A building arranged or designed to be occupied
by two families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A room or combination of rooms designed for year-round
habitation, containing self-sufficient bathroom and kitchen facilities,
connected to all required utilities, and designed for or used as a residence
by one family.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation,
or persons of the right to use a specified portion of a tract or tracts of
land for a specified purpose.



   ENGINEER, CITY.  As designated by the City Council, a consultant or
consulting firm(s) or city employee engaged or hired to provide engineering
services for the city.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES.



      (1)   Publicly or privately-owned facilities or systems for
the distribution of gas, electricity, steam, or water; the collection and
disposal of sewage or refuse; the transmission of communications; or similar
functions necessary for the provision of public services. Radio transmission
facilities for use by ham radio operators or two-way radio facilities for
business or governmental communications shall be deemed accessory uses and
not ESSENTIAL SERVICES, provided no transmitter or antenna tower exceeds 100
feet in height.



      (2)   ESSENTIAL SERVICES are divided into the following three
classes:



         (a)   Class I.  Transmission lines (whether,
subterranean or overhead) including electrical, natural gas, and water
distribution lines; sewer gravity lines and pressure mains; underground
septic tanks and drain fields, cable television and telephone transmission
lines; or similar utility lines.



         (b)   Class II.  Booster stations, pumping stations,
switching facilities, substations, lift stations, or other similarly required
facilities in connection with telephone, electric steam, water, sewer or
other similar utilities.



         (c)   Class III.  Generation, production or treatment
facilities such as power plants, sewage treatment plats, radio and television
transmission towers, or similar utilities; operations centers for providers
of essential services; and solid waste deposit stations where solid waste is
deposited by the public in containers prior to the waste being hauled to
another facility for disposal.



   EXPRESS FUEL/MINI MART.  A one-story retail store containing less than
3,600 square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell a
large volume of fuel and may also sell prepared and/or packaged foods,
beverages, and household and picnic supplies, and automobile incidentals. It
is designed to attract and depends upon a large volume of fueling and
stop-and-go traffic. Automotive mechanical and/or maintenance services are
not provided. Any retail business which generally meets the forgoing
description and which sells fuel between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00
a.m. shall be deemed an EXPRESS FUEL/MINI-MART.



   FAMILY.  An individual, or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive
of household servants; or a group of not more than six persons who need not
be related by blood, marriage or adoption living together as a single
housekeeping unit.



   FAMILY CARE HOME.  A home with support and supervisory personnel that
provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family
environment for not more than six resident persons with disabilities, the
person with disabilities defined in G.S. § 168-21(2).



   FAMILY THEME PARK.  An amusement and recreational facility with both
indoor and outdoor amusements and including but not limited to enclosed game
rooms, miniature 18 hole golf courses, batting cages, go-cart tracks, and
remote controlled miniature car and boat operation facilities.



   FARMERS’ MARKET.



      (1)   FARMERS’ MARKET (SMALL SCALE).  A market (normally
conducted outdoors) on pre-established dates at which locally and regionally
grown fruits and vegetables are sold on a retail basis. Baked good items and
handmade crafts may also be sold but may not constitute a majority of total
sales.



      (2)   FARMERS’ MARKET (LARGE SCALE).  A market (normally
with both indoor and outdoor facilities) normally with daily operating hours
at which locally and regionally grown fruits and vegetables are sold on a
retail basis. Baked good items, handmade crafts, produce items not native to
the region, and other retail items may also be sold but may not constitute a
majority of total sales.



   FEED AND FLOUR MILLS.  An establishment at which feed and grain are
milled and stored.



   FEED AND SEED STORE.  A retail establishment at which animal feed,
crop seeds and related products are sold. The milling or grinding of feed or
flour at the establishments shall be prohibited as shall the storage of
milled products.



   FINANCE COMPANY.  A commercial establishment that makes short and long
term loans to individuals.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.  A commercial bank, a mortgage bank, a savings
bank, a savings and loan association, or a credit union any of which are
licensed, insured or chartered by the United States of America or the state.



   FLAG.  A piece of durable fabric of distinctive design attached to a
permanent pole that is used as a symbol or decorative feature.



   FLEA MARKET.  An open-air market for new and/or second-hand articles
and goods sold by one or more merchants that is conducted on an open
nonresidential lot. Occasional yard sales conducted by individuals or
nonprofit organizations shall not be deemed FLEA MARKETS, provided the yard
sales are not conducted on more than six days per year or in the case of
nonprofit organizations not more than ten days per year.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR).  The gross floor area of all buildings on a
lot divided by the lot area. When computing this figure, the gross floor area
of all enclosed parking deck buildings shall be excluded.



   FLORIST.  A retail commercial establishment where flowers or
ornamental plants are sold indoors.



   FREEWAY BUSINESS SIGN.  A sign which directs attention to an activity
upon the premises where the sign is located so that the traveling public
utilizing the limited access highway is conveniently provided with transient
type services without endangering movement along and access to and from the
limited access highway.



   FRONTAGE.  All the property abutting on one side of a street, not
interrupted by an intersecting street, and measured along the street line.



   GOLF COURSE.  A tract of land for playing golf, improved with trees,
fairways, hazards and which may also include as accessories clubhouses,
shelters, golf ranges, and ball driving and golf course maintenance
facilities.



   GRADE OF STREET.  The height of the top of the curb, or if no curb
exists, the height of the edge of pavement in the lane of travel adjacent to
the side of the street at which grade is being measured.



   GREENHOUSE.  A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass
or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season
plants for subsequent sale.



   GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL.  An establishment whose primary business is
the growing of plants through the use of one or more on-premises greenhouses.



   GROSS FLOOR AREA.  The sum of the gross horizontal areas of each floor
of the principal building, measured for the exterior walls or from the
centerline of the party walls, including the floor area of accessory
structures. The term does not include any area used exclusively for the
parking of motor vehicles or for building or equipment access such as stairs,
elevator shafts and maintenance crawlspaces or unused attics. This term also
excludes pedestrian walkway common areas within enclosed shopping areas.



   GROUND COVERS.  Low growing plants such as grasses, ivies, creeping
bushes and similar decorative planting. Where required by this chapter,
GROUND COVERS shall have the capability of soil stabilization and erosion
control.



   GROUP DEVELOPMENT.  A group of two or more principal structures built
on a single lot, tract or parcel of land not subdivided into the customary
streets and lots and which will not be so subdivided into the customary
streets and lots and which will not be so subdivided, and designed for
occupancy by separate families, businesses or other enterprises. Examples
would be:  cluster-type subdivisions, row houses, apartment complexes,
housing projects, school and hospital campuses and shopping centers.



   GROUP HOME FOR AT-RISK YOUTH.  A home with support personnel that
provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services for not more
than 12 at-risk youth between the ages of ten and 17 years.



   GROUP HOME FOR PREGNANT WOMEN IN RECOVERY FROM SUBSTANCE ABUSE.  A
home with support personnel that provides room and board, personal care and
habilitation services for not more than 20 pregnant women in recovery from
substance abuse.



   GUN AND AMMUNITION SPECIALTY STORE.  An establishment that specializes
primarily in the sale of firearms, ammunition, hunting equipment and related
items. A store such as a variety store, catalog showroom, department store,
general sporting goods store or pawn shop which sells the items only as a
sideline among a wide variety of merchandise shall not be deemed a GUN AND
AMMUNITION SPECIALTY STORE.



   HEALTH CENTER.  A center, operated by a public agency, providing
outpatient and short term hospital facilities for medical and mental health
patients, as well as dental and social services.



   HELISTOP.  A facility or structure that is intended or used for the
landing and takeoff of rotary wing aircraft in support of principal permitted
uses, but not including the regular repair, fueling or maintenance of
aircraft or the sale of goods or materials to users of the aircraft.



   HOMELESS SHELTER.  A structure providing temporary habitation for not
more than 35 homeless people. Qualified personnel shall staff HOMELESS
SHELTERS on a full-time basis.



   HOSPITAL.  As defined in G.S. § 131E-76.



   HOTEL.  A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and may provide additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms and recreation facilities.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  Any land surface covered by buildings or other
material which reduces or prevents absorption of rainwater or other
precipitation. Examples of this include buildings, canopies, paved surfaces
and swimming pools.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO.  The gross area of all impervious surfaces
on a lot divided by the lot area.



   JAIL.  As distinguished from a penal institution, a JAIL is a facility
operated by Lincoln County (or a private contractor thereof) used for the
temporary incarceration of persons after arrest or pending hearing or trial
or for the incarceration and or housing of persons serving sentences. The
sentences are generally shorter than those assigned to state institutions and
may involve work release or other types of overnight and/or weekend only
incarceration in the facility.



   JUNK YARD.  The use of more than 600 square feet of the area of any
lot for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals
or other scrap material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobiles or other vehicles, appliances or machinery or parts thereof.



   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES.  A vehicle that is partially dismantled or
wrecked; or cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was
originally intended to move or is more than five years old and worth less
than $100; or does not display a current license plate.



   LANDMARK.  A property or structure designated as a LANDMARK by
ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed in G.S. §§
160A-400.1 through 160A-400.14, whereby it has been determined to be worthy
of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its historic
and/or architectural significance to the city.



   LINK. The portion of a street defined by a node at each end or at one
end. Approved stubs to adjacent property shall be considered LINKS. However,
alleys shall not be considered LINKS.



   LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET.  An off-street space or berth on the same
lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary
parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials.



   LOT.  A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a
building or group of buildings devoted to a common use or combination of
uses, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to
the same. Utility and drainage easements located within the lot shall be
deemed to be a part of that lot.



   LOT AREA (SIZE).  The total horizontal area within the legal lot lines
of a lot exclusive of any portions of the lot that lie within street
rights-of-way.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot located at the intersection of two or more roads.
A lot abutting on a curved road or roads shall be considered a corner lot if
straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the
foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
The street line forming the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the
lot except where the two street lines are equal, in which case the owner
shall be required to specify which is the front when requesting a zoning
permit.



   LOT DEPTH.  The average horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT LINE.  A line of record bounding a lot that separates one lot from
another lot or separates that lot from a public or private street or any
other public space.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  The lot line separating a lot from a street
right-of-way.



   LOT LINE HOUSE.  A single-family detached dwelling unit that is placed
against one of the side lot lines. The dwelling unit has a front and rear
yard but only one side yard.



   LOT LINE, INTERIOR.  A lot line that does not have street frontage.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  The lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any lot line abutting another lot and which is not a
front or rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which
has been recorded in the Deeds Office or a lot described by metes and bounds,
the description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of this
chapter.



   LOT, PANHANDLE.  A lot other than one having access on a cul-de-sac,
which contains a narrow strip providing street access.



   LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE.  A through lot which is not accessible from one
of the parallel or non-intersecting streets upon which it fronts.



   LOT, SINGLE-TIER.  A lot that backs upon a limited access highway, a
railroad, a physical barrier, or another type of land use and to which access
from the rear is usually prohibited.



   LOT, THROUGH.  A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which
fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.



   LOT WIDTH.  The distance between side lot lines measured at the
building setback line.



   MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME).  A dwelling unit that:



      (1)   Is not constructed in accordance with the standards set
forth in the North Carolina State Building Code (Uniform Residential Building
Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings);



      (2)   Is composed of one or more components, each of which was
substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be
transported to the home site on its own chassis; and



      (3)   Exceeds 40 feet in length and eight feet in width.



   MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME), CLASS A.  A manufactured home
constructed after July 1, 1976 that meets or exceeds the construction
standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
that were in effect at the time of construction and that satisfies each of
the following additional criteria:



      (1)   The minimum width (the width being the narrower of the
two overall dimensions) of the main body of the manufactured home as
assembled on the site shall be at least 22 feet for a distance extending
along the length (the length being the longer of the two overall dimensions)
of at least 20 feet;



      (2)   The pitch of the roof of the manufactured home has a
minimum vertical rise of two and two-tenths feet for each 12 feet of
horizontal run, the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly
used in standard residential construction and which does not exceed the
reflectivity of gloss white paint, and the roof has an overhang (eave)
extending at least ten inches from each vertical exterior wall. A
site-installed gutter may be counted in the width of the eave;



      (3)   The exterior siding consists of wood, hardboard, vinyl,
brick or aluminum and shall be comparable in composition, appearance, and
durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential
construction, and which does not exceed the reflectivity of gloss white paint;



      (4)   A continuous, permanent masonry foundation or masonry
curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, shall be
installed upon a poured concrete footer after placement on the lot, and
before occupancy;



      (5)   The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable
towing apparatus are removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy;



      (6)   The manufactured home is set up on the site in
accordance with the standards set by the North Carolina Department of
Insurance;



      (7)   Stairs, porches, entrance platforms and other means of
entrance and exit to the manufactured home shall be installed and constructed
in accordance with the standards set by the North Carolina Department of
Insurance; and



      (8)   The manufactured home is oriented on the site in a
manner that the side having the main entrance, and by design intended to be
the front of the manufactured home is generally parallel to a public street
abutting the site.



   MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME), CLASS B.  A manufactured home that
meets all of the criteria of a Class A manufactured home, except criteria
divisions (1), (2), (3), (4) and (8).



   MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME), PARK.  A parcel of land under single
ownership on which three or more manufactured homes are occupied as
residences.



   MEDICAL CLINIC.  A facility where one or more medical professionals
(medical doctor, dentist, osteopath, chiropractor, optometrist, podiatrist,
physical therapist) provide outpatient treatment services.



   MEDICAL EDUCATION CENTER.  A center for the ongoing training and
education of licensed healthcare personnel. The centers include nursing
schools and medical education centers in support principal permitted uses.



   MEMORIAL SIGN OR PLAQUE.  A sign commemorating the erection and/or
dedication of a building including name of building, date of erection, and
other information such as architect, contractor, or others involved in a
building’s creation, cut into or attached to a building surface.



   MINI-WAREHOUSE.  A structure containing separate storage spaces of
varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis for indoor storage
purposes. No outdoor storage shall be allowed in conjunction with the
facility.



   MOBILE HOME.  See MANUFACTURED HOME.



   MODULAR HOME.  A dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the
standards set forth in North Carolina State Building Code (Uniform
Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings), and composed of
components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported
to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. A MODULAR
HOME shall be deemed a single-family dwelling as defined in this chapter.



   MOTEL.  An establishment providing transient accommodations containing
six or more rooms with at least 25% of all rooms having direct access to the
outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the
building.



   MOTORCYCLE SALES.  A facility which displays and/or sells
motorcycles.  Outdoor storage is limited to during business hours only. 
Any outdoor storage of motorcycles not during business hours would require
approval as a conditional use permit.



   MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT.  A tract of land under single individual,
corporate, firm, partnership or association ownership, or under common
control evidenced by duly recorded contracts or agreements; planned and
developed as an integral unit in a single development operation or in a
definitely programmed series of development operations. The development shall
consist of two or more duplex buildings, or three or more dwelling units
sharing one or more common walls. The development shall have a unified or
coordinated design of buildings and a coordinated organization of service
areas and common open space area.



   NODE.  The terminus of a street or the intersection of two or more
streets, except that intersections that use a roundabout shall not be counted
as a NODE. For the purposes of this section, an INTERSECTION shall be defined
as the point of crossing or meeting of two or more streets.



   NONCOMMERCIAL (SIGN) COPY.  A sign message through pictures,
illustrations, symbols and/or words, or any combination thereof, which does
not contain any reference to a business or product but displays a substantive
message, statement or expression that is protected by the First Amendment to
the Constitution of the United States.



   NONCONFORMING LOT.  Any lot of record that does not meet the minimum
area or width requirements established in these regulations or any amendment
thereto.



   NONCONFORMING SIGN.  Any sign that was lawfully erected in compliance
with applicable code provisions and maintained prior to the effective date of
this chapter, and which fails to conform to all applicable standards and
restrictions of this chapter.



   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE.  Any structure lawfully existing on the
effective date of these regulations, or any amendment to it rendering the
structure nonconforming, which does not comply with all of the standards and
regulations of this chapter or any amendment thereto.



   NONCONFORMING USE.  A use or activity which does not conform to the
use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located
either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of any subsequent
amendments to this chapter.



   NURSERY.  A commercial enterprise on land used to raise flowers,
shrubs and plants for sale. NURSERIES may use greenhouses for the raising of
these items.



   NURSING CARE FACILITY.  A facility that serves people who need nursing
and supportive domiciliary care. Nursing care is provided for eight or more
hours per day.



   OFFICE.  A room or group of rooms used for the conduct of a business,
profession, service industry or government where retail trade is not
conducted.



   OFFICE BUILDING.  A building used primarily for conducting the affairs
of a business, profession, service, industry or government, or like activity,
that may include ancillary services primarily for office workers such as a
restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand.



   OFFICE PARK.  See BUSINESS PARK.



   OFFICE TRAILER.  A building manufactured in a plant and transported to
the use site and used exclusively for business or office purposes on a
temporary basis.



   ON-PREMISES DAY CARE FACILITY.  A publicly licensed day care facility
for six or more children located on the site of a principal business, office
or industrial use, the day care facility being designed and operated
primarily for the care of children whose parent or guardian is employed on
the site of the principal use.



   OPEN-AIR VENUE/OUTDOOR VENUE. A facility which would be used for such
events as weddings, rehearsal dinners, dinner parties, graduation parties,
birthday parties, retirement parties, bridal showers, baby showers, luncheons
and similar uses. The use shall have limited days and hours of operation and
must be able to either provide parking on site or by contract with a nearby
lot.



   OPEN SPACE, COMMON.  Land and/or water areas within the site
designated for development, not individually owned or dedicated for public
use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the
residents of the development but not including any lands occupied by street,
street rights-of-way or off-street parking.



   OPEN SPACE, COMMON, IMPROVED.  Common open space which has been
improved with recreational areas and amenities such as, but not limited to,
ballfields, tennis courts, swimming pools, nature trails, clubhouses and the
like.



   OPEN SPACE, UNOBSTRUCTED.  Land not covered by buildings or structures.



   OPEN STORAGE.  An unroofed area for the storage of bulk materials or
discarded items whether fenced or not but not including items and non-bulk
materials openly displayed for the purpose of retail sale.



   OUTLET STORE, ACCESSORY.



      (1)   A sales facility located on the same premises and
accessory to a principal manufacturing, distribution, or shipping facility.
The ACCESSORY OUTLET STORE must be clearly incidental to the principal use.



      (2)   If open to the general public, at least 50% of the value
of goods sold must either:



         (a)   Be manufactured by the owner of the store if owner
is a manufacturer;



         (b)   Be salvage goods distributed from the principal
use, if principal use is a distribution facility; or



         (c)   Be salvage goods obtained by the owner or operator
of the principal use the requirement to meet either division (2)(a) or (2)(b)
does not apply.



      (3)   If open only to employees of the owner or operator of
the principal use, the requirement to meet either criteria (2)(a), (2)(b) or
(2)(c) above does not apply.



   OUTPATIENT WELLNESS CENTER.  A center designed for the ongoing health
care needs of established medical patients which can include a variety of
services including, but not limited to, physical or mental therapy in support
of principal permitted uses. The centers shall not be deemed to include YMCAs
or YWCAs or commercial physical fitness centers.



   PACKAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  A small self-contained sewage treatment
facility built to serve developed areas beyond the service area of sanitary
sewers. The facilities are usually not owned by a governmental unit.



   PAINTBALL GAMING FACILITY, OUTDOOR.  The play of paintball games in an
outdoor area consisting of more than five acres of land. No buildings or
structures temporary or otherwise can be erected as part of the gaming area.
The gaming area shall be at least 200 feet away from any residential
structure and the use of tires as barriers shall be prohibited. Screening
shall be required adjacent to all residential areas. The boundaries of the
gaming area must be clearly identified by fencing, netting, trees, berms or a
combination thereof.



   PARAPET.  The portion of a building wall or false front that extends
above the roofline.



   PARK.  See RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.



   PARKING BAY.  The parking module consisting of one or more sets of one
or two rows of parking spaces and the aisle from which motor vehicles enter
and leave.



   PARKING SPACE.  A storage space of not less than nine feet by 19 feet
for one automobile, plus the necessary access space. All off-street PARKING
SPACES shall be located outside the dedicated street right-of-way.



   PATIO HOUSE.  A single-family house built on a small lot enclosed by
garden walls that provide privacy. Dwelling units themselves are detached but
may be connected to other dwelling units by means of garden walls. Dwellings
may be located with one or two sides on lot lines and in those cases the
outside wall of the dwelling forms the privacy wall for the adjoining lot.



   PAWN SHOP.  A shop where money is lent on the security of personal
property pledged. The property may then later be sold on a retail basis at
the shop.



   PENAL INSTITUTION.  As distinguished from a jail, a facility operated
by the state (or private contractor thereof used primarily for the
incarceration or housing of persons serving criminal sentences. State
prisons, prison camps and penitentiaries are examples of PENAL INSTITUTIONS.



   PERMIT, BUILDING.  Written permission issued for the construction,
repair, alteration or addition to a structure.



   PERMITTED USE.  A use allowed within a zoning district as a matter of
right (as opposed to a conditional use).



   PERSONAL HEALTH CLINIC.  A medical or health clinic which routinely
provides for the care and treatment of and testing for physical emotional or
mental injury, illness or disability and which may include overnight patient
care.



   PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD).  A development planned and
developed as an integral unit consisting of one or more residential-unit
types (as permitted in the underlying general zoning district) and conforming
to all applicable lot and bulk regulations.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  An area planned as a single entity
containing one or more residential, commercial or mixed-use clusters located
on lots that may or may not meet the minimum specified requirements contained
in this chapter.



   PLANNING JURISDICTION.  All areas within the corporate limits of the
city and the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction as depicted on the
city’s official zoning map that are subject to the rules and regulations
contained in this chapter.



   PLANTING STRIP.  A section of land that contains plant or other
natural materials and for the purpose of creating a visual separation between
uses or activities.



   PLAT.  A map or plan of a parcel of land that is to be or has been
subdivided showing the subdivision.



   POSTAL STORE.  A commercial establishment that specializes in the sale
of postal and packaging items and mailing and parcel expressing services.
Private mailboxes, rental service, photocopying and facsimile transmission
(FAX) services may also be offered.



   PREMISES.  A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct
number of designations shown on a recorded plat, record of survey, parcel map
or subdivision map. When a lot is used together with one or more contiguous
lots for a single use or planned development, all of the lots so used,
including any lots used for off-street parking, shall be considered as single
PREMISES for purposes of these regulations.



   PRINCIPAL USE.  The primary or predominant use of any lot.



   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL QUARTERS.  An accessory dwelling (other than a
manufactured home) either attached or part of the principal residential use
or separate from the principal use in the form of a guest house or garage
apartment provided that the dwelling is not rented or occupied for gain and
provided that no accessory building containing the use is constructed on a
lot until the construction of the main building has commenced. All private
residential quarters shall require a permit to be issued annually by the
Administrator. The principal dwelling on the lot containing the private
residential quarters shall be owner-occupied.



   PUBLIC SAFETY STATION.  A facility operated by a public agency, a
private contractor thereof, or by a private non-profit volunteer organization
and used for the base of operations and/or housing of equipment or personnel
for the provision of dispatched public safety services including law
enforcement, fire protection, rescue services, and/or emergency medical
services. The facility may contain living quarters for on-duty personnel. It
may also contain up to four holding cells for the temporary custody of
persons under arrest. Facilities for the maintenance of equipment housed at
the operation site are also permitted.



   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.  An area of land or combination of land and
water resources that is developed for active and/or passive recreation
pursuits with various manmade features that accommodate the activities.



   RECYCLING CENTER.  A structure at which newspapers, aluminum cans,
glass, corrugated paper or backyard waste (i.e., grass cuttings, tree limbs
and the like) are deposited for the purpose of being recycled. All goods
shall be housed at all times within the structure. The outdoor storage of all
goods to be recycled shall be prohibited. Closed bins shall be deemed to be a
structure for the purpose of this definition.



   RECYCLING STATION - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIAL.  A facility
which recycles construction and demolition material including concrete,
asphalt, wood materials, metal, wall materials (sheetrock, and drywall).
These materials would be separated and either crushed or ground into usable
material. 95% of the material would be recycled and any residuals that cannot
be reused would be placed in a permitted landfill either private or county.
Stockpiles would be created from the usable material and be sold by weight or
by truckload count.



   REMOVAL.  Any relocation of any part or all of a structure that is
taken from its existing site or to another site.



   REST HOME (HOME FOR THE AGED AND INFIRM).  Facilities licensed to
provide domiciliary care for more than six elderly or disabled adults who do
not need nursing care but are no longer able to remain in their own homes
because they need assistance in meeting their day-to-day basic needs. The
facilities servicing six or fewer people are deemed FAMILY CARE HOMES.



   RESTAURANT.  A commercial establishment other than a drive-in or fast
food restaurant where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed
primarily within the principal building.



   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN.  A building or portion thereof where food and/or
beverage are sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a
significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take
place outside the confines of the building, often in a motor vehicle on the
site.



   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD.  An establishment whose principal business is
the sale of prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a
ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building,
on the restaurant premises or off-premises.



   ROAD.  A dedicated public right-of-way for vehicular traffic (or a
private road when permitted by this chapter). The word ROAD includes, but is
not limited to, STREET, FREEWAY, HIGHWAY, EXPRESSWAY and THOROUGHFARE.



      (1)   ROAD, ARTERIAL.  A road that collects and distributes
traffic to and from collector roads and which may contain signals at
important intersections.



      (2)   ROAD, COLLECTOR.  A local access road that serves as a
connector street between local roads and the thoroughfare system.



      (3)   ROAD, FRONTAGE.  A local road that is parallel to a
full or partial access controlled road and functions to provide access to
adjacent lands.



      (4)   ROAD, LOCAL.  Cul-de-sacs and loop streets generally
less than 2,500 feet in length, or streets less than one mile in length that
do not serve as major traffic generators.



      (5)   ROAD, PUBLIC.  A road meeting all minimum construction
standards of NCDOT and available for use by the general public.



   SATELLITE DISH.  An apparatus capable of receiving a communications
signal from a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit.



   SCALE (PLAN SCALE).  Where this chapter uses the term SCALE in the
sense of requiring plans drawn to scale, it shall mean scale using a standard
civil engineer’s scale.



   SERVICE STATION.  Any building, land area or other premises, or
portion thereof, primarily used or intended to be used for the retail
dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels and including any minor repair work
conducted as an accessory use, but not including convenience stores.



   SETBACK.  A distance measured inward from a property line that shall
remain unoccupied and unobstructed upward except as may be permitted
elsewhere in this chapter.



   SETBACK, FRONT.  The portion of the front yard that shall remain
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be permitted
in this chapter.



   SETBACK, REAR.  The portion of the rear yard that shall remain
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be permitted
elsewhere in this chapter.



   SETBACK, SIDE.  The portion of the side yard that shall remain
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be permitted
in this chapter.



   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, PRIVATE.  A sewage disposal system serving one
connection that is usually owned and controlled by a private single entity.



   SEWER SYSTEM, PUBLIC.  A means of collecting, transporting and
treatment of sewage by a public entity (e.g., city, town, county or
district), or other public body created by, or pursuant to state, federal and
local laws, or any combination thereof acting cooperatively or jointly. A
package treatment plant shall be considered part of a public sewer system if
owned by a city, town, county, district and the like.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  Two or more retail uses planned, developed and
managed as a unit and related in location, size and type of shop to the needs
of the trade area which is being serviced and with customer and employee
parking provided on site and the provisions goods delivery separated from
customer access. SHOPPING CENTERS shall be construed to include all out
parcels, whether or not developed, located within the shopping center site or
development plan. SHOPPING CENTERS are divided into three classes - Class A,
Class B and Class C. A SHOPPING CENTER may contain any use otherwise,
permitted or conditional in the respective zoning district, however, for a
shopping center to contain a use listed as conditional (either initially or
later through a change in use) a conditional use permit is required. If the
SHOPPING CENTER is a conditional use, any initial uses within it listed as
conditional uses in this chapter are reviewed and approved through the
conditional use application for the SHOPPING CENTER.



   SHOPPING CENTER, CLASS A.  A small neighborhood shopping center which
does not exceed a total of 10,000 square feet in gross floor area.



   SHOPPING CENTER, CLASS B.  A community shopping center that has at
least 10,000 but no more than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area.



   SHOPPING CENTER, CLASS C.  A shopping center which is designed to
serve the entire community and has over 50,000 square feet of gross floor
area.



   SHRUB.  A woody bush-type plant that has branches and is at least 16
inches tall above the highest root at the time of planting.



   SIGHT TRIANGLE.  A triangular area on a corner lot adjoining the
rights-of-way of the two intersecting streets, the triangular area being
formed by the intersecting lines of the street rights-of-way and a straight
line connecting two points, each points being 25 feet from the intersection
of the two street rights-of-way. See diagram below:









 



   SIGN.  Any object, device, or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors (or indoors behind transparent surfaces on the wall or window of a
building intended to be viewed only from outdoors), which is used to
advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or
location by any means, including words, letter, figures, designs, symbols,
fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. SIGNS do not include the
flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state, city, or any
fraternal, religious or civic organizations; works of art which in no way
identify a product; religious symbols; or scoreboards located on athletic
fields.



   SIGN, ADVERTISING.  A sign that directs attention to or communicates
information about a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted,
sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed.
Any sign larger than 32-square feet directing attention to a commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered only incidentally upon
the premises where the sign is displayed shall also be deemed an ADVERTISING
SIGN.



   SIGN, CAMPAIGN OR ELECTION.  A sign that advertises one or more
candidates or other individual person for public office, political party or
issue, to be voted on a definite election day.



   SIGN, CANOPY OR AWNING.  A sign attached to or painted or printed onto
a canopy or awning. For the purposes of this chapter, the permitted size of a
CANOPY OR AWNING SIGN will be calculated on the basis of the size of the
building wall to which the canopy is attached. It will, for measuring
purposes, be deemed a wall sign.



   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION.  A sign placed at a construction site identifying
or announcing the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor,
financier, or others involved in the development of the project.



   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL.  A sign fronting on a road containing only the name
of the principal use, directional arrow and mileage to the principal use. The
principal use shall not be visible to the motorist at the location at which
the sign is placed.



   SIGN, DIRECTORY.  A sign on which the names and locations of occupants
or the use of a building or property is identified.



   SIGN, FLASHING.  A sign that uses an intermittent or flashing light
source or windblown and/or mechanical moved reflective materials to attract
attention.



   SIGN, FREE-STANDING.  Any sign that is not affixed to a building and
is securely and permanently mounted in the ground. The sign may be a ground
mounted sign, pole or monument sign.



   SIGN, GOVERNMENT. Any temporary or permanent sign erected and
maintained or any government purposes.



   SIGN, GROUND MOUNTED.  A sign which extends from the ground or which
has supports which places the bottom thereof less than two and one-half feet
from the ground directly beneath the sign.




Example of Ground Mounted Sign










 



   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION.  A sign which displays on the name, address
and/or crest, or insignia trademark, occupation or profession of an occupant
or the name of any building on the premises.



   SIGN, INCIDENTAL.  A sign used in conjunction with equipment or other
functional elements of a use or operation. These shall include, but not be
limited to drive through window menu boards, and signs on automatic teller
machines, gas pumps, vending machines or newspaper racks.



   SIGN, INSTRUCTIONAL.  An on-premises sign designed to guide vehicular
and/or pedestrian traffic by using words such as “Entrance,” “Exit,”
“Parking,” “One-Way” or similar directional instruction, but not
including any advertising message. The name or logo of the business or use to
which the sign is giving direction may also be included on the sign.



   SIGN, ILLUMINATED.  A sign either internally or externally illuminated.



   SIGN, LIGHTED.  A sign illuminated only by light cast upon the sign
from an external light source.



   SIGN, LUMINOUS.  A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting
either by lights on or in the sign. Neon signs shall be deemed LUMINOUS SIGNS.



   SIGN, MEMORIAL OR PLAQUE.  A sign commemorating the erection and/or
dedication of a building including a name of building, date of erection, and
other information such as architect, contractor or others involved in a
building’s creation, cut into or attached to a building surface.



   SIGN, MONUMENT.  A monolithic sign in which the bottom of the sign is
flush with the ground and the vertical dimension of the sign is greater than
the horizontal dimension.



   SIGN, NONCONFORMING.  Any sign that was lawfully erected in compliance
with applicable code provisions and maintained prior to the effective date of
this chapter, and which fails to conform to all applicable standards and
restrictions of this chapter.



   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENT.  A sign that directs
attention to or communicates information about a temporary special event
offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed.



   SIGN, ON-PREMISES.  A sign that draws attention to or communicates
information about a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction,
or other enterprise or activity that exists or is conducted, sold, offered,
maintained or provided on the premises where the sign is located.



   SIGN, POLE.  A detached sign erected and maintained on a freestanding
frame, mast or pole and not attached to any building but not including
ground-mounted signs. The bottom of the signs shall be greater than two and
one-half feet from the ground directly beneath the sign.




Examples of Pole Sign
















   SIGN, PORTABLE.  Any freestanding sign that is not permanently affixed
to the ground and can freely and easily be removed from one location to
another. A sign is permanently affixed to the ground if its supporting
elements are set in a manner as to manifestly indicate that the sign is
intended to remain in one location for an indefinite period. Without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, PORTABLE SIGNS shall include any sign
mounted on a trailer or on a stand not attached to the ground, or on wheels
as well as A-shaped or sandwich signs that can, with little difficulty, be
moved from place to place.



   SIGN, PORTABLE SIDEWALK.  A portable sign with a maximum dimension of
ten square feet and displayed only during the business operating hours of the
business/use being advertised. The signs shall be sufficiently weighted so as
to be stable in windy conditions.




Examples of Portable Signs
















   SIGN, PRIMARY.  The main or principal sign located on-premises.



   SIGN, PROJECTING.  Any sign other than a wall, awning, canopy or
marquee sign, which is affixed to a building and is supported only by the
wall on which the sign is mounted.



   SIGN, PUBLIC INTEREST.  A sign on private property that displays
information pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the general
public such as “Warning” and “No Trespassing” signs.



   SIGN, REAL ESTATE.  A sign that is used to offer for sale, lease or
rent the premises upon which the sign is placed.



   SIGN, ROOF.  A sign erected or maintained in whole or in part upon or
over the roof or parapet of a building.



   SIGN, SETBACK.  The shortest horizontal distance from the property
line or right-of-way to the nearest point (leading edge) of the sign or its
supporting member whichever is nearest to the property line or right-of-way.



   SIGN, VEHICULAR.  Signs on parked vehicles or trailers visible from
the public right-of-way where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to
advertise a product or to direct people to a business or activity located on
the same or nearby property. For the purposes of this chapter, VEHICULAR
SIGNS shall not include business logos, identification or advertising on
vehicles primarily used for other business purposes.



   SIGN, WALL.  Any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a
building or dependent upon a building for its support with its exposed face
parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of the building or structure
on which the sign is affixed. Signs directly painted on walls shall be deemed
WALL SIGNS.



   SIGN, WINDOW.  A sign in a building window intended to be seen
primarily or entirely from outside the building.



   SPECIAL, HIGHWAY.  Any highway listed as a special highway in §
153.120 of this chapter.



   SPECIAL INTEREST AUTO.  An antique or hobby vehicle being actively
restored by its owner. The vehicle may not be in running condition but shall
be made to be in running condition within one year after being brought onto
the premises. A vehicle that is not being actively restored shall be
considered a junked motor vehicle.



   STREET.  A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular
traffic that affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.



   STREET PROPERTY LINE.  The line which separates a lot or parcel of
land from a street right-of-way created by dedication resulting from the
recording of the lot.



   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.  An area of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a public street, including areas offered for dedication to the
public for those purpose, areas claimed by the city or the state for those
purposes or actually used for those purposes.



   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY.  A building separate and subordinate to the
principal building on the same lot as the principal building used for
purposes customarily incidental to the principal building.



   STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL.  A structure in which the principal use on the
lot takes place.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person, firm, or corporation who subdivides or
develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined. The
subdivider shall also be known as the APPLICANT.



   SUBDIVISION.  All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose of sale or
building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all
divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in
existing streets, but the following shall not be included within this
definition and is not subject to any regulations enacted pursuant to this
chapter:



      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of
previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not
increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the
city as shown in its subdivision regulations;



      (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres
where no street right-of-way dedication is involved;



      (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for
widening or opening streets;



      (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire
area is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are
equal to or exceed the standards of the city as shown in this chapter; and



      (5)   The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with
the terms of a probated will or in accordance with interstate succession
under G.S. Ch. 29.



   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR.  A subdivision where:



      (1)   New roads are proposed or rights-of-way are dedicated;



      (2)   The entire tract to be subdivided is greater than ten
acres; or



      (3)   More than ten lots are created after the subdivision is
completed.



   SUBDIVISION, MINOR.  A subdivision where:



      (1)   No new roads are proposed or road rights-of-way
dedicated;



      (2)   The entire tract to be subdivided is ten acres or less
in size;



      (3)   Where ten or fewer lots will result after the
subdivision is completed; and



      (4)   Subdivision of a tract or parcel of land in single
ownership meeting the following criteria:



         1.   The tract or parcel to be divided is not exempted
under division (2) of the term SUBDIVISION above;



         2.   No part of the tract or parcel to be divided has
been divided under this division in the ten years prior to division;



         3.   The entire area of the tract or parcel to be
divided is greater than five acres;



         4.   After division, no more than three lots result from
the division; and



         5.   After division, all resultant lots comply with all
of the following:



            A.   Any lot dimension size requirements of the
applicable land use regulations, if any;



            B.   The use of the lots is in conformity with the
applicable zoning requirements, if any; and



            C.   A permanent means of ingress and egress is
recorded for each lot.



   SUBDIVISION TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.  A committee appointed by the
City Council to review plats and to make recommendations to the Planning
Board regarding the plats. The committee may also be referred to as the TRC.
The TRC shall consist of a representative from the following agencies:



      (1)   Lincoln County Health Department;



      (2)   North Carolina Department of Transportation;



      (3)   Soil and Water Conservation District;



      (4)   City of Lincolnton Public Works Department; and



      (5)   City of Lincolnton Planning Department.



   TAVERN. An establishment devoted primarily to serving alcoholic
beverages to the public for on-premises consumption including pubs,
microbreweries, brewpubs and bars.



   TEMPORARY HOMELESS SHELTER.  A structure providing temporary
habitation for not more than 35 homeless people. The structure shall not be
used for more than one year before the use must cease for a period of not
less than one year. Qualified personnel shall staff TEMPORARY HOMELESS
SHELTERS on a full-time basis.



   TENT ASSEMBLY.  Public assemblies using tent or similar temporary
structure for purposes other than a business, circus, carnival, entertainment
performances or overnight occupancy.



   THOROUGHFARE.  Any existing or proposed road designated on a
thoroughfare plan as a major or minor thoroughfare, the plan having been duly
adopted or accepted by the City Council or County Board of Commissioners, the
Lake Norman RPO and the North Carolina Department of Transportation.



   THOROUGHFARE PLAN.  The most recently adopted version of the
thoroughfare plan of the city as approved by the City Council, the Lake
Norman RPO and the North Carolina Department of Transportation.



   TOWN HOUSE.  Attached dwellings on separate lots that share common
walls at the side lot lines. Yards are small.



   TRACT.  A piece of property upon which a subdivision is proposed.



   TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT.  A type of planned unit
development (PUD) that contains both residential and nonresidential uses that
are built in an urban and compact configuration



   TRANSITIONAL INFILL DEVELOPMENT (TID).  A type of planned residential
development (PRD) intended to be situated on smaller lots than a typical PRD.



   TREE, LARGE.  A tree which, at the time of planting, has a caliper of
at least one and three-fourths inches and a height of at least ten feet and
of a species which, at maturity, can be expected to reach a height of at
least 40 feet under normal growing conditions in the local climate.



   TREE, PROTECTED SIZE.  All deciduous and coniferous trees with a
caliper of three inches or greater and all dogwoods, redbuds and American
hollies that are at least four feet high.



   TREE, SMALL.  A tree which, at the time of planting, has a caliper of
at least one and one-half inches and a height of at least five feet and of a
species which at maturity, can be expected to reach a height of at least 20
feet under normal growing conditions in the local climate.



   TWIN HOUSE.  Two dwelling units on separate lots jointed by a common
building wall along the property line.



   UNOBSTRUCTED OPEN SPACE.  See OPEN SPACE, UNOBSTRUCTED.



   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATOR.  The administrative official
appointed by the City Manager to administer this chapter. This person may
also be referred to as the Administrator.



   UTILITIES, PUBLIC.  Utilities (e.g., sewer, water, electricity)
provided by a city, town, county, district or other public body, pursuant to
state, federal and local laws, or any combination thereof acting
cooperatively or jointly.



   VARIANCE.  A relaxation of the strict terms of a specific provision of
this chapter by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 153.275 through 153.281 of this chapter.



   VILLAGE HOUSE.  A single-family detached dwelling built on a small lot
(typically smaller than the minimum lot size for the zoning district). Land
saved by use of smaller lots is dedicated for common use. Houses may be
placed close to the street to maximize rear yards. Shared driveways with
separate parking areas may be utilized.



   WATER SYSTEM, INTERMEDIATE.  The provision of piped water for human
consumption, if the approved system is not owned and operated by a public
entity.



   WATER SYSTEM, PRIVATE.  A water supply system having one service
connection whose water supply comes from a single source, usually limited to
a well or spring.



   WATER SYSTEM, PUBLIC.  The provision to the public of piped water by a
system owned and operated by a public entity.



   WHOLESALE SALES ESTABLISHMENT.  A business where more than 50% of its
gross sales are for re-sale purposes as evidenced by sales tax reports
submitted to the State Department of Revenue.



   YARD, FRONT.  An area measured between the edge of the public street
right-of-way line, and the front of a building, projected to the side lot
lines. See § 153.062 for special circumstances.



   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending the full width of the lot on which a
principal building is located and situated between the rear lot line and a
line parallel thereto and passing through the point of the principal building
nearest the rear lot line. See § 153.062 for special circumstances.



   YARD SALE, GARAGE SALE, ATTIC SALE OR RUMMAGE SALE.  An occasional
sale conducted by a household or a group of up to four households, or by a
nonprofit organization, at which surplus and primarily used household goods
and/or clothing are sold. In a case where the sales are conducted on the same
property more than six days per year (or in the case of nonprofit
organizations more than ten days per year) or, in cases when new or used
merchandise, purchased for resale, are re-sold it shall be deemed a flea
market and not a yard sale.



   YARD, SIDE.  A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the principal building and the side lot line as measured
perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal
building.



(Prior UDO, § 4.2)  (Ord. ZTA-5-2009, passed 11-5-2009; Ord. ZTA-6-2009,
passed 1-7-2010; Ord. ZTA-1-2013, passed 2-7-2013; Ord. ZTA-3-2014, passed
11-13-2014; Ord. ZTA-4-2016, passed 7-7-2016; Ord. passed 4-6-2016; Ord.
O-17-17, passed 11-2-2017)



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 153.045  CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   Customary home occupations may be established in any dwelling unit. The
following requirements shall apply in addition to all other applicable
requirements of this chapter for the district in which the uses are located.



   (A)   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the
residential character of the dwelling.



   (B)   No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in
connection with the home occupation.



   (C)   Use of the dwelling for the home occupation shall be limited
to 25% of the area of the principal building.



   (D)   Residents of the dwelling plus a maximum of one nonresident
may be engaged in a home occupation or otherwise report to work at the
dwelling.



   (E)   No display of products shall be visible from any adjoining lot
or street and only articles made or reconditioned on the premises may be
sold; except that nondurable articles incidental to a service conducted at
the home occupation may be sold on the premises.



   (F)   No external alterations inconsistent with the residential
character of the building shall be permitted.



   (G)   Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles (e.g.,
automobiles, vans and pick-up trucks) shall be permitted in connection with
the conduct of the customary home occupation.



   (H)   No traffic shall be generated by the home occupation in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood. Any need for parking generated by the conduct of the home
occupation shall be provided off the road right-of-way in the manner and in
the amount provided for in § 153.185 of this chapter.



   (I)   Chemical, mechanical, or electrical equipment that creates
odors, light emission, noises, or interference in radio or television
reception detectable outside the dwelling shall be prohibited.



   (J)   Home occupations may only be conducted between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



   (K)   All customary home occupations shall require the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the Administrator.



   (L)   Tutoring or home instruction classes shall be limited to a
maximum of six students at a time.



   (M)   (1)   One nonilluminated professional name plate,
occupational sign or business identification sign mounted flush to the
dwelling unit and not more than two square feet in area shall be allowed per
customary home occupation.



      (2)   In lieu of a flush mounted sign, a freestanding sign of
up to two square feet and not higher than five feet may be erected in the
front yard not closer to the street than a line located equidistant between
the front of the principal dwelling and the street right-of-way. In no case
shall a freestanding sign be located within a sight triangle.



(Prior UDO, § 5.1)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.046  SCREENING.



   The intent of these screening requirements shall be to create a screen
between zoning districts and other zoning districts or to screen certain uses
in order to minimize potential nuisances such as the transmission of noise,
dust, odor, litter and glare of lights; to reduce the visual impact of
unsightly aspects of adjacent development; to provide for the separation of
spaces; and to establish a sense of privacy. Any screening required under
this section shall materially screen the subject use between the ground level
and the height of the required screening from the view of the adjoining.



   (A)   Screening.  Screening shall be required under the following
situations.



      (1)   Between Residential and Nonresidential Districts. 
Where an OI, NB, GB, PB or GMC District abuts a Residential (R) District,
screening shall be provided on the lot(s) which are located in the OI, NB,
GB, PB or GMC District (except a residential use) at the time the lots are
developed (except with a residential use) or when any existing and/or
accessory structure on the lot is expanded.



      (2)   Between residential and nonresidential uses in the R-O
or ROS Districts.  In an R-O or ROS District where a nonresidential use
adjoins a residential use, screening shall be provided on the nonresidential
use lot, except that screening shall not be required where the adjoining
residential use is located in a NB, CB, CBT, GB or GMC District.



      (3)   Multi-family developments.  All multi-family
developments shall be screened from all other lots which lie in a Residential
(R) District except that screening shall not be required around a
multi-family development whose side and rear boundaries abut multi-family
development.



      (4)   Open storage and open structures.



         (a)   Within any NB, CB, CBT, GB, PB or GMC District,
screening shall be required for the open storage of any goods other than
vending machines, retail goods left outside only during business hours,
vehicles, trailers, other equipment capable of being driven on a roadway and
any fixtures fastened to a building, ground or impervious surface; or for any
unenclosed structure consisting of a roof, but no walls used for storage of
materials, products, wastes or equipment, whenever the storage or structure
is located within 100 feet of the street right-of-way line.



         (b)   Screening shall be placed on the property so as to
effectively screen the open storage or structure from the public view from
any street right-of-way.



      (5)   Manufactured home parks.  See § 153.202 of this
chapter.



      (6)   Planned developments.  See §§ 153.215 through 153.220.



      (7)   Other.  Other situations as specifically listed in the
zoning district regulations (§§ 153.105 through 153.122 of this chapter) or
in the conditional use regulations (§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this
chapter).



   (B)   Location of screening.



      (1)   (a)   Any screening required by division (A) shall be
located along side and/or rear property lines of the lot(s) in question
except that screening shall not be required along any street right-of-way
unless otherwise stipulated in this chapter.



         (b)   If screening is required along a street
right-of-way it shall be located behind the right-of-way and outside the area
of the sight triangle (defined in § 153.031 of this chapter).



      (2)   (a)   Whenever an industrial use is located on the
opposite side of a street right-of-way from a (R) residential zone, screening
shall be installed on the industrial use property along the street
right-of-way.



         (b)   An exception to this requirement is made when the
street is a special highway as listed in § 153.120 of this chapter because
§ 153.120(G) sets forth special landscaping along a special highway.



         (c)   For the purposes of this requirement, an
industrial use is deemed to be any use that is listed only in the GMC
District and not in any other general zoning district (permitted use or
conditional use).



   (C)   Specifications for screening.  Screening may be in the form
of natural plantings, planted berms, walls or fences. Screening shall be
encouraged, however, in the form of natural plantings. Where sufficient room
exists to place a screen consisting of natural plantings or maintain an
existing screen of natural plantings, the natural plantings shall be used as
the required form of screening. Otherwise, screening in the form of a planted
berm, wall or fence may be used. The Administrator may approve a combination
of natural planting, planted berm, wall or fence, if he or she determines
that the spirit and intent of this section are met by the combination. (See
this section, this division (C) and division (D) below and note street
landscaping requirements in this division.)



      (1)   Natural plantings.



         (a)   Where natural plantings are used, a buffer strip
of at least 20 feet in width (ten feet for a nonresidential use in the R-O
District) shall be planted. This strip shall be free of all encroachment by
structures, parking areas or other impervious surfaces. The amount and type
of buffer materials to be planted per 100 linear feet shall be as indicated
in Figure A below.



         (b)   All materials planted shall be free from disease,
installed in a fashion that ensures the availability of sufficient soil and
water to sustain healthy growth, properly guyed or staked and planted in a
manner that is not intrusive to utilities and/or pavement and planted in
accordance with division (G) below of this section.



      (2)   Walls or fences.



         (a)   Any wall shall be constructed in a durable fashion
with a finish surface of brick, stone or other decorative masonry material
approved by the Administrator.



         (b)   Fences shall be constructed of wood in a durable
fashion and of durable, weather resistant wood fencing materials and of
consistent pattern. No wall or fence shall be less than six feet nor greater
than eight feet in height above grade. All walls or fences used for screen
purposes shall be opaque. Walls and fences shall be constructed in accordance
with division (G) of this section.



      (3)   Berms.  All berms shall be planted with both shrubs and
ground covers to leave no bare earth. The berm shall be at least three feet
in height and contain at least 30 shrubs per 100 linear feet. The shrubs
shall be a species that can be expected to materially screen the development
site within five years of planting. No slope of a berm shall be steeper than
one foot of rise for every three feet in plane.




Figure A
















   (D)   Relief to screening requirements.  In the event that the
unusual topography or elevation of a development site or the location or size
of the parcel to be developed would make strict adherence to the requirements
of this section serve no meaningful purpose or would make it physically
impossible to install and/or maintain the required screen, the Administrator
may alter the requirements of this chapter provided the spirit and intent of
the screening requirement as outlined in this section are maintained. An
alteration may occur only at the request of the developer, who shall submit a
plan to the Administrator showing existing site features that would screen
the proposed use and any additional screen materials the developer will plant
or construct to screen the proposed use. The Administrator shall have no
authority to provide relief unless the developer demonstrates that existing
site features and any additional screening materials will screen the proposed
use as effectively as the required screen.



   (E)   Areas deficient in screening.



      (1)   All existing uses whether conforming or nonconforming,
that have existing junked or inoperable vehicles stored on site, shall be
required to install screening within 24 months of the date of adoption of
these provisions in accordance with this division.



         (a)   If the use can be viewed from a street, the first
20 feet between the street right-of-way and the use must be screened so that
junked or inoperable vehicles cannot be viewed from the street.  If this
cannot be done due to lack of space for plantings, an opaque fence six feet
in height may be provided in lieu of plantings.



         (b)   If a vehicle storage yard, automotive wrecker
service, or junkyard is adjacent to a residential district, a minimum 20-foot
landscaped strip shall be provided between the property line and the use.



      (2)   An exception to the requirements of this division may be
made where the Administrator determines either:



         (a)   The use has insufficient land to install required
screen;



         (b)   The use would be required to utilize land
developed for off-street parking for screening; or



         (c)   The use is already screened by existing topography
or plant life. In these cases he or she may partially or entirely (as
necessary) waive the requirements of this division by allowing less
screening, use of alternative materials, existing features or any combination
thereof, provided the spirit and intent of this chapter are preserved.



   (F)   Existing screened areas.  In cases where an existing screened
area exists, further plantings and or improvements shall not be required
provided the screened area is of sufficient width and depth and contains
adequate and sufficient materials to meet the requirements of this chapter.
If the screened area is deficient, the developer shall make needed
improvements and/or additions to satisfy the screening requirements and
intent of this chapter.



   (G)   Screen construction and installation maintenance.



      (1)   The plantings, fences, walls or berms that constitute a
required screen shall be properly installed and maintained in order for the
screen to fulfill the purpose for which it is established. Walls, fences and
berms shall be constructed in a durable and attractive fashion in accordance
with any applicable codes and generally accepted construction and workmanship
practices and meet all specifications herein. Plant species shall be
recommended for healthy growth under local climate conditions, not highly
prone to disease and be expected to grow in a manner to meet the spirit and
intent of this section. Plant materials shall be planted in accordance with
generally accepted and recommended planting and growing practices.



      (2)   The owner of the property and any tenant on the property
where a screen is required shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
maintenance of all screen materials. The maintenance shall include all
actions necessary to keep the screened area free of litter and debris, to
keep plantings healthy and growth from interfering with safe vehicular or
pedestrian travel, or use of parking areas, or from creating any nuisances to
adjoining property owners and to keep walls, fences and berms in good repair
and neat appearance. Any vegetation that constitutes part of a screen shall
be replaced in the event that it dies. All screen materials shall be
protected from damage by erosion, motor vehicles or pedestrians.



(Prior UDO, § 5.2)



§ 153.047  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   The intent of these landscaping requirements shall be to
enhance the visual quality of development, to soften the appearance of
expansive paved areas and building mass, create and maintain a pleasing
appearance in the community, reduce the effects of glare and heat caused by
parking areas and to reduce visual clutter along commercialized streets.



      (2)   Landscaping required by this section shall be installed
in the following situation:



         (a)   All new construction, development or any
expansions in developed site area land uses; or



         (b)   For all existing development, other than one- or
two-family residential land uses, when more than 50% of the land area
developed at the time of application for zoning permit is disturbed,
redesigned, altered or reconstructed.



      (3)   Where screening or buffering requirements of this
chapter overlap in area, duplicate or otherwise conflict with any requirement
of this section, only the more stringent requirements need be met; provided
however, no fence, wall or berm may be substituted for any requirement in
this section.



      (4)   The succeeding divisions described the minimum types and
amounts of landscaping which shall be required.



      (5)   Where growing conditions permit, large trees may be
substituted for small trees and large or small trees may be substituted for
shrubs, however, required larger plant material may not be substituted with
smaller plant materials. Where existing plant life satisfies the requirements
of this section the owner is encouraged to use plant life in lieu of
destroying it and planting new materials.



   (B)   Street landscaping,



      (1)   Street landscaping off the street right-of-way and
behind the sight triangle shall be required in the ROS, RO, OI, NB, GB, PB,
and GMC Zoning Districts along all thoroughfares.



      (2)   The landscaping shall be provided in a designated
landscaping area which shall include, as width, at least the first 12 feet of
the front yard and side yard as measured from the edge of the street
right-of-way line. Per 100 linear feet of landscaping, there shall be, at a
minimum, four small trees and 12 shrubs, or four large trees. The remaining
portion of the landscaped area shall be improved with ground covers or
natural mulching materials. No part of the landscaped area shall be left as
bare soil. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property and
any tenant of the property to maintain the landscaped area in a healthy
condition; to keep plant growth off roadways or otherwise from interfering
with traffic visibility or safety, and to keep the landscaped area free of
litter, debris and uncontrolled weed growth. Within the designated landscaped
area, landscaped decorative fences and masonry walls may be constructed no
closer than six feet to the street right-of-way line and behind the sight
triangle, however, the construction of the fences or masonry walls shall not
relieve the developer from planting requirements except as provided in the
succeeding divisions of this section.



      (3)   All required plantings shall be located on the street
side of any fence or wall, and where berms are constructed, between the
street right-of-way line and the crest of the berm. Any side devices
constructed within the designated landscaped area shall be limited to the
following.



         (a)   Berms.  All earth shall be planted with ground
covers except where mulching is provided for trees or shrubs. Shrubs and
trees on the berms and within the designated landscaping area may be counted
in planting requirements. Berms shall meet all requirements of §
153.046(C)(3) of this chapter.



         (b)   Fences.  Fences shall be constructed of
decorative wood or metal materials, designed specifically for fencing, be of
a consistent patter, and not exceed six feet in height. Metal fences shall be
limited to decorative steel or iron. Utility metal fencing such as chain link
fencing is not permitted within the designated landscape area. (Utility
fences are permitted outside (side opposite street side) the designated
landscaping area, see § 153.049 and other applicable requirements.) Wood
fences shall be limited to pressure treated wood or naturally preserved
species approved by the Administrator (e.g., locust and redwood). Wood
fencing may be rail, picket, or opaque in construction and must be of a
consistent pattern.



         (c)   Walls.  Walls shall be constructed of decorative
materials and shall not exceed a height of six feet. Materials visible on the
street side shall be limited to clay brick, natural or cultured stone, or
other decorative masonry materials approved by the Administrator. Except for
stone, masonry materials must be constructed of a consistent pattern.



      (4)   In the event that the size of the parcel to be developed
or its location would make it physically impossible to install and/or
maintain the required landscaping, the Administrator may alter the street
landscaping requirements of this chapter provided, however, the spirit and
intent of this chapter are maintained. An alteration may occur only if the
developer submits a plan to the Administrator that shows any existing and
proposed landscaping. The Administrator shall otherwise have no authority to
alter any landscaping requirements.



      (5)   No street landscaping materials, wall or fence device
shall be constructed or maintained in a manner which blocks sight distance at
vehicular ingress and egress points on the property or obstructs sight
distance at street intersections as set forth in § 153.052 of this chapter.
All plantings exceeding two and one-half feet in height shall be located
behind the sight triangle.



   (C)   Parking lot landscaping.



      (1)   Parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with this
division. The provisions of this section do not apply to rear parking lots.
As used herein, the rear parking lots include only parking areas located
between the rear building line and a rear interior lot line (a line not
adjoining a street. The amount of plant materials required for parking lot
landscaping is in addition to any plant materials required by any other
provision of this chapter (e.g., buffer strips, street landscaping and
building landscaping).



      (2)   The following minimum number of plants shall be required
for each parking space. If calculations result in a fraction, the fraction
shall be increased to the next whole number.



 

Large trees
 

0.10



Small trees
 

0.075



Shrubs
 

0.50




 



      (3)   The following rules shall apply to the arrangement and
installation of required parking lot landscaping. These requirements apply
only to the minimum number of trees required by this section. Non-required
trees (additional trees beyond what is required by this section) may be
planted in any fashion.



         (a)   Large trees shall be planted so that no point of
the tree’s main trunk is closer than four feet from parking lot or driveway
surfaces. If large trees required by this division are planted in an island
(area surrounded by paved surfaces), peninsula, or median there shall be
sufficient pervious planting area (pervious area shall also mean impervious
materials (e.g., walks), that drain into the trees root area) for viable
growth of the tree(s). Trees may be clustered where appropriate for the
species and this area may also be used for planting shrubs or small trees. To
be counted for required parking lot landscaping, a large tree must be planted
within 25 feet of the parking lot. Where existing plant stock is to be
counted at distances greater than 25 feet from the paved surfaces where the
developer can show that the existing stock casts shadows upon the paved
surface. No trees located off the project site may be substituted for new
plantings.



         (b)   Small trees shall be planted so that no point of
the tree’s main trunk is closer than four feet from parking lot or driveway
surfaces. To be counted for required parking lot landscaping, a small tree
must be planted within 15 feet of the parking lot.



         (c)   No shrubs shall be located within any vehicle
overhang area. (Area three feet beyond curb or wheel stop at the head of a
parking space.)



         (d)   Required parking lot landscaping shall generally
be distributed throughout the parking area. Plantings may be located along
the perimeter of the parking lot, along entranceways, and on interior
features such as islands, peninsulas and medians. The minimum percent each of
the required large trees, small trees, and shrubs to be planted on interior
features (islands, peninsulas, and medians) is as follows:



 


Number of Spaces

 

Minimum Percent of Plant Materials to be Planted on Interior Features




40 or less spaces

 

No minimum




40 to 100 spaces

 

30%




More than 100 spaces

 

50%




 



         (e)   Each parking space shall be not further than 100
feet from a tree (large tree or small tree).



         (f)   It is encouraged that trees be located so as to
maximize shading of parking spaces during summer months.



         (g)   All parking lot landscaped areas shall be covered
with ground covers or natural mulching materials, however, areas subject to
vehicle overhang may be covered with brick, stone, mulch or other non-living
materials.



   (D)   Area deficient in landscaping.  Where an existing commercial
development lacks sufficient trees to meet the requirements of new
development as set forth in divisions (B) and (C) of this section, no tree
inside or within 25 feet of a parking area, or within 12 feet of the street
right-of-way shall be removed without a permit issued by the Administrator.
The Administrator shall issue the permit only after having first determined:



      (1)   The tree is either:



         (a)   Diseased and dying; or



         (b)   Otherwise a threat to public safety or potential
property damage; or



      (2)   That the removal of the tree would not make the property
less conforming to the standards of either divisions (B) or (C) of this
section.



   (E)   Landscaping installation and maintenance.



      (1)   The plantings that constitute required landscaping shall
be properly installed and maintained in order to fulfill the purpose of which
it is established.



      (2)   Plant species shall be recommended for healthy growth
under local climate conditions, not of a type highly prone to disease, and be
of a type highly prone to disease, and be of a type expected to grow in a
manner which will satisfy the spirit and intent of this section of this
chapter. Plant materials shall be planted in accordance with generally
recommended and accepted planting and growing practices. The owner of the
property, any tenant on the property where landscaping is required shall be
jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all required
landscape materials. The maintenance shall include all actions necessary to
keep the landscaped areas free of litter and debris; to keep plantings
healthy; to keep growth from interfering with safe vehicular or pedestrian
travel, or use of parking areas, or from creating any nuisances to adjoining
properties; and to keep walls, fences, and berms in good repair and neat
appearance.



      (3)   Any vegetation that constitutes required landscaping
shall be replaced in the event that it dies. All landscaping materials shall
be protected from damage by erosion, motor vehicles or pedestrians.



(Prior UDO, § 5.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.048  SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   After the effective date of this chapter, a certificate of zoning
compliance shall not be issued for any use located on a lot(s) upon which
screening and/or landscaping is required, unless the screening and
landscaping is provided on the lot(s) as herein specified. This provision may
be temporarily waived by the Administrator in cases where it was not possible
for the developer to install certain species of plant material prior to
occupancy due to the recommended planting season not occurring at an
appropriate phase in construction, and in that case, the time deadline for
planting the materials shall be extended only to the ideally recommended
planting season for the materials.



(Prior UDO, § 5.4)



§ 153.049  FENCES OR WALLS PERMITTED.



   Except as otherwise noted, fences or walls are permitted in the various
districts subject to the following regulations.



   (A)   In Residential (R) and Office/Institutional (O-I) Districts.



      (1)   When fences or walls are installed in a required setback
area (required front, side or rear yard), the maximum height shall be six
feet, except when the fence or wall is installed pursuant to § 153.046(C)(2)
of this chapter it shall not exceed eight feet in height.



      (2)   No electrical fences shall be permitted.



   (B)   In NB, CB, CBT, GB, PB and GMC Districts.



      (1)   Maximum height shall be 12 feet except that no maximum
shall apply to jails and penal institutions where the wall or fence is
installed behind any required setbacks.



      (2)   No electrical fences shall be permitted.



(Prior UDO, § 5.5)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.050  LOT TO ABUT A DEDICATED STREET.



   No lots may be created after the effective date of this chapter that do
not have at least 35 feet of dedicated street right-of-way frontage except as
follows.



   (A)   A lot not having 35 feet of dedicated street right-of-way
frontage may be created if located entirely within a planned shopping center
or office park.



   (B)   A one-family residence may be constructed on a lot which
existed at the effective date of this chapter which does not abut a dedicated
street right-of-way provided the lot is given access to a dedicated street by
an easement at least 12 feet in width for the use of the dwelling established
on the lot and further provided that the easement is maintained in a
condition passable for automobiles and service and emergency vehicles. This
easement may not be extended to provide access to any other lots or to any
other residence not having frontage on a dedicated street.



(Prior UDO, § 5.6)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.051  ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING.



   (A)   No more than one principal residential structure shall be
located on a lot, except as a part of multi-family development. A lot with
two Class A or Class B manufactured homes that existed at the time of the
adoption of this amendment (May 6, 1999) may continue and the manufactured
homes on the lot may be replaced provided that the replacement homes meet the
minimum requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   More than one principal structure devoted to a nonresidential
use may be located on a lot provided that access is available from a public
street to each building for use by service or emergency vehicles.



(Prior UDO, § 5.7)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.052  VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   On a corner lot in any district (other than the CB and CBT Districts)
no planting, structure, sign (other than traffic regulation signs), fence,
wall or artificial obstruction to vision more than two and one-half feet in
height shall be placed or maintained within the sight triangle.



(Prior UDO, § 5.8)  Penalty, see § 153.999



Cross-reference:



   Definition of sight triangle, see § 153.031



§ 153.053  TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES.



   Temporary structures and uses, when in compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances of the city shall be
allowed. The following temporary structures and uses shall be permitted.



   (A)   Construction trailers used in connection with construction
projects shall not require special use or temporary use permits provided that
the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The construction trailers shall be located on a building
site only upon receipt of a valid building permit for the construction
project;



      (2)   The construction trailers may remain on a construction
site as long as there is a valid building permit for the construction
project; and



      (3)   All construction trailers shall be located off all
street rights-of-way.



   (B)   (1)   Carnivals, circuses, tent assemblies, and similar
commercial and charitable uses not otherwise listed as a permitted or
conditional use in the district in which they are located and which are of
limited time duration and which do not involve the use of any permanent
structures and which are located less than 200 feet from residential land
uses located in residential zoning districts may be permitted upon the
authorization of the Board of Adjustment and subsequent issuance of a permit
by the Administrator. The Board of Adjustment, in approving the use, may
authorize conditions regarding duration of the use, hours of operation,
signage, lighting and the like, and these conditions shall be made part of
the permit issued by the Administrator.



      (2)   Carnivals, circuses, tent assemblies, and similar
commercial and charitable uses not otherwise listed as a permitted or
conditional use in the district in which they are located and which are of
limited time duration and which do not involve the use of any permanent,
structures and are located 200 feet or more from residential land uses
located in residential zoning districts may be permitted upon the
authorization of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator, in
approving the use, may authorize conditions regarding duration of the use,
hours, of operation, signage, lighting and the like, and these conditions
shall be made part of the permit issued by the Administrator.



   (C)   In the event of a disaster, the result of which would require
the rebuilding of a dwelling, the owner and his or her family may occupy a
manufactured home on the property. The permit granted by the Administrator,
shall be for a six-month period and may be renewed by the Board of Adjustment
provided that construction has proceeded in a diligent manner.



   (D)   Structures, whether temporary or permanent, located in a
subdivision, and used as sales offices for the subdivision development are
permitted. The permits shall be issued by the Board of Adjustment for a
period of one year, and are renewable for a period of time to be determined
by the Board of Adjustment, provided the development is being actively
marketed. At the completion of the sales in a tract or upon expiration of the
permit, whichever occurs first, the temporary structure(s) shall be removed,
and any permanent structure(s), temporarily used as a sales office shall be
used only for a purpose otherwise permitted in that district.



   (E)   (1)   In any Residential (R) District a temporary
conditional use permit (CUP) may be granted by the Board of Adjustment for
not more than one manufactured home to be placed on a residential lot as an
accessory use. The permit shall only be granted where conditions exist
requiring care for an immediate family member due to medical reasons.



      (2)   The CUP shall be granted only after the Board of
Adjustment has made all of the following findings:



         (a)   The manufactured home is an accessory use to a
principal residential use;



         (b)   The manufactured home will be placed on the lot on
a temporary basis;



         (c)   There exists a medically related need for the
proximate care of an immediate family member. This finding must be
substantiated by a certificate of need from a medical doctor and other
evidence the Board of Adjustment may desire. As used herein, PROXIMATE CARE
shall mean the same level of care that would normally necessitate living in
the same dwelling as the care provider or in a domiciliary care facility,
such as care in the basic day-to-day living needs, (e.g., feeding, bathing,
and other functions);



         (d)   The person(s) responsible for providing the care
will live in either the principal dwelling or the manufactured home and that
the person(s) needing the care shall live in the structure not occupied by
the person(s) providing the care;



         (e)   There exists sufficient reason(s) justifying
separate quarters and the reasons shall be limited to either contagious
disease, serious illness, or lack of adequate space within the principal
dwelling;



         (f)   The person(s) in need of care is an immediate
family member of the person(s) to be responsible for providing the care;



         (g)   The manufactured home will have adequate access to
public water and sewer or a well and septic tank as verified by permits from
the County Health Department;



         (h)   The manufactured home will be placed in the rear
yard and will be no closer than 20 feet from any property line or, if it is
not feasible to locate the manufactured home in the rear yard, that the
manufactured home will be located in the non-required side yard behind the
front building line of the principal dwelling and no closer than 20 feet from
the principal dwelling; and



         (i)   The granting of the CUP will not materially
endanger the public health, safety, and welfare.



      (3)   The following additional requirements shall be
applicable:



         (a)   The CUP shall be valid for one year after issuance
or for shorter period as specified by the Board of Adjustment, however, no
CUP shall be valid beyond 30 days after any of reason(s) justifying the CUP
cease to exist.



         (b)   The CUP may be renewed prior to the expiration
date. The applicant must submit an application to the Zoning Administrator
outlining the conditions and if any changes have been made. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the CUP is still valid as originally approved
by the Board of Adjustment it will be renewed for one additional year. If the
Zoning Administrator feels that conditions have changed and the CUP is no
longer valid, the matter will be forwarded to the Board of Adjustment for a
determination. The Board of Adjustment, after a public hearing, can either
renew or rescind the permit.



         (c)   The permit is granted to a particular owner on the
basis of circumstances peculiar to that owner and it shall not remain in
effect in the event of a change of ownership of any land, structure, use or
other item covered by the CUP.



         (d)   When granting the CUP, the Board of Adjustment may
impose reasonable conditions, restrictions and safeguards as considered
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare in
accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. Violation of these
conditions, restrictions and safeguards shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 5.9)  (Ord. ZTA-3-08, passed 11-18-2008; Ord. ZTA-1-2011,
passed 5-5-2011; Ord. O-02-18, passed 4-5-2018)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.054  HEIGHT CALCULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   For purposes of this chapter, the height of a structure
shall be the vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of the
finished grade at the front of the structure to the highest point of the
structure.



      (2)   The maximum heights as indicated in the various
districts may be exceeded for the following uses:



         (a)   Roof structures not intended for human occupancy
such as skylights, transmission or television towers, housing for elevators
and stairways, water tanks, ventilating fans, air conditioning equipment or
similar equipment; steeples, spires; belfries, cupolas or chimneys;



         (c)   Radio and television antennas; and



         (c)   Hospitals, health centers and medical education
centers.



   (B)   Setbacks for structures with height exceptions.  Any
structure which exceeds the prescribed maximum building height for the zoning
district in which it is located shall be located on the lot so that no
portion of the structure is located closer to any lot line than the
difference between the actual height of the structure and the normally
allowed maximum building height in that zoning district.



(Prior UDO, § 5.10)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.055  RELIEF OF FRONT YARD SETBACK FOR CERTAIN DWELLINGS.



   The front yard requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not
apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located
wholly or partially within 100 feet on either side of the proposed dwelling
and on the same side of the street in the same block and use district as the
lot is less than the minimum required front yard depth. In that case the
front yard on those lots may be less than the required front yard but not
less than the average of the existing front yard on the aforementioned lots,
or a distance of 15 feet from the edge of the street right-of-way, whichever
is greater.



(Prior UDO, § 5.11)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.056  OUTDOOR LIGHTING.



   Outdoor lighting shall be located in a manner that does not endanger
motorists.



(Prior UDO, § 5.12)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.057  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Within any Residential (R) District, accessory structures
shall be located as follows.



      (1)   Except as herein provided, no portion of any accessory
structure shall be located within any front yard. Exceptions are:



         (a)    Water wells on any lot; and



         (b)   Garages used primarily to house automobiles.



      (2)   Water wells may be located in any front, side or rear
yard.



      (3)   Automobile garages designed to accommodate no greater
than three automobiles may be located in any front yard other than in the
required front setback. Any garage shall also observe the minimum dwelling
side setback requirement for the zoning district in which it is located.



      (4)   Accessory structures are allowed in any side yard,
provided they observe a setback of ten foot side yard from any side yard lot
line.



      (5)   Accessory structures are allowed in any rear yard
provided that all accessory structures observe a ten foot setback from any
rear lot line.



   (B)   Within any NB, CB, CBT, GB, PB or GMC District, accessory
structures shall be located as follows.



      (1)   Except as herein provided, no accessory structure shall
be located in any required front or side setback. A water well may be located
in any front, side or rear yard.



      (2)   Accessory structures are allowed within with rear
principal building setback area provided that no accessory structure (except
as provided in division (B)(1) above of this section) shall be allowed within
ten feet of a rear or side yard line or within 20 feet in the case of any
rear or side yard line which abuts a Residential (R) District.



   (C)   On any lot containing a principal residential use, no
accessory structure shall be permitted that involves or requires any
construction features which are not primarily residential in nature or
character; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply in the R-25
District to structures erected for agricultural purposes.



   (D)   On any lot containing a principal residential use, the
aggregate area of all accessory structures (excluding barns, farm-related
structures and satellite dish antennas) shall not exceed one-half the heated
ground floor area of the principal building nor exceed the height of the
principal building. All lots, however, shall be allowed to have an accessory
garage of no greater than 500 square feet provided that the garage:



      (1)   Meets all required setbacks; and



      (2)   Is designed primarily to house automobiles.



   (E)   For all nonresidential uses, no off-street parking or loading
areas shall be located within 12 feet of any street right-of-way line.



   (F)   Outpatient wellness centers, medical education centers,
nursing care facilities and helistops are permitted as accessory uses to
hospitals and health centers.



(Prior UDO, § 5.13)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.058  CONSTRUCTION BEGUN PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF CHAPTER.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the
plans, construction or designed use of any building or structure upon which a
building permit was secured prior to the adoption of this chapter, provided
the construction was in conformance with the city’s zoning ordinance
adopted by the City Council on November 1, 1990 and/or the city subdivision
ordinance, adopted by the City Council on January 10, 1991, and any amendment
subsequent thereto and provided the building permit remains valid.



(Prior UDO, § 5.14)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.059  REDUCTION OF LOT AND YARD AREAS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No required yard or lot area existing at the time of adoption
of this chapter or any amendment subsequent thereto shall be reduced in size
below the minimum requirements set forth herein, except as the result of
street widening or other taking for public use or conveyance in lieu thereof.



   (B)   Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
shall meet the minimum requirements established by this chapter. This
prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the condemnation of land for
public purposes.



(Prior UDO, § 5.15)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.060  USE OF MANUFACTURED HOMES AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES.



   A manufactured home may only be used as a principal residential
structure, except when serving as a manufactured home sales lot office, or
pursuant to a temporary permit issued in accordance with §§ 153.053(C), (D)
or (E) of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 5.16)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.061  USES NOT EXPRESSLY PERMITTED OR CONDITIONAL.



   (A)   No building or structure, sign or land shall hereafter be
used, erected or occupied and no building or structure shall be erected,
expanded or moved except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.
This chapter specifies uses that are allowed in each zone.



   (B)   Uses designated as permitted uses are allowed in a zone as a
matter of right. Uses designated as conditional uses are allowed only after
approval by the City Council pursuant to §§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this
chapter.



   (C)   Certain uses pre-dating the adoption of this chapter are
allowed to remain as nonconforming uses in accordance with §§ 153.135
through 153.145 of this chapter.



   (D)   Certain temporary uses may be allowed in accordance with §
153.053 of this chapter. Unless a use is allowed as a permitted, conditional,
nonconforming or temporary use, then the use is expressly prohibited in that
zone by this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 5.17)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.062  LOCATION OF REQUIRED YARDS ON IRREGULAR LOTS.



   (A)   Generally.  The location of required front, side and rear
yards on irregularly shaped lots shall be determined by the Administrator.
The determination will be based on the spirit and intent of this chapter to
achieve and appropriate spacing and location of buildings and structures on
individual lots.



   (B)   Front yards and rear yards on corner lots.



      (1)   On corner lots, the front yard shall be measured
perpendicular from the street lot line having the shortest linear footage. If
both street lot lines have equal linear footage and no principal structure is
located on the lot, the property owner shall determine the location of the
front yard. On lots having equal frontage and there is a principal structure
located on the lot the front yard shall be based on the architectural
orientation of the house. Once the front yard is determined the rear yard
shall be the yard opposite the front yard.



      (2)   A graphic example of this is as follows:




Figure B
















   (C)   Front yards and rear yards on through lots.



      (1)   On through lots, the required front and rear yards shall
each equal or exceed the greater of either the required front or rear yard
setback that would normally be applied in that zoning district. For example,
if a through lot were located in a zoning district which normally required a
35-foot front setback and a 25-foot rear setback, both front and rear
setbacks would have to equal or exceed 35 feet. For the purpose of placing
accessory structures, however, the rear yard shall be deemed to be the yard
opposite the street-side yard which the architectural front of the building
faces. For the purpose of placing a principal residence, the Administrator
shall require the architectural front of the building to be oriented similar
to residences on either side.



      (2)   A graphic example of this is as follows:




Figure C










 



(Prior UDO, § 5.18)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.063  VIBRATION.



   No established use in any district may be operated in a fashion that
any inherent or recurring ground vibrations can be felt or detected at the
property line without the use of instruments.



(Prior UDO, § 5.19)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.064  NOISE.



   Every use of land shall be operated in a way that regularly recurring
noises are not disturbing or unreasonably loud and do not cause injury,
detriment or nuisance to any person of ordinary sensitivities. Every use in a
NB, CB, CBT, GB, PB or GMC District must be operated in a way that any noise
which may be detected by the human senses without instruments at the district
boundary line separating that district from a Residential (R) District is no
louder or frequent than the noise which could normally be expected from uses
allowed in that Residential (R) District.



(Prior UDO, § 5.20)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.065  ODOR.



   Every use of land shall be operated in a way that regularly recurring
odors are not disturbing and do not cause injury, detriment or nuisance to
any person of ordinary sensitivities. Every use in a NB, CB, CBT, GB, PB or
GMC District must be operated in a way that any odor which may be detected at
the district boundary line separating that district from a Residential (R)
District is similar in character to odors which could be expected to be
generated from uses allowed in that Residential (R) District.



(Prior UDO, § 5.21)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.066  YARD SALES.



   Yard sales as defined in § 153.031 of this chapter are hereby
permitted in any zone without permit.



(Prior UDO, § 5.22)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.067  YARD REQUIREMENTS NOT APPLICABLE TO ESSENTIAL SERVICES, CLASS I.



   No yard requirements as set forth in §§ 153.105 through 153.122 of
this chapter are applicable to essential services, Class I. There are no yard
requirements for essential services, Class I.



(Prior UDO, § 5.23)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.068  ACCESSORY DAY CARE CENTER.



   Any business or industrial use is permitted one accessory day care
center, as defined in § 153.031 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 5.24)  Penalty, see § 153.999



Cross-reference:



   Definition of accessory day care center, see § 153.031



§ 153.069  COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   On any residential lot of less than two acres in size and
located in a Residential (R) zone, commercial vehicles which may be parked on
an overnight basis shall be limited to school buses, vans and pick-up trucks.
This requirement shall not be interpreted to prohibit vehicles from loading
and unloading household goods in any Residential (R) District for a period of
up to 24 hours nor shall this restrict the overnight parking of freight truck
tractors without trailers on any lot.



   (B)   A residentially developed lot shall not be used as the base of
operation for any freight hauling truck.



(Prior UDO, § 5.25)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.070  CANOPIES IN NB, GB, PB AND GMC DISTRICTS.



   On any lot where a canopy or canopies are used to shelter vehicles,
such as lots containing convenience stores, service stations, express-fuel
mini-marts and other similar uses requiring vehicular shelter, the edge of
the canopy may extend to within ten feet of the front and rear property lines
and five feet of the side yard property line. However, in no case, shall a
canopy or canopies extend to within ten feet of a street right-of-way
boundary.



(Prior UDO, § 5.26)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.071  CANOPIES AND AWNINGS IN CB, CBT DISTRICT.



   A canopy or awning may extend beyond a structure to cover a sidewalk or
other walkway provided that no canopy or awning may extend over the portion
of a public right-of-way used for vehicular traffic or parking.



(Prior UDO, § 5.27)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.072  SUBDIVISIONS IN THE R-25 DISTRICT IN EXCESS OF 35 LOTS.



   Any subdivision in excess of 35 lots and located in the Residential-25
(R-25) Zoning District shall automatically be reviewed as a planned
residential development (PRD) as outlined in §§ 153.215 through 153.220. In
a subdivision of less than 35 lots, the developer shall have the choice of
developing either a standard subdivision or a planned residential development
(PRD).



(Prior UDO, § 5.28)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.073  WRECKED OR JUNKED VEHICLES.



   Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, within any zoning
district, no stripped, partly wrecked or junked motor vehicle, or part
thereof, shall be permitted to be kept out-of doors on any street or lot.
Each vehicle on the lot or street must display a current license plate or tag
and have a current registration card and inspection sticker as required by
the State Department of Motor Vehicles. Individuals actively restoring
special interest vehicles inside a garage or other approved enclosed
structure are exempt from this regulation. Individuals actively restoring not
more than one special interest auto outside of a garage or other enclosed
structure are exempt from this regulation provided the auto is kept in a rear
yard. A junked motor vehicle shall be considered any type of motorized
vehicle that cannot be driven on the road or water.



(Prior UDO, § 5.29)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.074  SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE CENTRAL
BUSINESS AND TRANSITIONAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of establishing supplementary
requirements for development in the Central Business (CB) and Central
Business Transitional (CBT) Districts is to protect and enhance the visual
character of development and to preserve the unique streetscape of downtown
by encouraging compatibility among downtown structures.



   (B)   Development standards.



      (1)   Buildings within the CB and CBT Districts exhibit design
elements that contribute to the unique sense of character of downtown
Lincolnton. Specifically, older retail style buildings tend to have flat or
low pitch roofs concealed by the front façade parapet, no front or side yard
setback, large storefront windows on the first floor and strong horizontal
separations between the first and any upper floors created by window and/or
changes in façade materials. Adjacent retail structures should embrace that
style when possible. The many churches exhibit primarily two distinct styles,
late gothic revival and classic (Greek) revival. Perimeter buildings and
residential buildings convey a more common pitched roof, with styles of
colonial, revival and craftsman (among others) intermingled. Some of the
older structures have or had steep pitched metal roofs in neutral or muted
colors. New or renovated structures in CB and CBT zones are expected to
compliment the nearby structures, extending styles that adjoin or creating an
aesthetic blend from style to style where adjoining styles transition,
particularly at the zoning district edges where blending from style to style
is important.



      (2)   In order to continue, recreate and, in some cases,
replicate (such as in the CBT District) the historic development pattern of
downtown Lincolnton, the following standards shall apply to all new
construction, additions, and substantial modifications to existing
structures; except that the Board of Adjustment may waive or modify one or
more requirements whenever, in its opinion, the waiver or modification is
consistent with the intent of this section and results in a development which
meets the findings of fact required herein. For the purposes of this section,
SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION shall be defined as any work which involves the
alteration of the building’s footprint, construction of additional stories,
changes in roof pitch, modification of building fenestration and entryways,
material changes to the building façade, or painting which does not use
natural material colors.



         (a)   Awnings and canopies.  When used, awnings and
canopies shall be placed at the top of window openings and shall relate to
the shape of the top of the window. Awnings shall be made of canvas or
treated canvas material; or standing seam prefinished metal on open metal
framing. Awnings, where existing conditions are in place and subject to staff
review, can be recovered with slate or simulated slate, shingles, or standing
seam metal in neutral or earth tone colors. In new construction the above
standards may be incorporated when determined by staff that it is
appropriate, based on review of other nearby structures, generally within
approximately 300 feet of the new building and within the same zoning
district. Vinyl or metal awnings are not permitted. No awning shall extend
more than two-thirds the width of the sidewalk or nine feet, whichever is
less. Awnings and canopies must be self-supporting from the wall; no supports
shall rest on or interfere with the use of pedestrian walkways or street. In
no case shall any awning extend beyond the street curb or interfere with
street trees or public utilities. The use of metal or other rigid roofing
material is not intended to be used as a vertical facade for awnings or
canopies. A vertical drop of acceptable scale is permitted. Metal is not
permitted as a vertical wall face or screen.



         (b)   Building height.  In no case shall any structure
in the downtown exceed the height of the base of dome on the Lincoln Cultural
Center.



         (c)   Building presentation.  In individual commercial
buildings, building entrances shall face the street and be accessible from
the public sidewalk. Any portion of a building that faces an adjacent street
right-of-way shall be considered a building front and shall be subject to the
presentation entrance and fenestration requirements of this section. For
non-commercial buildings (residential, religious, etc) or for commercial
cluster group development, when approved, the street facade shall be
addressed via fenestration requirements or design elements and entrances
shall be accessible via walkways or plazas from the public sidewalk.



         (d)   Building width.  Additions and new construction
located in the CB or CBT Districts shall maintain the existing building wall
by extending the building front from side lot line to side lot line, except
that an appropriate architectural wall or similar design feature may be used
instead of a building extension. Where penetration through the lot line is
required, such as access for pedestrians or vehicular access to an area
behind the front, such as rear yard parking or courtyards, the penetration
shall be appropriately visually framed, by use of a fence termination
feature, walls, replicated or existing building walls, or scalable
landscaping where appropriate, subject to staff review.



         (e)   Color.  Additions and new construction shall
relate paint colors to natural material colors found on neighboring historic
buildings and nearby buildings. Contrasting colors, which accent
architectural details and entrances may be used. (A pallet of suggested
colors is available.)



         (f)   Fenestration.  New construction and remodeling of
existing buildings in the CB and CBT Districts shall maintain the prevalent
pattern and spacing of the windows and doorways on downtown buildings.
Windows on the street level front of buildings shall constitute at least 20%
and not more than 50% of the façade. Window on subsequent levels shall be a
minimum of 15 square feet. Windows must be clear, transparent glass (not
mirrored or tinted dark) and shall not be lower than two feet above grade.
Double-hung windows with a height-to-width ratio of 2:1 are preferred for
upper stories. No window or door shall be horizontally separated by more than
15 feet from the nearest other window or door in the same façade. Frames and
sashes for windows shall be of wood, vinyl or pre-finished metal and may have
stone, brick or cast concrete lintels and stills. Window glass shall always
be set back from the building face rather than flush.



         (g)   Front build-to-line.



            1.   The fronts of all new commercial buildings
constructed in the CB District shall abut existing sidewalks, where provided,
except for outdoor café-type uses when a low wall or other architectural
articulation is carried across the right-of-way to continue the visual
continuity of building faces.



            2.   The fronts all new commercial buildings
constructed in the CBT District may vary from zero to 20 feet (i.e., thus
creating a maximum front yard setback of zero to 20 feet) as measured from
the street right-of-way boundary. Variable front yard setbacks are encouraged
in the CBT District to allow for building articulation. Any setback areas
shall be geared for pedestrian use. No off-street parking shall be allowed in
these areas. Outdoor storage of retail goods (during daylight hours) shall be
permitted, as shall outdoor seating areas.



            3.   The fronts of all new multifamily buildings
constructed in the CB or CBT Districts may vary from zero to 30 feet as
measured from the street right of way. Corner lot side setbacks may be
adjusted similarly. Setbacks on multifamily sites should convey the linear
rhythms of nearby properties but require some flexibility. The final front
and corner setbacks shall be subject to review as a part of the conditional
use permit process. No off street parking shall be allowed in these areas.



         (h)   Horizontal rhythms.  Downtown building patterns
traditionally emphasized a strong horizontal design element. New construction
and additions to or remodeling of existing buildings shall maintain a clear
visual division between street level and any upper architectural feature used
to accomplish this effect.



         (i)   Materials.  Façade materials found in the
downtown district include wood, brick and stone. Additions and new
construction shall use facing materials that are compatible in quality,
color, texture, finish, and dimension to those common in the downtown area.
Acceptable materials include, but may not be limited to brick, stone or wood.
Under no circumstances shall metal siding, unfinished concrete block or vinyl
siding be allowed.



         (j)   Roofs.  Additions and new construction using flat
pitch or low pitch roof design (anything under 3:12) must install parapet
walls on all sides or cap the walls with a cornice treatment that provides
articulation to the roofline. When the roof drains to the rear of the
building and is guttered the parapet may be eliminated upon staff approval.



         (k)   Signs.  Signs should relate in placement and size
to other building elements and shall not obscure building elements such as
windows, cornices or decorative details. Sign material, style and color shall
complement the building façade in terms of design, scale, color and
materials. Individual shop signs in a single storefront shall relate to each
other in design, size, color, placement on the building, and lettering style.
Canvas signs placed on the outside of buildings, excluding canopy signs,
whether for permanent or temporary use are prohibited. Signs placed on the
inside of window areas shall conceal no more than 20% of the area of the
window on which the signs are located.



         (l)   Streetscape protection.  Any damage to the
existing streetscape design, including street trees, by development, use, or
condition or private property shall be corrected by the proper owner at the
owner’s expense to the satisfaction of the city’s Public Works
Department, prior to the release of a certificate of occupancy. Any damage
not corrected by the owner shall be corrected by the city, the cost of which
is to be billed to the owner, including city administrative costs. For the
purposes of this section, STREETSCAPE shall be defined to include any public
improvement adjacent to private property.



         (m)   Walls and entrances.  Walls and entrances in the
CB and CBT Districts shall be designated to encourage and complement
pedestrian-scale activity. Recessed doorways at building fronts are required.



   (C)   Demolition.



      (1)   No building shall be demolished without the building
owner or his or her representative first consulting with the city’s
Planning Director or his or her designee. Following initial communication
from the building owner, the Director shall have 21 days to render a
recommendation to the applicant.



      (2)   If the property owner so desires, he or she may secure a
demolition permit from the Lincoln County Building Inspector at the end of
the 21-day review period. The demolition of any contributing member of the
National Register District is strongly discouraged.



   (D)   Procedures.  Prior to the construction of any new building,
structure or parking area or the substantial renovation of that, a zoning
permit must be secured from the Administrator.



   (E)   Permit applications.  Applications for a zoning permit shall
be accompanied by supporting material sufficient to determine compliance with
the standards outlined in this section. The material shall include, but may
not be limited to, a detailed site plan, street elevations, a height
disclosure statement, and where necessary, the location of all public
utilities. The information shall be sealed by a registered engineer,
surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed in the state.
Applications for a zoning permit shall be filed on forms provided by the
Planning Department. The Administrator will consider no incomplete
applications. All applications will be reviewed by the Administrator within
21 working days from the date of submittal.



(Prior UDO, § 5.30) (Ord. ZTA-7-2016, passed 1-5-2017) Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.075  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS IN EXCESS OF
85,000 SQUARE FEET GROSS FLOOR AREA.



   The following supplemental regulations shall apply to any individual
retail use 85,000 or more gross floor area (gfa). For purposes of this
section, any retail establishment with a gross floor area of 85,000 plus gfa
shall be identified as a large retail establishment.



   (A)   Conditional use permit.



      (1)   Notwithstanding any other regulations contained in this
chapter, any large retail establishment shall be subject to a conditional use
permit per §§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter.



      (2)   Any large retail use that:



         (a)   Existed at the time of adoption of this section
and expands by a factor of 50% or greater; and



         (b)   As a result of the expansion the gfa of the
structure equals or exceed 85,000 square feet gfa shall also be subject to
the issuance of a conditional use permit.



      (3)   The addition shall, to the greatest degree feasible and
practical, be made to meet the development standards contained in division
(D) below.



   (B)   Reuse/compartmentalization.  As part of the conditional use
permit review process, any large retail establishment constructed after the
adoption of these regulations shall be designed to include specific elements
for adaptation to multi tenant re-use. The elements may include but are not
limited to the following:



      (1)   Compartmentalized constructions include plumbing,
electrical service, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning to the extent
possible per all applicable codes;



      (2)   Building design shall also allow for the interior
subdivision of the structure into separate tenancies;



      (3)   Façades shall be readily adaptable to multiple
entrances;



      (4)   Parking lot schemes shall be designed to enable users of
any future tenants to readily walk from their vehicles to the storefront; and



      (5)   Other design elements that facilitate the multi-tenant
re-use of the building.



   (C)   Development standards for all large retail establishments. 
The following standards shall apply to any large retail establishment.
Notwithstanding, if a large retail establishment or a shopping center that
contained a large retail establishment existed at the time of adoption of
these regulations, the regulations contained in this section will only apply
to an addition to the large retail establishment if the addition constitutes
an increase in gross floor area by a factor of greater than 50% and, as a
result of the expansion, the large retail expansion has a gfa of 85,000 plus
square feet.



      (1)   (a)   Principal buildings shall be substantially
parallel to the public road upon which they front. For the purposes of this
standard, the term FRONT relates to the relationship between the building
plane and the street or streets and not the arrangement or orientation of the
structure and its entrances on the site. When more than one principal
building is located on site, the regulation shall apply to the principal
building closest to the adjacent public road. When located on a corner lot,
the building shall be parallel with the road with the greatest traffic
volumes.



         (b)   This standard may be waived by the City Council
where, due to practicalities, it would be more suitable to face the
building(s) to the lesser traveled road.



         (c)   1.   Buildings located on outparcels within a
shopping center must substantially address (i.e., be parallel to) the
adjoining non-limited access highway and be readily accessed via sidewalks
and/or walkways from that adjoining road.



            2.   All buildings occupying the outparcel lots
shall have their architectural fronts facing the roads and shall have a
usable door providing access to pedestrians. The fronts all buildings located
on outparcels shall have a setback no greater than 20 feet as measured from
the edge of the adjoining sidewalk.



            3.   Any setback areas shall be geared for
pedestrian as opposed to automobile use. No off-street parking or loading
shall be allowed in this area.



            4.   Outdoor storage of retail goods (during
daylight hours) shall be permitted, as shall outdoor seating areas.




Figure D










 



      (2)   A sidewalk and plant strip shall be placed parallel to
all public roads which the development fronts upon and where pedestrians
could be reasonably expected to access the development. (For instance, if the
development adjoined a limited access highway where there was no feasible
means for pedestrian access, the rule could be waived.) The sidewalk and
plant strip shall be constructed in accordance with § 153.395 of this
chapter.



      (3)   Street trees shall be planted along and parallel to the
public road. The trees shall be planted within 25 feet of the edge of the
road right-of-way, between the right-of-way and any buildings on the lot. The
number of trees to be planted shall be as prescribed in § 153.047(B). Large
trees may not be planted under any utility lines. The distribution of trees
shall generally be proportionate to the street frontage. While an equal
interval between trees is not required, it is the intent of this chapter to
not have long intervals without trees. Waivers to these regulations may be
granted where the adherence of these regulations would interfere or have the
potential to interfere with any utility lines.



      (4)   Large expanses of off-street parking readily visible
from an adjoining public road are strongly discouraged. Rather, off-street
parking in the interior of the development (i.e., behind building façades)
or in screened portions of the side yard is recommended. Notwithstanding,
upwards of 40% of the amount of off-street parking provided for the large
retail establishment (or the multi-tenant development) may be located in the
front yard of the large retail establishment. The remainder of the parking
may be placed in the rear of the development or in screened portions of the
side yard. The side-yard screening need not be in full compliance with the
screening options provided in § 153.046(C), but rather shall serve as a
means of significantly shielding the parking from the view of motorists and
pedestrians from adjacent roads. Alternative techniques such as changes in
elevation or from the street and sidewalk can be used to augment the
landscaping. The location of parking may be shifted to a combination of
front, side, and rear yard parking in a single parking field when the shape
and/or configuration of the site, limited access locations, or other site
constraints would prevent a typical configuration of the site such as is
illustrated in division (D)(1) above. In order to minimize the impact of the
parking field, and notwithstanding the provisions of § 153.185(K), the
standard for parking for these “large retail establishments” shall be one
space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. In addition, and
notwithstanding the provisions of § 153.185(F), the minimum dimensions of
parking spaces in parking lots for large retail establishments shall not be
less than seven and one-half feet in width nor 17 feet in length. No more
than 20% of the total required parking may be built utilizing the minimum
dimensions.



      (5)   Off-street parking lots shall be designed to encourage
pedestrian mobility. This can be accomplished by:



         (a)   Reducing the number of large parking lots and
breaking parking into separate smaller areas of parking;



         (b)   Locating parking facilities as close as possible
to entrance areas into the large retail establishment; and



         (c)   Other suitable alternative methods.



      (6)   The following regulations are designed to create
visually distinct and aesthetically appealing structures. To the greatest
degree feasible and practical, exterior architectural characteristics shall
be designed to differentiate the structures from similar structures
containing the same uses) which may be found outside the city. Accordingly,
the external appearances of the front of all buildings (and including any
building sides that are oriented to any public street right-of-way as
required in division (D)(1) above whether located within the development or
not) shall be governed as follows:



         (a)   Seventy-five percent plus of the area below the
facia of the building shall be comprised of: brick, brick veneer, decorative
concrete block, pre-cast or field poured tilt concrete panels with texture;
stone or stone veneer, flush architectural metal panels; stucco or artificial
stucco; glass, wood, or wood materials, or similar decorative materials.
Notwithstanding, not more than 50% of the exterior building materials shall
include smooth-faced concrete block, or smooth faced tilt-up concrete panels.



         (b)   Façades of buildings having a horizontal length
of 150 feet or greater shall have an articulated wall plane that incorporated
plane projections or recesses to create an interesting and attractive
architectural design which is comprised of more than flat walls with minimal
features. Any wall offsets designed to meet this requirement shall have a
minimum projection or recess depth of two feet and a minimum width of two
feet.



         (c)   Rooflines should consist of one or more sloped
planes. However, flat roofs may be allowed so long as they are concealed from
view by a parapet. The parapet shall not be of a constant height for greater
than 150 linear feet. Rooftop HVAC equipment shall be concealed by a parapet
or via an enclosure consisting of materials outlined in division (D)(6)(a)
above.



         (d)   External ground-level mechanical appurtenances and
dumpsters shall be similarly screened.



         (e)   Those portions of any roof that is visible from a
pubic road shall not have a shiny surface appearance similar to aluminized or
galvanized metal. Notwithstanding, anodized, baked or other nonreflective
roof material shall be allowed.



         (f)   Off-street loading docks and facilities shall not
be visible from any adjoining public road located entirely outside the lot(s)
containing the large retail structure (i.e., the requirement shall not apply
to roads, public or private, located entirely within the development
containing the large retail structure).



         (g)   There shall not be any overnight external (i.e.,
not contained within a fully or partially enclosed structure) storage of
retail goods visible from any adjoining public road not located within the
development.



         (h)   Ground floor façades that face public streets
shall have arcades, clear display windows and entry areas along no less than
40% of their horizontal space.



         (i)   Façade colors shall be of low reflecftance,
subtle or neutral earth tone colors. High intensity colors, metallic colors,
black or fluorescent colors are prohibited.



      (7)   Large retail establishments shall provide at least one
outdoor space or site amenity to beautify the site and to enhance the
vehicular and pedestrian entryways to the site and any other buildings on the
site. A preferred option (although other options may be considered and
approved) include a public plaza or courtyard that contains furniture items
such as seating walls, benches, drinking and/or decorative fountains, clock
towers and other features that are designed to external aesthetics of the
site. The outdoor spaces can be located in the front yard (and, if so, can be
designed to be accessed exclusively through the development rather than from
the adjoining street) or in the interior portion of the development.



      (8)   When located on a lot fronting two or more streets, the
primary access to the large retail establishment shall be from the more
“auto-oriented street” (i.e., normally considered to be the street with
the higher traffic volume). A secondary access point may be provided from the
other street. The second access point may be denied when it is deemed that an
undue or unsafe amount of traffic will be generated on the secondary street
or if the traffic will have a negative impact on surrounding residentially
developed neighborhoods.



      (9)   Due to the nature of large scale development, the
complexity of design, the development design and review process, economic
cycles and market conditions, and the time necessary to complete the
necessary transactions to secure the property and commence construction, it
is recognized that it is appropriate and necessary to allow for additional
time for such developments to be commenced. Therefore, and notwithstanding
other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, developments that include large
retail establishments may be granted a five-year vesting under the provisions
of G.S. § 160A-385.1 if such request is included and approved as part of the
application for such development. In addition, and notwithstanding the
provisions of in § 153.316(I), the time limit for the issuance of a building
permit shall be the same as the vesting period that is proposed and approved
for the development of the site.



(Prior UDO, § 5.31)  (Ord. ZTA-2-2009, passed 4-2-2009; Ord. ZTA-4-2009,
passed 8-6-2009)  Penalty, see § 153.999



ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 153.090  INTRODUCTION.



   (A)   In order to achieve the purpose of this chapter, the following
districts, based on the concepts and proposals of the city’s land use plan
and other plans and policies are hereby established. In addition to the
primary uses that are permitted by right or through the issuance of a
conditional use permit, other uses including accessory uses, off-street
parking and signs are permitted as listed in this chapter.



   (B)   The districts are divided into three different categories:



      (1)   General zoning districts;



      (2)   Overlay districts; and



      (3)   Parallel conditional use districts.



(Prior UDO, § 6.1)



§ 153.091  GENERAL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   General zoning districts are designated throughout the zoning
jurisdiction and include numerous uses that are allowed by right subject to
those uses meeting yard and height regulations. In addition, each zone allows
for conditional uses that may be developed once a conditional use permit has
been issued by the City Council. The following general zoning districts are
hereby established.



   (A)   R-25 Rural Residential District.  This district is intended
to accommodate very low density residential and agricultural uses in fringe
areas of the zoning jurisdiction that generally are non-intensely developed.
This district is established to accommodate very low-density development
where public utilities are nonexistent or partially existent, and to
accommodate greater densities where services are present, therefore, density
levels are variable to the existence of the facilities. The continuance of
agricultural operations is encouraged within this district. Under certain
circumstances certain conditional uses may be allowed depending upon
facilities to support the uses, compatibility with existing and proposed
surrounding development, and other criteria set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   R-15 Single-Family Residential District.  This district is
established to provide areas consisting primarily of single-family residences
located in both urban and suburban settings. Generally, public water and
sewer are available or are readily available. Permitted residential uses
consist solely of single-family residences and the minimum lot size shall be
15,000 square feet. In addition to single-family residences, a limited number
of private and public community uses are allowed, on either a permitted by
right basis or on a conditional use basis where certain criteria specified in
this chapter are met.



   (C)   R-10 Residential District.  This district is established to
provide primarily for single-family residences. The minimum lot size for
single-family dwellings on a use by right basis is established at 10,000
square feet. These areas are served by water and sewer. Certain pubic and
private community facilities are also allowed or may be allowed on a
conditional basis. Certain cluster type residential developments may be
allowed on a conditional basis whereby gross densities within the
developments are generally similar to those which would be achieved through
10,000 square foot lots.



   (D)   R-8 Residential District.



      (1)   This district is established to accommodate
single-family dwellings on 8,000 minimum square foot lots and two-family
dwellings on 12,000 minimum square foot lots and to allow under certain
conditions, and after review and approval by the City Council, a variety of
residential dwelling unit arrangements in planned residential developments.
Review by the Planning Board, and review and approval by the City Council for
residential uses and arrangements, other than those specifically permitted by
right, is established to ensure that developments are well-planned, and where
applicable, compatible with adjoining single-family residences and
neighborhoods. These districts are located where water and sewer are present.
The district accommodates both one- and two-family residences.



      (2)   A limited number of private and public community uses
are allowed or may be allowed on a conditional use basis where certain
criteria specified in this chapter are met.



   (E)   RMF Residential Multi-Family District.  This district is
intended primarily as a residential district for the location of detached
single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings
along with their customary accessory uses so as to establish areas where
development patterns are somewhat more dense than surrounding areas. In order
to ensure that developments are well planned and compatible with adjoining
residential areas, multi-family projects with a density greater than six
units per acre shall be a conditional use subject to review procedures set
forth in §§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter. Under the same intent
and criteria set forth for the R-8 District, a variety of residential
dwelling units arrangements in planned residential developments may be
allowed on a conditional basis. A limited number of private and public
community uses are allowed or may be allowed on a conditional use basis
whereby certain criteria specified in this chapter are met.



   (F)   RO Residential Office District.  This district allows for
one-, two- and multi-family residential uses and certain commercial, office
and institutional uses which would create an area convenient for both
residential and employment purposes. In certain areas this district is also
established to provide a transition between purely residential areas and
primarily commercial areas. In order to enhance the district’s residential
character, the R-O District for purposes of this chapter is deemed a
residential district. This classification does require screening and
buffering from all new uses in adjacent commercial and industrial districts.
Small offices, certain community facilities and one and two-family residences
are permitted by right. Larger offices, multi-family dwellings, other
community facilities, and certain businesses are allowed only on a
conditional use basis. Planned residential developments are a conditional use
allowed on the same basis as in the R-8 District.



   (G)   O-I Office Institutional District.  This district is
established to allow for a wide variety of offices, certain commercial uses
having minor impacts, certain community facilities, professional and medical
service and certain institutions. Single-family residences are permitted, but
unlike the R-O Zone, the emphasis of this zone is on nonresidential uses.
This zone may also be established in certain areas to provide an orderly
transition between residential areas and more intensive commercial uses.



   (H)   N-B Neighborhood Business District.



      (1)   This district is designed primarily for local business
centers for retailing of merchandise such as groceries, drugs, and household
items and for furnishing certain personal, business and professional
services. Unlike some of the other commercial zones, this district is
established to serve local neighborhoods and other relatively small trading
areas. The standards established for these business areas are designed to
promote sound, permanent business development and also to protect abutting or
surrounding residential areas from undesirable aspects of nearby business
developments. These districts are located at accessible places with respect
to traffic circulation in order to conveniently serve the trading population
and to promote the grouping of several places of business at locations so
designated. Since this district is established to provide for small
neighborhood oriented businesses, limitations on gross floor areas are
established for certain uses. A Neighborhood Business District is typically a
relatively small area but shall consist of at least two lots in separate
ownership or at least two acres regardless of ownership.



      (2)   Unlike the CB District, off-street parking, landscaping
and yard requirements are established for the NB District.



   (I)   C-B Central Business District.  The purpose of this district
is to permit concentrated development of a wide variety of retail
establishments, personal services and professional and non-professional
offices. In addition, certain industrial and residential uses may be
developed with City Council approval. In light of the concentrated amount of
a development normally found in a downtown area, yard regulations are
minimal. Given the lack of space for off-street parking, this requirement has
also been eliminated.



   (J)   CBT Central Business Transitional District.  The purpose of
this district is to permit concentrated development of a wide variety of
retail establishments, personal services and professional and
non-professional offices. In addition, certain industrial and residential
uses may be developed with City Council approval. Like the Central Business
District, yard regulations are minimal. However, unlike the Central Business
District, off-street parking standards must be met for all uses permitted in
the district. The number of off-street parking spaces required for uses in
the Central Business Transitional District is less than that for other
Business and Commercial Districts since land size limitations restrict
parking area availability. Land in this district exhibits some of the same
characteristics as land within the Central Business District, but is
generally not developed in the same concentrations as the Central Business
District.



   (K)   G-B General Business.  The purpose of this district is to
provide an array of retail, wholesale and service uses to serve the entire
community and with access to the uses being primarily by automobile. The
districts are located along major arterial and collector streets and adjacent
to the Central Business District in order to have a minimal effect on
residential neighborhoods.



   (L)   P-B Planned Business.  The purpose of this district is to
promote orderly and aesthetic commercial development along major highways and
entranceways in the Lincolnton area. In order to achieve this goal, the
conditional use process will be employed here for larger tracts of property
and for larger-sized building. In this manner, the City Council will be able
to review plans for most new developments in these districts and be able to
ensure that provisions such as adequate ingress and egress, buffering,
landscaping, screening, traffic flow and the like are properly addressed.



   (M)   GMC General Manufacturing and Commercial.  This district is
designed primarily for general commercial and industrial land uses, including
manufacturing, processing and assembling of parts and products; distribution
of products at wholesale outlets, retail outlets; transportation terminals;
various public and utility uses; and a broad variety of specialized
commercial and industrial operations. Many types of the operations are
permitted by right. Certain types of manufacturing and commercial operations,
however, will be allowed only upon issuance of a conditional use permit. The
permits are issued only after review by the Planning Board and City Council,
and the City Council having made certain findings and determined any required
conditions as set forth in §§ 153.235 through 153.244.



   (N)   ROS Residential Office Single-Family.  This district is
established to accommodate both single-family residential uses and other
light office and institutional uses in older areas of the city that have
developed in a manner that includes those uses. It is important that areas
zoned ROS exist in harmony with adjacent established single-family areas.
Unlike the RO District, the ROS District does not allow for the conditional
use of multi-family or planned residential developments. Like the RO
District, however, the ROS District is a residential district. This
classification requires screening and buffering from all new uses in adjacent
commercial and industrial districts.



(Prior UDO, § 6.2)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.092  OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   Overlay districts are established to provide for certain additional
requirements and/or uses for properties located in one or more general zoning
districts. Thus, in addition to the requirements of the underlying general
zoning district, the provisions of the overlay district and/or any subsequent
rezonings may be initiated by an individual, Planning Board or City Council.
A zoning map change either establishing or changing any overlay district
shall be subject to the same procedures and requirements as any other zoning
map change.



   (A)   MHO Manufactured Home Overlay.  The purpose of this district
is to provide areas in which Class A manufactured homes can be located on
individual lots. In order that these homes, when placed on the lot, are
compatible with single-family residences, the MH District does provide
certain size, construction and aesthetic standards for manufactured homes by
allowing only Class A manufactured homes (as defined in § 153.031). The MH
Overlay District supplements the range of uses permitted in the underlying
district. All other uses and regulations for the underlying district shall
continue to remain in effect for properties classified in the MH Overlay
District. The MH Overlay District may only be located in areas that contain a
Residential (R) underlying general zoning district. The overlay areas may not
consist of an individual lot or scattered lots, but shall consist of a
defined area within which additional requirements or standards are placed
upon manufactured homes. The intent of this approach is to allow manufactured
homes in parts of a zoning district where they would not otherwise be
allowed, subject to appropriate conditions. In determining these areas, the
City Council will give close consideration to whether manufactured homes
would be compatible with surrounding land uses.



   (B)   SH Special Highway Overlay District.  The purpose of this
district is to protect and preserve the natural scenic beauty of the
landscape of areas which lie near or adjacent to designated Special Highways
and that development which takes place on land which lies near the highways
be developed in a manner which maximizes the attractiveness of uses and the
safety and order of development of the area through the application of
additional development standards. Ensuring that development occurs in a
manner, it will in turn contribute to and enhance trade, tourism, capital
investment, public safety and the general welfare.



   (C)   HO Historic Overlay District.  This shall be an additional
zone established pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 3C which may
overlay other zoning districts on the official zoning map. That portion of
any zoning district to which the HO District shall apply shall also be
delineated on the official zoning map. The HO District is intended as an area
in which conservation, preservation, restoration and development of historic
character and significance and be fostered and maintained. No Historic
District or districts shall be designated until:



      (1)   An investigation and report describing the significance
of the buildings, structures, features, sites or surroundings included in any
proposed district, and a description of the boundaries of the district has
been prepared; and



      (2)   The State Department of Cultural Resources, acting
through the State Historic Preservation Officer or his or her designee shall
have made an analysis of and recommendations concerning the report and
description of proposed boundaries. Failure of the Department to submit its
written analysis and recommendations to the City Council within 30 calendar
days after a written request for the analysis has been received by the
Department of Cultural Resources shall relieve the city of any responsibility
for awaiting the analysis, and the City Council may at any time thereafter
take any necessary action to adopt or amend the zoning regulations.



(Prior UDO, § 6.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.093  CU PARALLEL CONDITIONAL USE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Parallel conditional use districts are established to consider
situations where a particular use may be acceptable on a lot or tract of land
but the other uses permitted in a general zoning district would not be
acceptable. In these instances, the City Council may elect to rezone the
lot(s) in question to a parallel conditional use district. The rezonings may
be made contingent upon the property owner meeting fair and reasonable
conditions which assure the compatibility of the use with surrounding
properties and promote the general welfare of the community. Zoning to a CU
District shall be a voluntary procedure on the part of the property owner or
his or her agent and is intended for firm development proposals. It is not
intended for securing early zoning for tentative proposals.



   (B)   The following CU Districts are hereby established:



 


CU-R-25

 

CU-RMF

 

CU-CBT




CU-R15

 

CU-ROS

 

CU-NB




CU-R-10

 

CU-RO

 

CU-GB




CU-R-8

 

CU-OI

 

CU-PB






 

CU-CB

 

CU-GMC




 



(Prior UDO, § 6.5)  Penalty, see § 153.999



ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 153.105  R-25 RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Two-family dwellings;



      (3)   Manufactured homes, Class A;



      (4)   Agriculture uses;



      (5)   Family care homes;



      (6)   Day care centers, small group;



      (7)   Customary home occupations in accordance with § 153.045
of this chapter;



      (8)   Essential services, Class I;



      (9)   Churches with a maximum sanctuary seating capacity of
not greater than 500 seats. Customary accessory uses shall also be permitted.
Church owned and maintained cemeteries as an accessory use are permitted;



      (10)   Publicly owned and operated outdoor recreation
facilities which are one acre or less in area. No facility shall contain a
swimming pool or indoor community center or meeting facility;



      (11)   Private recreation facilities constructed pursuant to a
permit authorizing the construction of some residential development and
intended primarily for the use and enjoyment of the residents thereof;



      (12)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools and
private schools district administrative offices where located on the same
parcel as a school;



      (13)   Stands for the in-season sale of produce out of a home
garden located on the premises where the produce is being sold;



      (14)   Accessory structures in accordance with § 153.057 of
this chapter;



      (15)   Signs in accordance with §§ 153.160 through 153.172
of this chapter;



      (16)   Off-street parking in accordance with §§ 153.185
through 153.188 of this chapter; and



      (17)   Private residential quarters provided there is
sufficient off-street parking to accommodate the private residential quarters
in addition to the spaces required for the principal dwelling.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with
§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter:



      (1)   Cemeteries as a principal use (setbacks apply to both
buildings and graves);



      (2)   Planned residential developments when public water and
public sewer will be provided to the development and provided the gross
density of the development does not exceed six dwelling units per acre or in
the case of a density bonus granted pursuant to § 153.215 of this chapter a
total gross density of not more than eight and four-tenths dwelling units per
acre;



      (3)   Planned unit developments (mixed use) in accordance with
§ 153.216 of this chapter and provided the uses within the development are
otherwise listed as permitted or conditional uses allowed in the R-25
District;



      (4)   Customary home occupations which meet all the criteria
as set forth in § 153.045 of this chapter except § 153.045(B) of the
section; provided however, if an accessory or outside storage building is
used in connection with a home occupation it shall not exceed 800 square feet
in floor area and not more than one building shall be devoted to the home
occupation and the building is located in the rear yard and not less than 50
feet from any property line.



      (5)   Auto hobbyist (see Definitions, § 153.031);



      (6)   Churches having a sanctuary seating capacity in excess
of 500 seats;



      (7)   Country clubs and privately-owned outdoor recreation
facilities provided that go-cart tracks and outdoor vehicular racing
facilities shall not be permitted;



      (8)   Publicly owned and operated outdoor recreation
facilities in excess of one acre in area and/or containing a swimming pool,
or indoor community center or meeting facility;



      (9)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (10)   Manufactured home parks in accordance with §§ 153.200
through 153.202 of this chapter;



      (11)   Public safety stations;



      (12)   Essential services, Class II and Class III;



      (13)   Rest homes, nursing care facilities and continuing care
communities; and



      (14)   Public schools administrative offices (freestanding).



   (C)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Minimum lot size.



         (a)   Single-family dwellings and Class A manufactured
homes:



            1.   Twenty-five thousand square feet where no
public water or public sewer is provided at the lot;



            2.   Twenty-two thousand five hundred square feet
where either one of public water or public sewer are provided at the lot; or



            3.   Twenty thousand square feet where both public
water and public sewer are provided at the lot.



         (b)   Two-family dwellings:



            1.   Fifty thousand square feet where no public
water or public sewer are provided at the lot;



            2.   Thirty-five thousand square feet where either
one of public water or public sewer are provided at the lot; or



            3.   Twenty thousand square feet where both public
water and public sewer is provided at the lot.



         (c)   Churches:  two acres.



         (d)   Schools:  five acres.



         (e)   Bed and breakfast inn:  one acre.



         (f)   Essential services:  none.



         (g)   Manufactured home parks:  three acres.



         (h)   Planned residential development minimum site size
shall be two acres and maximum density shall be six units per acre; however,
a density bonus of up to two and four-tenths additional units per acre may be
granted pursuant to § 153.215(C) of this chapter.



         (i)   Cemeteries as a principal use:  three acres.



         (j)   Rest homes: one acre.



         (k)   Nursing care facilities:  60,000 square feet.



         (l)   Continuing care communities:  five acres.



         (m)   Country clubs:  five acres.



         (n)   Family care home:  same as single-family dwelling.



         (o)   All other principal uses:  25,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum front yard setback (as measured from the edge of
the street right-of-way line).



         (a)   Where public water and public sewer are provided
to the lot: all uses: 40 feet.



         (b)   Where only one of either or neither public water
and public sewer are provided to the lot:  all uses:  50 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback (an additional ten feet shall
be provided on all side yards which abut a public street).



         (a)   Single-family and two-family dwellings and
manufactured homes, Class A:  ten feet.



         (b)   Schools:  40 feet.



         (c)   Manufactured home park:  50 feet as measured from
the manufactured home park property line to the nearest manufactured home
space. Required buffer area may be included in setback.



         (d)   Bed and breakfast inns:  25 feet.



         (e)   Public safety stations:  25 feet.



         (f)   Structures within planned residential
developments:  30 feet.



         (g)   Essential services, Class II:  20 feet.



         (h)   Essential services, Class III:  50 feet.



         (i)   Church:  40 feet.



         (j)   Rest home, nursing care facility and continuing
care communities:  40 feet.



         (k)   Swimming pools located in a public or privately
maintained recreation facility:  40 feet.



         (l)   Community center or meeting facility:  40 feet.



         (m)   All other uses:  15 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setback.



         (a)   Manufactured home park:  same as side yard
requirement.



         (b)   Essential services, Class III:  50 feet.



         (c)   All other uses:  40 feet.



      (5)   Maximum building height.  All uses:  35 feet, except
as provided in § 153.054 of this chapter.



      (6)   Minimum lot width (as measured at the required front
yard setback).



         (a)   Churches, community centers, meeting facilities,
schools, country clubs, bed and breakfast inns and essential services, Class
III:  150 feet.



         (b)   Manufactured home parks:  150 feet. (Except that
a portion of the site containing no manufacturing home spaces and used to
provide access to the park from a public street may be as narrow as 50 feet.)



         (c)   All other uses:  100 feet.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening, as provided in § 153.046 of this chapter,
shall be required for the following uses and for all other circumstances
required by § 153.046(A) of this chapter.



         (a)   Essential services, Classes II and III;



         (b)   Country club, but screening is not required for
golf course playing areas;



         (c)   Outdoor swimming pools located in a public or
privately maintained recreation facility;



         (d)   Manufactured home parks;



         (e)   Planned residential developments;



         (f)   Churches;



         (g)   Community centers and meeting facilities;



         (h)   Country clubs but not including golf courses;



         (i)   Bed and breakfast inns;



         (j)   Public safety stations;



         (k)   Rest homes, nursing care facilities and continuing
care communities;



         (l)   Public or private elementary or secondary schools;
and



         (m)   Public or private outdoor recreation facilities
not constructed pursuant to a permit authorizing the construction of some
residential development.



      (2)   Where applicable, landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.047 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.1)



§ 153.106  R-15 SINGLE-FAMILY LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Day care centers, small group;



      (3)   Customary home occupations in accordance with § 153.045
of this chapter;



      (4)   Family care homes;



      (5)   Essential services, Class I;



      (6)   Accessory structures in accordance with § 153.057 of
this chapter;



      (7)   Signs in accordance with §§ 153.160 through 153.172 of
this chapter;



      (8)   Off-street parking in accordance with §§ 153.185
through 153.188 of this chapter; and



      (9)   Publicly owned and operated outdoor recreation facility
one acre or less in size and not containing a swimming pool.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with
§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter.



      (1)   Cemeteries (setbacks apply to both graves and buildings).



      (2)   Churches.



      (3)   Country clubs and privately-owned outdoor recreation
facilities provided that go-cart tracks and other outdoor vehicular racing
facilities shall not be permitted.



      (4)   Essential services, Class II.



      (5)   Indoor community center or meeting facility.



      (6)   Open air venue/outdoor venue.



      (7)   Public and private elementary schools, secondary
schools, community colleges, and public school district administrative
offices where located on the same tract of land as a public school.



      (8)   Public safety stations.



      (9)   Publicly owned and operated outdoor recreation
facilities in excess of one acre in area and/or containing a swimming pool.



   (C)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Minimum lot size.



         (a)   Single-family dwellings:  15,000 square feet.



         (b)   Churches:  one acre.



         (c)   Country clubs: five acres.



         (d)   Public or private outdoor recreation facilities
not constructed pursuant to a permit authorizing the construction of a school
or some residential development:  none.



         (e)   Public and private elementary and secondary
schools:  four acres.



         (f)   Public safety station:  20,000 square feet.



         (g)   Essential services:  none.



         (h)   Cemeteries as a principal use:  two acres.



         (i)   All other principal uses:  15,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum front yard setback (as measured from the edge of
the street right-of-way line).



         (a)   All principal uses listed as permitted uses in
division (A) above:  35 feet.



         (b)   Cemeteries and essential services, Class II:  35
feet.



         (c)   All other uses:  50 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback (an additional ten feet shall
be provided on all side yards which abut a public street).



         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings:  ten feet.



         (b)   Public and private elementary and secondary
schools:  40 feet.



         (c)   Church:  40 feet.



         (d)   Swimming pools located in a public or private
maintained recreation facility:  40 feet.



         (e)   Country clubs, but not including golf courses: 
40 feet.



         (f)   Community center or meeting facility:  40 feet.



         (g)   All other uses:  15 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setbacks.  All uses:  25 feet or
same as minimum side yard setback, whichever is greater.



      (5)   Maximum building height.  All uses:  35 feet, except
as provided in § 153.054 of this chapter.



      (6)   Minimum lot width (as measured at the required front
yard setback).



         (a)   Churches, community center, meeting facilities,
schools, country clubs, and essential services Class III:  120 feet except
that in no instance shall the lot width measured at the street right-of-way
be less than 50 feet.



         (b)   All other uses:  90 feet except that in no
instance shall the lot width measured at the street right-of-way be less than
35 feet.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening, as provided in § 153.046 of this chapter,
shall be required for the following uses and for any other circumstances as
required by § 153.046(A) of this chapter.



         (a)   Essential services, Classes I and II;



         (b)   Country clubs, but screening is not required for
golf course playing areas;



         (c)   Outdoor swimming pools located in a public or
privately maintained recreation facility;



         (d)   Schools, elementary, secondary, public or private;



         (e)   Essential services, Class II;



         (f)   Churches;



         (g)   Community centers and meeting facilities; and



         (h)   Public or private outdoor recreation facilities
not constructed pursuant to a permit authorizing the construction of some
residential development.



      (2)   Where applicable landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.057 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.2)  (Ord. passed 4-6-16)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.107  R-10 SINGLE-FAMILY MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right: 
all permitted uses allowed in the R-15 Single-Family District.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with
§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter:



      (1)   All conditional uses listed in § 153.106(B) of this
chapter.



      (2)   Planned residential developments in accordance with §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter and provided the dwelling unit types
are limited to single-family dwellings on standard lots and other
single-family dwellings including lot line houses, village houses and patio
houses and provided the gross density of the development does not exceed four
dwelling units per acre or in the case of a density bonus granted pursuant to
§ 153.215(C) of this chapter a total gross density of not more than five and
six-tenths dwelling units per acre.



      (3)   Planned unit development (mixed use) in accordance with
§ 153.216 of this chapter and provided the uses within the development are
otherwise listed as permitted or conditional uses allowed in the R-10
District.



   (C)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Minimum lot size.



         (a)   Single-family dwellings:  10,000 square feet,
except as provided in §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (b)   Churches:  30,000 square feet.



         (c)   Schools, elementary and secondary, public and
private (with or without schools administrative buildings):  two acres.



         (d)   Essential services:  none.



         (e)   Public safety station:  20,000 square feet.



         (f)   Family care homes:  10,000 square feet.



         (g)   Planned residential developments:  minimum site
size shall be two acres and maximum residential densities shall be four
dwelling units per acre, however, a density bonus of up to one and six-
tenths additional units per acre may be granted pursuant to § 153.215(C) of
this chapter.



         (h)   All other principal uses:  one acre.



      (2)   Minimum front yard setback (as measured from the edge of
the street right-of-way line).  All uses:  same as R-15.



      (3)   Minimum side yards setback (an additional ten feet shall
be provided on all side yards which abut a public street).



         (a)   Single-family dwellings:  ten feet.



         (b)   Family care homes:  ten feet.



         (c)   Planned residential developments:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (d)   All other uses:  same as R-15.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setbacks.  All uses:  25 feet or
same as minimum side yard setback, whichever is greater.



      (5)   Maximum building height.  All uses:  35 feet, except
as provided in § 153.054 of this chapter.



      (6)   Minimum lot width.



         (a)   Single-family dwellings and family care homes: 
80 feet at front yard setback; 30 feet at street right-of-way.



         (b)   Planned residential development:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (c)   All other uses:  same as R-15.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening, as provided in § 153.046 of this chapter,
shall be required for the following uses and for all other circumstances as
required by § 153.046(A) of this chapter:



         (a)   Planned residential developments.



         (b)   All other uses listed in § 153.106(D) of this
chapter.



      (2)   Where applicable landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.047 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



Cross-reference:



   Definition of lot line houses, see § 153.031



   Definition of patio houses, see § 153.031



   Definition of village houses, see § 153.031



§ 153.108  R-8 SINGLE AND TWO-FAMILY MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   All permitted uses allowed in the R-15 District; and



      (2)   Two-family dwellings.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with
§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter.



      (1)   All conditional uses listed in § 153.106(B) of this
chapter;



      (2)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (3)   Public safety stations;



      (4)   Rest homes, nursing care facilities and continuing care
communities;



      (5)   Planned residential developments in accordance with §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter and provided the gross density of the
development does not exceed six dwelling units per acre or in the case of a
density bonus granted pursuant to § 153.215(C) of this chapter a total gross
density of not more than eight and four-tenths dwelling units per acre;



      (6)   Planned unit developments (mixed use) in accordance with
§ 153.216 of this chapter and provided the uses within the development are
otherwise listed as permitted or conditional uses allowed in the R-8 District;



      (7)   Day care centers;



      (8)   Group homes for at-risk youth;



      (9)   Domestic violence shelters;



      (10)   Traditional infill developments (TID) in accordance
with § 153.219 of this chapter. A TID may only contain residential uses that
are otherwise allowed in this zoning district (either as a permitted use or a
conditional use); and



      (11)   Homeless shelters.



   (C)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Minimum lot size.



         (a)   Single-family dwelling:  6,000 square feet,
except as provided in §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (b)   Two-family dwellings:  12,000 square feet except
as provided in §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (c)   Planned residential development:  minimum site
size shall be two acres and maximum residential densities shall be six units
per acre, however, a density bonus of up two and four-tenths additional units
per acre may be granted pursuant to § 153.215(C) of this chapter.



         (d)   Bed and breakfast inns:  15,000 square feet.



         (e)   Public safety stations:  15,000 square feet.



         (f)   Rest homes and nursing care facilities:  20,000
square feet.



         (g)   Continuing care communities:  one acre.



         (h)   Day care center:  8,000 square feet.



         (i)   Family-care home:  8,000 square feet.



         (j)   All other uses:  same as R-10.



      (2)   Minimum front yard setback (as measured from the edge of
the street right-of-way line).



         (a)   Single- and two-family dwellings, bed and
breakfast inn and family care home:  30 feet.



         (b)   Cemeteries and essential services, Class II:  20
feet.



         (c)   Planned residential development:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (d)   All other uses:  40 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback (an additional ten feet shall
be provided on all side yards which abut a public street).



         (a)   Single- and two-family dwellings:  ten feet.



         (b)   Family care homes:  eight feet.



         (c)   Planned residential development:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (d)   Public and private elementary and secondary
schools:  20 feet.



         (e)   Church:  20 feet.



         (f)   Swimming pools not constructed pursuant to a
permit authorizing the construction of some private residential
development:  40 feet.



         (g)   Community centers or meeting facilities:  20 feet.



         (h)   Bed and breakfast inn:  15 feet.



         (i)   Rest home and nursing care facilities:  15 feet.



         (j)   Continuing care community:  20 feet.



         (k)   Day care center:  ten feet.



         (l)   All other uses:  same as R-10.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setback.  All uses:  25 feet or same
as minimum side yard setback, whichever is greater.



      (5)   Maximum building height.  All uses:  35 feet, except
as provided in § 153.054 of this chapter.



      (6)   Minimum lot width.



         (a)   Single-family dwelling and family care home:  70
feet at front yard setback; 35 feet at street right-of-way.



         (b)   Two-family dwelling:  80 feet at front yard
setback; 35 feet at street right-of-way.



         (c)   Planned residential developments:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (d)   Day care center:  70 feet at front yard setback;
35 feet at street right-of-way.



         (e)   Bed and breakfast inn:  80 feet at front yard
setbacks; 35 feet at street right-of-way.



         (f)   All other uses:  same as R-15.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening, as provided in § 153.046 of this chapter
shall be required for the following uses and for any other circumstances as
required by § 153.046(A) of this chapter:



         (a)   Planned residential developments:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter;



         (b)   Country club, but screening is not required for
golf course playing areas;



         (c)   Essential services, Class II;



         (d)   Outdoor swimming pool not constructed pursuant to
a permit authorizing construction of some residential developing;



         (e)   Nursing care facilities;



         (f)   Community center or meeting facility; and



         (g)   Bed and breakfast inn.



      (2)   Where applicable, landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.047 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.4) (Ord. ZTA-3-2016, passed 6-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.109  RMF RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   All permitted uses allowed in the R-15 District;



      (2)   Two-family dwellings;



      (3)   Multi-family dwellings with a gross density of up to six
units per acre;



      (4)   Churches with a maximum sanctuary seating capacity of
not greater than 500 seats. Customary accessory uses shall also be permitted.
Church owned and maintained cemeteries as an accessory use are permitted;



      (5)   Private recreation facilities constructed pursuant to a
permit authorizing the construction of some residential development and
intended primarily for the use and enjoyment of the residents thereof;



      (6)   Private residential quarters provided there is
sufficient off-street parking to accommodate the private residential quarters
in addition to the two off-street spaces required for the principal dwelling;
and



      (7)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with
§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter:



      (1)   Multi-family dwellings with a gross density of no less
than six units per acre and no greater than eight units per acre. Note: 
pursuant to §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter multi-family
developments may exceed eight units per acre if constructed as a planned
residential development and a density bonus in accordance with § 153.215(C)
of this chapter is granted;



      (2)   Planned residential developments in accordance with §
153.215 of this chapter and provided the gross density of the development
does not exceed eight units per acre or in the case of a density bonus
granted pursuant to § 153.215(C) of this chapter a total gross density of
not more than eleven and two-tenths units per acre;



      (3)   Planned unit developments (mixed use) in accordance with
§ 153.216 of this chapter and provided the uses within the development are
otherwise listed as permitted or conditional uses allowed in the RMF District;



      (4)   Essential services, Class II;



      (5)   Cemeteries as a principal use (setbacks apply to both
buildings and graves);



      (6)   Churches having a sanctuary seating capacity in excess
of 500 seats;



      (7)   Country clubs and privately-owned outdoor recreation
facilities provided that go-cart tracks, other outdoor vehicular racing
facilities, water slides, outdoor facilities open after 10:00 p.m., and
facilities using outdoor audio loudspeaker systems shall not be permitted;



      (8)   Publicly owned and operated outdoor recreation
facilities in excess of one acre in area and/or contain a swimming pool, or
indoor community center or meeting facility;



      (9)   Public or private nonprofit community centers;



      (10)   Public safety stations;



      (11)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (12)   Rest homes, nursing care facilities and continuing care
communities;



      (13)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools and
public school district administrative offices where located on the same tract
of land as the school; and



      (14)   Traditional infill developments (TID) in accordance
with § 153.219 of this chapter. A TID may only contain residential uses that
are otherwise allowed in this zoning district (either as a permitted use or a
conditional use).



   (C)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Minimum lot size.



         (a)   Single-family dwelling:  8,000 square feet,
except as provided for in §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (b)   Two-family dwellings:  12,000 square feet except
as provided for in §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (c)   Multi-family dwellings:  minimum site size shall
be 25,000 square feet but gross density shall not exceed six units per acre
as a permitted use or eight units per acre as a conditional use. These
densities may again be exceeded pursuant to §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of
this chapter where multi-family dwellings are constructed as part of a
planned development.



         (d)   Planned residential developments:  minimum site
size shall be two acres and maximum residential densities shall be eight
units per acre, however, a density bonus of up to three and two-tenths
additional units per acre may be granted pursuant to § 153.215(C) of this
chapter.



         (e)   Bed and breakfast inns:  15,000 square feet.



         (f)   Public safety stations:  15,000 square feet.



         (g)   Rest homes and nursing care facilities:  20,000
square feet.



         (h)   Continuing care communities:  one acre.



         (i)   Day care center:  8,000 square feet.



         (j)   Churches:  20,000 square feet.



         (k)   Private recreation facilities constructed pursuant
to a permit authorizing the construction of some residential development and
intended primarily for the use and enjoyment of the residents thereof:  none.



         (l)   Private residential quarters:  no additional lot
size beyond that required for the principal dwelling.



         (m)   All other uses:  same as R-8.



      (2)   Minimum front yard setback (as measured from the edge of
the street right-of-way line):



         (a)   Single- and two-family dwellings, multi-family
dwellings bed and breakfast inn and family care home:  30 feet.



         (b)   Cemeteries and essential services, Class II:  20
feet.



         (c)   Planned residential development:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (d)   All other uses:  40 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback (an additional ten feet shall
be provided on all side yards which abut a public street).



         (a)   Single- and two-family dwellings:  ten feet.



         (b)   Multi-family dwellings:  12 feet.



         (c)   Planned residential development:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (d)   Family-care home:  eight feet.



         (e)   Public and private elementary and secondary
schools:  20 feet.



         (f)   Church:  20 feet.



         (g)   Swimming pools not constructed pursuant to a
permit authorizing the construction of some private residential
development:  40 feet.



         (h)   Community centers or meeting facilities:  20 feet.



         (i)   Bed and breakfast inn:  15 feet.



         (j)   Rest home and nursing care facilities:  15 feet.



         (k)   Continuing care community:  20 feet.



         (l)   Day care center:  ten feet.



         (m)   All other uses:  15 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setback.  All uses:  25 feet or same
as minimum side yard setback, whichever is greater.



      (5)   Maximum building height.  All uses:  40 feet, except
as provided in § 153.054 of this chapter.



      (6)   Minimum lot width.



         (a)   Single-family dwelling:  70 feet at front yard
setback; 35 feet at street right-of-way.



         (b)   Two-family dwelling: 80 feet at front yard
setback; 35 feet at street right-of-way.



         (c)   Multi-family developments: 100 feet at the street
right-of-way.



         (d)   Planned residential developments:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (e)   Day care center:  70 feet at front yard setback;
35 feet at street right-of-way.



         (f)   Bed and breakfast inn: 80 feet at front yard
setback; 35 feet at street right-of-way.



         (g)   All other uses:  100 feet.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening, as provided in § 153.046 of this chapter
shall be required for the following uses and for any other circumstances
required by § 153.046(A) of this chapter.



         (a)   Planned residential developments:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (b)   Multi-family developments where abutting
properties zoned or used for single- or two-family residential use.



         (c)   Country club, but screening is not required for
golf course playing areas.



         (d)   Essential services, Class II.



         (e)   Outdoor swimming pool not constructed pursuant to
a permit authorizing construction of some residential developing.



         (f)   Nursing care facilities.



         (g)   Community center or meeting facility.



         (h)   Bed and breakfast inn.



         (i)   Day care center but small group day care centers
need not be screened.



      (2)   Where applicable, landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.047 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.5)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.110  R-O RESIDENTIAL OFFICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   All permitted uses allowed in the R-15 District;



      (2)   Two-family dwellings;



      (3)   Office buildings containing 5,000 square feet or less of
gross floor area;



      (4)   Churches including customary accessory uses. Church
owned and maintained cemeteries as an accessory use are permitted;



      (5)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools
and/or schools district administrative offices;



      (6)   Family care homes, provided the family care home will
not be located within one-half mile radius of another family care home
existing at the time the application for zoning permit is made;



      (7)   Customary home occupations in accordance with § 153.045
of this chapter;



      (8)   Day care center, small group;



      (9)   Private residential quarters, provided there is
sufficient off-street parking to accommodate the private residential quarters
in addition to the two off-street parking spaces required for the principal
dwelling;



      (10)   Private recreation facilities constructed pursuant to a
permit authorizing the construction of some residential development and
intended primarily for the use and enjoyment of the residents thereof;



      (11)   Public safety stations;



      (12)   Barber shop/beauty shop; and



      (13)   Farmers market (small scale).



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with
§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter.



      (1)   Multi-family dwellings with a gross density of up to ten
units per acre;



      (2)   Planned residential developments and planned unit
developments (mixed use) in accordance with §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of
this chapter and provided the allowed densities for the developments shall be
the same as for the RMF District;



      (3)   Planned unit developments (mixed use) in accordance with
§ 153.216 of this chapter and provided the uses within the development are
otherwise listed as permitted or conditional uses allowed in the R-O District;



      (4)   Essential services, Class II;



      (5)   Rest homes, nursing care facilities and continuing care
communities;



      (6)   Day care centers;



      (7)   Florists;



      (8)   Copying service;



      (9)   Museums;



      (10)   Funeral homes;



      (11)   Laboratories;



      (12)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (13)   Office buildings containing over 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area;



      (14)   Travel agency;



      (15)   Art and photography studios (excluding adult
establishments);



      (16)   Tailor and alteration shop;



      (17)   Libraries;



      (18)   Optician;



      (19)   Cemeteries as a principal use;



      (20)   Country clubs and privately-owned outdoor recreation
facilities, and publicly owned outdoor recreation facilities greater than one
acre in area and/or containing a swimming pool; provided however, any private
facilities are subject to the same limitations as required for the uses in
the RMF District;



      (21)   Community centers;



      (22)   Group home for pregnant women in recovery from
substance abuse;



      (23)   Traditional infill developments (TID) in accordance
with § 153.219 of this chapter. A TID may only contain residential uses that
are otherwise allowed in this zoning district (either as a permitted use or a
conditional use);



      (24)   Child advocacy center; and



      (25)   Temporary homeless shelters.



   (C)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Minimum lot size.



         (a)   Bed and breakfast inn:  9,000 square feet.



         (b)   Churches:  20,000 square feet.



         (c)   Copy service:  9,000 square feet.



         (d)   Day care centers:  8,000 square feet.



         (e)   Florists:  9,000 square feet.



         (f)   Funeral home:  21,780 square feet.



         (g)   Laboratories:  9,000 square feet.



         (h)   Multi-family dwellings:  21,780 square feet
minimum project site size, but gross density shall not exceed ten units per
acre.



         (i)   Museum:  21,780 square feet.



         (j)   Office buildings:  9,000 square feet.



         (k)   Other uses and planned residential developments: 
same as in the RMF District.



      (2)   Minimum front setback.



         (a)   Planned developments:  see §§ 153.215 through
153.220 of this chapter.



         (b)   All other uses:  30 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback (an additional ten feet shall
be provided on all side yards which abut a public street).



         (a)   Museum, office buildings, funeral home, florist,
laboratory, copying service, travel agency, art and photography studios,
tailor and alteration shop, library, optician, multi-family dwelling:  15
feet.



         (b)   Other uses:  same as the RMF District.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setback.  All uses:  25 feet.



      (5)   Minimum lot width (as measured at the required front
setback); at least 35 feet of lot width measured at the street right-of-way
line shall be required except as noted.



         (a)   Office buildings, museums, libraries, funeral
home, florist, laboratory, copy service, multi-family dwelling, church,
schools:  100 feet with at least 50 feet at the street right-of-way line.



         (b)   Two-family dwellings:  80 feet.



         (c)   Churches and schools:  120 feet with at least 50
feet at the street right-of-way line.



         (d)   Planned residential development:  see §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



         (e)   Other uses:  70 feet.



      (6)   Maximum building height.  All uses:  40 feet, except
as provided in § 153.054 of this chapter.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening when required by § 153.046(A) of this chapter
shall be installed pursuant to § 153.046 of this chapter.



      (2)   Where applicable, landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.047 of this chapter.



      (3)   Screening for planned developments:  see §§ 153.215
through 153.220 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.6)  (Ord. ZTA-5-2009, passed 11-5-2009; Ord. ZTA-6-2009,
passed 1-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.111  O-I OFFICE INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   All uses as permitted in the R-O District but the 5,000
square foot limit for office buildings shall not apply;



      (2)   Art and photography studios (excluding adult
establishments);



      (3)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (4)   Cemeteries as a principal use;



      (5)   Churches;



      (6)   Colleges and trade schools, except truck and heavy
construction equipment operating schools;



      (7)   Community centers;



      (8)   Copy service;



      (9)   Day care centers;



      (10)   Essential services, Class II;



      (11)   Florist;



      (12)   Food catering service;



      (13)   Funeral homes;



      (14)   Gift shop having less than 2,500 square feet gross
floor area;



      (15)   Hospitals;



      (16)   Laboratories;



      (17)   Libraries;



      (18)   Museums;



      (19)   Optician;



      (20)   Pharmacy (less than 3,000 square feet gross floor area);



      (21)   Recreation facilities:  country clubs, privately-owned
outdoor recreation facilities and publicly owned outdoor recreation
facilities greater than one acre on the same basis as permitted in §
153.109(A) of this chapter;



      (22)   Rest homes, nursing care facilities and continuing care
communities;



      (23)   Health centers;



      (24)   Hospitals including but not limited to
university/teaching hospitals and physical rehabilitation hospitals;



      (25)   Medical clinics; and



      (26)   Personal health clinics.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with
§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter.



      (1)   Multi-family dwellings with a gross density of up to ten
units per acre;



      (2)   Planned residential developments in accordance with §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter and provided the allowed densities
for the developments shall be the same as for the RMF District;



      (3)   Planned unit developments (mixed use) in accordance with
§ 153.216 of this chapter and provided the uses within the development are
otherwise listed as permitted or conditional uses allowed in the O-I District;



      (4)   Jails;



      (5)   Financial institutions;



      (6)   Post office; and



      (7)   Traditional infill developments (TID) in accordance with
§ 153.219 of this chapter. A TID may only contain residential uses that are
otherwise allowed in this zoning district (either as a permitted use or a
conditional use).



   (C)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Minimum lot size.



         (a)   Residential uses:  same as RMF.



         (b)   Nonresidential uses:  none.



      (2)   Minimum lot width (as measured at the required front
setback).



         (a)   Residential uses:  same as RMF District.



         (b)   Nonresidential uses:  80 feet.



      (3)   Minimum front setback.



         (a)   Residential uses:  same as RMF.



         (b)   Nonresidential uses:  30 feet (as measured from
the edge of the street right-of-way).



      (4)   Minimum side setback.  Ten feet for all uses, except 20
feet shall be required on all corner lots and any lots that abut a
Residential (R) District.



      (5)   Minimum rear setback.  All residential uses:  25 feet;
all other uses 20 feet.



      (6)   Maximum building height.  Forty feet, except as
permitted in § 153.054 of this chapter.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening when required by § 153.046(A) of this chapter
shall be installed pursuant to § 153.046 of this chapter.



      (2)   Where applicable, landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.047 of this chapter. Screening for planned
developments, see §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.7)



§ 153.112  N-B NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   Retail uses (provided, however, no single retail use
with greater than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be permitted).



         (a)   Antique store;



         (b)   Arts and crafts store;



         (c)   Bakeries (retail/nondistributor);



         (d)   Beauty supply stores;



         (e)   Bicycle store;



         (f)   Book and stationery store, cards, gift-wrap,
boxes, sales (excluding adult establishments);



         (g)   Camera shop;



         (h)   Clock shop;



         (i)   Clothing store;



         (j)   Computer service store;



         (k)   Convenience store;



         (l)   Copy service;



         (m)   Curtain and drape store;



         (n)   Delicatessen;



         (o)   Dressmaking shop;



         (p)   Drugstore;



         (q)   Dry cleaning (pickup and delivery only);



         (r)   Dry goods shop;



         (s)   Florist and gift shop;



         (t)   Floor covering, lighting, wallpaper, paint and
window covering stores;



         (u)   Food catering service;



         (v)   Food store;



         (w)   Furniture store;



         (x)   Furrier;



         (y)   Hardware store;



         (z)   Hobby shop;



         (aa)   Household goods shop;



         (bb)   Jewelry and jewelry repair;



         (cc)   Key shop;



         (dd)   Linen shop;



         (ee)   Luggage and leather store;



         (ff)   Medical supply store;



         (gg)   Music store;



         (hh)   Notion and fabric store;



         (ii)   Office supply and equipment shop;



         (jj)   Pet store;



         (kk)   Postal store;



         (ll)   Publicly operated alcohol beverage control (ABC)
store;



         (mm)   Restaurant (excluding fast-food and drive-in
restaurant);



         (nn)   Second-hand shop (excluding pawn shop);



         (oo)   Shoe store;



         (pp)   Shoe repair shop;



         (qq)   Sporting goods and trophy shop;



         (rr)   Tailor and alteration shop;



         (ss)   Toy store;



         (tt)   Variety and department store;



         (uu)   Video rental and sales shop (excluding adult
establishments);



         (vv)   Shopping centers, Class A provided the shopping
center does not exceed 10,000 square feet in gross floor area and no single
store within the shopping center shall exceed 5,000 square feet in gross
floor area; and



         (ww)   Office buildings containing a maximum gross floor
area of 15,000 square feet or less.



      (2)   Services.



         (a)   Art and photography studio (excluding adult
establishments);



         (b)   Automobile parking lot;



         (c)   Automobile wash establishment (self-service);



         (d)   Banks;



         (e)   Barber shop;



         (f)   Beauty shop;



         (g)   Bed and breakfast inn;



         (h)   Branch library;



         (i)   Churches;



         (j)   Commercial schools providing training in any of
the arts, sciences, trades or professions, conducted entirely indoors, with
up to 100 enrolled students;



         (k)   Community centers and publicly owned outdoor
recreation facilities;



         (l)   Day care centers and small group day care centers;



         (m)   Essential services, Classes I and II;



         (n)   Exterminator service;



         (o)   Film processing shop;



         (p)   Finance company;



         (q)   Fitness and tanning salon and private nonprofit
primarily indoor sports and fitness and similar recreation facilities (e.g.,
YMCA, YWCA, Boys Clubs, Girls Clubs, Optimist and the like);



         (r)   Interior decorating service;



         (s)   Laundromat;



         (t)   Library;



         (u)   Locksmith;



         (v)   Medical clinic;



         (w)   Office-business, professional and public;



         (x)   Opticians and optical services;



         (y)   Post office;



         (z)   Public safety station;



         (aa)   Recycling depository station where all deposited
materials are stored indoors or in closed bins; and



         (bb)   Travel agency.



      (3)   Other uses.



         (a)   Customary home occupations in a nonconforming
residential structure in accordance with § 153.045 of this chapter;



         (b)   Accessory structures in accordance with § 153.057
of this chapter;



         (c)   Signs in accordance with §§ 153.160 through
153.172 of this chapter; and



         (d)   Off-street parking and loading in accordance with
§§ 153.185 through 153.188 of this chapter.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with
§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter.



      (1)   Retail uses.



         (a)   Restaurants, fast food;



         (b)   Shopping centers, Class A;



         (c)   Office buildings containing over 15,000 square
feet; and



         (d)   Tavern.



      (2)   Services.



         (a)   Animal hospitals;



         (b)   Auction houses, conducted indoors (excluding
livestock auctions);



         (c)   Commercial schools, providing training in any of
the arts, sciences, trades or professions, conducted entirely indoors, with
over 100 enrolled students;



         (d)   Tavern;



         (e)   Taxidermist; and



         (f)   Mini warehouses.



      (3)   Other.



         (a)   Planned unit developments (mixed use) in
accordance with § 153.216 of this chapter and provided the uses within the
development are otherwise listed as permitted or conditional uses allowed in
the N-B District and any Residential (R) District;



         (b)   Family care homes;



         (c)   Child advocacy center; and



         (d)   Accessory apartments in commercial structures
provided all building and fire codes are met.



   (C)   Yard requirements.



         (a)   Minimum lot size:  none.



         (b)   Minimum lot width:  70 feet (as measured at the
required front setback).



         (c)   Minimum front setback:  30 feet (as measured from
the edge of the street right-of-way).



         (d)   Minimum side setback:  ten feet, except 20 feet
shall be required on all corner lots and lots which abut a Residential (R)
District.



         (e)   Minimum rear setback:  20 feet.



         (f)   Maximum building height:  40 feet, except as
permitted in § 153.054 of this chapter.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening, when required by § 153.046(A) of this
chapter, shall be installed pursuant to § 153.046 of this chapter.



      (2)   Where applicable, landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.047 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.8)  (Ord. ZTA-2-2010, passed 6-3-2010; Ord. ZTA-2-2011,
passed 7-11-2011; Ord. ZTA-4-2016, passed 7-7-2016)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.113  C-B CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   Retail uses.



         (a)   Antique store;



         (b)   Appliance and appliance repair store;



         (c)   Arts and crafts store;



         (d)   Automobile and boat supply store;



         (e)   Bakeries (retail and wholesale);



         (f)   Bicycle store;



         (g)   Beauty supply store;



         (h)   Book and stationery store (excluding adult
establishments);



         (i)   Box and gift-wrap store;



         (j)   Card (greeting) shop.



         (k)   Camera shop and film developing service depository
and/or walk-in service developing lab;



         (l)   Catalog sales store;



         (m)   Clock shop;



         (n)   Clothing shop/department store;



         (o)   Computer service store;



         (p)   Convenience stores (no fuel sales);



         (q)   Copy service;



         (r)   Curtains, drape and other window treatments store;



         (s)   Delicatessen;



         (t)   Dressmaking shop;



         (u)   Drugstore;



         (v)   Dry cleaning (pick-up and delivery station);



         (w)   Dry goods shop;



         (x)   Electronics sales;



         (y)   Florist and gift shop;



         (z)   Floor covering, lighting, wallpaper, paint and
window covering store;



         (aa)   Food store;



         (bb)   Formalwear sales and rental;



         (cc)   Furniture, rugs and other home furnishings store;



         (dd)   Furrier;



         (ee)   Hardware store (but not outdoor storage or
enclosed lumber yards);



         (ff)   Hobby store;



         (gg)   Household goods shop;



         (hh)   Jewelry and jewelry repair shop;



         (ii)   Key shop;



         (jj)   Linen shop;



         (kk)   Luggage and leather shop;



         (ll)   Medical supply sales and rental store;



         (mm)   Music store including recordings of the various
media, print music, sound and high fidelity equipment and supplies, and
musical instruments sales and service;



         (nn)   Notion and fabric store;



         (oo)   Office buildings with a maximum gross floor area
of 10,000 square feet;



         (pp)   Office supply, stationary office equipment;



         (qq)   Party rental shop;



         (rr)   Pet store;



         (ss)   Postal store;



         (tt)   Restaurant and auxiliary food catering service;



         (uu)   Second-hand shop;



         (vv)   Shoe store;



         (ww)   Shoe repair shop;



         (xx)   Sporting goods and trophy shop;



         (yy)   Tailor and alteration shop;



         (zz)   Toy store;



         (aaa)   Variety and department store;



         (bbb)   Video rental and sales shop (excluding adult
establishments); and



         (ccc)   Motorcycle sales.



      (2)   Services.



         (a)   Art and photography studios (excluding adult
establishments);



         (b)   Automobile parking lot;



         (c)   Banks;



         (d)   Barber shop;



         (e)   Beauty shop;



         (f)   Community center;



         (g)   Commercial schools providing training in any of
the arts, sciences, trades or professions, conducted indoors, with up to 100
enrolled students;



         (h)   Essential services, Classes I and II;



         (i)   Exterminator service;



         (j)   Finance company;



         (k)   Film processing service;



         (l)   Fitness and tanning center (excluding adult
establishments);



         (m)   Interior decorating service;



         (n)   Laundromat;



         (o)   Library;



         (p)   Museum;



         (q)   Newspaper office and broadcast media offices and
studios only;



         (r)   Offices-business, professional, medical and public;



         (s)   Opticians and optical services;



         (t)   Post office;



         (u)   Public safety station;



         (v)   Rental of party, medical, office and household
items;



         (w)   Signs in accordance with §§ 153.160 through
153.172 of this chapter;



         (x)   Theaters, auditoriums and public or private
nonprofit cultural arts facilities (performance, education, and/or exhibit)
excluding adult establishments;



         (y)   Travel agency; and



         (z)   Dry cleaning service.



      (3)   Other.  Accessory apartments in commercial structures
provided all Building and Fire Codes are met.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with
§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter:



      (1)   Retail uses.  Shopping centers, Classes A and B.



      (2)   Services.



         (a)   Arcade or amusement center or game room;



         (b)   Auction houses, indoors (excluding livestock
auctions);



         (c)   Automobile service station;



         (d)   Bail bond service;



         (e)   Bed and breakfast inn;



         (f)   Check cashing equipment;



         (g)   Churches;



         (h)   Commercial schools providing training in any of
the arts, sciences, trades or professions, conducted indoors, with over 50
enrolled students;



         (i)   Day care center;



         (j)   Financial institution;



         (k)   Hotel;



         (l)   Jails;



         (m)   Motel;



         (n)   Newspaper printing and other publishing;



         (o)   Office buildings containing over 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area;



         (p)   Parking facilities;



         (q)   Pawn shop; and



         (r)   Tavern.



      (3)   Other.



         (a)   Planned unit developments (mixed use) in
accordance with § 153.216 of this chapter and provided the uses within the
development are otherwise listed as permitted or conditional uses allowed in
the C-B District and Residential (R) Districts;



         (b)   Multi-family dwellings; and



         (c)   Family care homes.



   (C)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot size:  none.



      (2)   Minimum lot width:  none.



      (3)   Minimum front yard setback:  none.



      (4)   Minimum side yard setback:  none except ten feet shall
be required on all corner lots and 20 feet on side yards that abut any
Residential (R) District. The side yard setback on Multifamily residential
uses adjoining Residential (R) Districts may be reduced to 10 feet if an
opaque fence or wall is provided to screen the Multifamily residential use
from the Residential (R) District.



      (5)   Minimum rear yard setback:  none except 20 feet shall
be required on all lots whose rear yard abuts any Residential (R) District.
The rear yard setback on Multifamily residential uses adjoining Residential
(R) Districts may be reduced to 10 feet if an opaque fence or wall is
provided to screen the Multifamily residential use from the Residential (R)
District.



      (6)   Maximum building height:  40 feet except as permitted
in § 153.054 of this chapter.



      (7)   Off-street parking and loading:  all of street parking
and loading requirements as prescribed in §§ 153.185 through 153.188 of
this chapter shall be waived.



      (8)   Minimum build to lines:



         (a)   The fronts of all new commercial buildings shall
be constructed at the minimum front and side setback lines.



         (b)   The fronts of all new multifamilv buildings shall
observe a build to line of zero to thirty feet as measured from the street
right of way boundary..



      (9)   Where new structures are constructed adjacent to
existing sidewalks, an expansion joint shall be placed between the structures
and the sidewalk.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening when required by § 153.046(A) of this
chapter, shall be installed pursuant to § 153.046 of this chapter.



      (2)   When off-street parking is provided, landscaping shall
be installed, as applicable, pursuant to § 153.047(B) of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.9)  (Ord. ZTA-1-2013, passed 2-7-2013; Ord. ZTA-4-2016,
passed 7-7-2016; Ord. ZTA-7-2016, passed 1-5-2017; Ord. passed 4-6-2017) 
Penalty, see § 153.999



Editor’s note:



   Additional development standards pertaining to the CB District, see §
153.074



§ 153.114  CBT CENTRAL BUSINESS TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right: All
uses permitted in § 153.113(A) of this chapter.



   (B)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   The following uses may be allowed upon the issuance of a
conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with §§ 153.235
through 153.244 of this chapter:



      (2)   All uses permitted in § 153.113(B) of the chapter.



   (C)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot size:  none.



      (2)   Minimum lot width:  none.



      (3)   Minimum front yard setback:  none.



      (4)   Minimum build to lines:



         (a)   The fronts of all new commercial buildings shall
observe a build to line of zero to 20 feet as measured from the street
right-of-way boundary.



         (b)   The fronts of all new multifamily buildings shall
observe a build to line of zero to 30 feet as measured from the street right
of way boundary.



      (5)   Minimum side yard setback:  none except ten feet shall
be required on all corner lots and 20 feet on side yards that abut any
Residential (R) District. The side yard setback on Multifamily residential
uses adjoining Residential (R) Districts may be reduced to ten feet if an
opaque fence or wall is provided to screen the Multifamily residential use
from the Residential (R) District.



      (6)   Minimum rear yard setback:  none except 20 feet shall
be required on all lots whose rear yard abuts a Residential (R) District. The
rear yard setback on Multifamily residential uses adjoining Residential ( R)
Districts may be reduced to ten feet if an opaque fence or wall is provided
to screen the Multifamily residential use from the Residential (R) District.



      (7)   Maximum building height:  40 feet except as permitted
in § 153.054 of the chapter.



      (8)   Off-street parking and loading:  all off-street parking
requirements as prescribed in §§ 153.185 through 153.188 of this chapter.
Where lots in this district abut Main Street, the building or the principal
building in a multi-building project, shall be located between Main Street
and any off-street parking facilities. Off-street loading requirements as
prescribed in §§ 153.185 through 153.188 of this chapter shall be waived.



      (9)   Where new structures are constructed adjacent to
existing sidewalks, an expansion joint shall be placed between the structures
and the sidewalk.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening when required by § 153.046(A) of this chapter
shall be installed in accordance with § 153.046 of this chapter. Street
landscaping, as addressed in § 153.047(A) of this chapter, shall not be
required in the CBT District.



      (2)   When off-street parking is provided, landscaping shall
be installed, as applicable, pursuant to § 153.047(B) of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.9A) (Ord. ZTA-7-2016, passed 1-5-2017)  Penalty, see §
153.999



Editor’s note:



   Additional development standards pertaining to the CBT District, see §
153.074



§ 153.115  G-B GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   Retail uses.



         (a)   Antique store;



         (b)   Appliance and appliance repair store;



         (c)   Arts and crafts store;



         (d)   Automobile and boat supply stores;



         (e)   Automobile, truck, and motorcycle sales and
adjoined service/repair;



         (f)   Automobile service station;



         (g)   Bakeries (retail);



         (h)   Beauty supply stores;



         (i)   Bicycle stores;



         (j)   Boat sales lot;



         (k)   Book and stationery store, cards, gift wrap and
box sales (excluding adult establishments);



         (l)   Building materials store (with no outdoor storage);



         (m)   Camera shop;



         (n)   Camper and recreational vehicle sales;



         (o)   Catalogue sales store;



         (p)   Clock shop;



         (q)   Clothing store/department store;



         (r)   Computer service store;



         (s)   Convenience store;



         (t)   Copy and offset printing shop;



         (u)   Curtain and drape and other window treatments
store;



         (v)   Delicatessen;



         (w)   Dressmaking shop;



         (x)   Drugstore;



         (y)   Dry cleaning plant;



         (z)   Dry cleaning stores (pickup and delivery);



         (aa)   Dry goods shop;



         (bb)   Electric, plumbing, heating, ventilating and air
conditioning supplies and equipment sales and service;



         (cc)   Electronics sales;



         (dd)   Farm equipment sales and repair;



         (ee)   Feed and seed store;



         (ff)   Florist and gift shop;



         (gg)   Floor covering, lighting, wallpaper, paint and
window covering stores;



         (hh)   Food catering service;



         (ii)   Food store, grocery store, supermarket;



         (jj)   Formal wear sales and rentals;



         (kk)   Furniture, rugs, and other home furnishings store;



         (ll)   Furrier;



         (mm)   Garden center, commercial greenhouses and
horticultural nurseries;



         (nn)   Hardware store (no outdoor storage);



         (oo)   Hobby shop;



         (pp)   Home improvements store (no outdoor storage);



         (qq)   Household goods shop;



         (rr)   Jewelry and jewelry shop;



         (ss)   Key shop;



         (tt)   Linen shop;



         (uu)   Publicly operated alcohol beverage central (ABC)
store;



         (vv)   Luggage and leather goods store;



         (ww)   Medical supply sales and retail;



         (xx)   Manufactured home sales and service;



         (yy)   Music, record, instruments, and sound and
hi-fidelity store (sales and service);



         (zz)   Notion and fabric shop;



         (aaa)   Office supplies, stationary and office equipment
shop;



         (bbb)   Pawn shop;



         (ccc)   Pet store;



         (ddd)   Postal store;



         (eee)   Restaurant;



         (fff)   Restaurant, fast-food;



         (ggg)   Second-hand shop;



         (hhh)   Shoe store;



         (iii)   Shoe repair shop;



         (jjj)   Sporting goods and trophy shop;



         (kkk)   Tailor and alteration shop;



         (lll)   Toy stores;



         (mmm)   Upholstery, cabinet and woodworking shop;



         (nnn)   Variety and department store;



         (ooo)   Video rental and sales shop (excluding adult
establishments); and



         (ppp)   Shopping centers, Class A and B.



      (2)   Services.



         (a)   Arcade or amusement center or game room in a
shopping center, Class C only;



         (b)   Art and photography studio (excluding adult
establishments);



         (c)   Animal hospitals;



         (d)   Auction houses, indoors only (excluding livestock
auctions);



         (e)   Assembly hall, coliseum, ballroom and the like;



         (f)   Automobile body shop;



         (g)   Automobile garage, repair and service;



         (h)   Automobile parking lot;



         (i)   Automobile wash establishment (self-service, full
service or automatic);



         (j)   Bait and tackle shops;



         (k)   Banks;



         (l)   Barber shop;



         (m)   Beauty shop;



         (n)   Bowling alley, indoor skating rink and baseball
batting range;



         (o)   Broadcast studios but not transmission towers (see
essential services Class III);



         (p)   Churches;



         (q)   Publicly operated and/or commercial schools,
providing training in any of the arts, sciences, trades or professions;



         (r)   Community centers;



         (s)   Day care centers;



         (t)   Electric, plumbing, heating and air conditioning
services and contractors and building contractors but outdoor storage of
materials shall be a conditional use;



         (u)   Essential services, Classes I and II;



         (v)   Exterminator service;



         (w)   Film processing service;



         (x)   Finance company;



         (y)   Financial institutions;



         (z)   Private for profit fitness and tanning center and
public or nonprofit sports, fitness and related recreation and education
facilities (e.g., YMCA, YWCA, Boys and Girls Clubs);



         (aa)   Fraternal and civic clubs (excluding adult
establishments);



         (bb)   Funeral home;



         (cc)   Golf courses (all types and miniature and/or
driving range);



         (dd)   Government facilities (excluding jails, prisons
and similar penal institutions);



         (ee)   Hotel, inn or motel;



         (ff)   Interior decorator shop;



         (gg)   Laundromat;



         (hh)   Library;



         (ii)   Locksmith;



         (jj)   Medical clinics;



         (kk)   Mini-warehouse;



         (ll)   Motel;



         (mm)   Museums;



         (nn)   Newspaper printing and other publishing;



         (oo)   Offices-business, professional and medical and
public;



         (pp)   Opticians and optical services;



         (qq)   Pawn shops;



         (rr)   Photo processing center;



         (ss)   Photocopying and offset printing services;



         (tt)   Post office;



         (uu)   Public safety station;



         (vv)   Recording studios;



         (ww)   Recycling depository;



         (xx)   Rental centers (party, medical, personal,
furnishings and household items; tools and mechanized equipment; and
construction and cleaning equipment, trucks, vans and moving equipment, autos
and related vehicles);



         (yy)   Sign shop/sign painting;



         (zz)   Skating rink; indoor/outdoor; and



         (aaa)   Theaters, auditoriums and cultural arts
facilities for the exhibition, education, and performance of cultural arts
(excluding adult establishments).



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted upon
the issuance of a conditional use permit by the Lincolnton City Council in
accordance with §§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter.



      (1)   Retail uses.



         (a)   Express fuel/mini-mart;



         (b)   Shopping centers, Class C;



         (c)   Building materials, hardware and related sales
with outdoor storage, and outdoor storage of building materials by
contractors;



         (d)   Flea markets where indoor and fully enclosed; and



         (e)   Adult establishments.



      (2)   Service uses.



         (a)   Arcade or amusement center or game room;



         (b)   Office buildings containing over 50,000 square
feet of gross floor area;



         (c)   Essential services, Class III;



         (d)   Jails;



         (e)   Moving and storage services;



         (f)   Machining of metals shop (machine shop) not
exceeding 10,000 square feet of gross floor area;



         (g)   Postal and parcel service processing facility;



         (h)   Baseball hitting or golf driving ranges;



         (i)   Outdoor storage of materials by contractors;



         (j)   Road, grading, and utility contractors provided
all machinery is screened from view of street or adjoining property in
accordance with § 153.046(C) of this chapter; and



         (k)   Tavern.



      (3)   Other.



         (a)   Planned unit developments (mixed uses) in
accordance with § 153.216 of this chapter and provided the uses within the
development are otherwise listed as permitted or conditional uses allowed in
the G-B District; and



         (b)   Accessory apartments in commercial structures
provided all building and fire codes are met.



   (C)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot size:  none.



      (2)   Minimum lot width:  70 feet (as measured at the
required front setback).



      (3)   Minimum front setback:  40 feet (as measured from the
edge of the street right-of-way line).



      (4)   Minimum side setback:  ten feet, except 20 feet shall
be required on all corner lots and lots whose side yard abuts any Residential
(R) District.



      (5)   Minimum rear setback:  20 feet, except 30 feet shall be
required on all lots whose rear yard abuts any Residential (R) District.



      (6)   Maximum building height:  50 feet, except as permitted
in § 153.054 of this chapter.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening when required by § 153.046(A) of this
chapter, shall be installed pursuant to § 153.046 of this chapter.



      (2)   Where applicable, landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.047of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.10) (Ord. ZTA-2-2011, passed 7-11-2011; Ord. ZTA-4-2016,
passed 7-7-2016)  Penalty, see § 153.999



Editor’s note:



   Any retail use in excess of 85,000 square feet shall be required to
follow the supplemental regulations contained in § 153.075.



§ 153.116  P-B PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses shall be permitted by
right.



      (1)   All uses permitted in § 153.113(A) of this chapter
provided that the uses:



         (a)   Are limited to a maximum of 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area;



         (b)   Contain only one principal building on the lot; and



         (c)   Contain no more than one principal use per
principal building.



         (d)   The limitations in § 153.116(A)(1)(a) through (c)
above shall not apply to development sites located 200 feet or more from
residential land uses located in residential zoning districts.



      (2)   The prohibition of fuel sales for convenience stores as
listed in § 153.113(A) of this chapter shall not apply to the PB District;



      (3)   Signs in accordance with §§ 153.160 through 153.172 of
this chapter;



      (4)   Off-street parking and loading in accordance with §§
153.185 through 153.188 of this chapter; and



      (5)   Publicly operated alcohol beverage control (ABC) store.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed only
after a conditional use permit has been issued by the City Council in
accordance with §§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter.



      (1)   All uses listed in § 153.113(A) of this chapter which
do not meet all of the criteria found in division (A)(1) and (2) above of
this chapter and all uses listed in § 153.113(B) of this chapter except
jails; and provided however, arcade or amusement center or game rooms shall
be only in shopping centers Class C;



      (2)   Planned unit developments (mixed use) in accordance with
§ 153.216 of this chapter and provided the uses within the development are
otherwise listed as permitted or conditional uses allowed in the P-B District
or any Residential (R) District;



      (3)   Assembly halls, coliseums, ballrooms and similar
structures;



      (4)   Bowling alleys and skating rinks;



      (5)   Motel and motor lodge;



      (6)   Garden centers, commercial greenhouses and horticultural
nurseries;



      (7)   Automobile, truck, and motorcycle sales and adjoined
service/repair;



      (8)   Family theme parks;



      (9)   Express fuel/mini-mart;



      (10)   Automobile wash establishments (self-service,
full-service or automatic);



      (11)   Shopping center, Class C;



      (12)   Indoor shooting range/sales of fire arms and
ammunition; and



      (13)   Accessory apartments in commercial structures provided
all building and fire codes are met.



   (C)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot size:  none.



      (2)   Minimum front setback:  40 feet (as measured from the
edge of the street right-of-way).



      (3)   Minimum lot width:  70 feet (as measured at the
required front setback).



      (4)   Minimum side setback: ten feet, except 20 feet shall be
required on all corner lots and 30 shall be required on all lots whose side
yard abuts any Residential (R) District.



      (5)   Minimum rear setback:  20 feet, except 30 feet shall be
required on all lots whose rear yard abuts any Residential (R) District.



      (6)   Maximum structure height:  50 feet except as permitted
in § 153.054 of this chapter.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening when required by § 153.046(A) of this chapter
shall be provided in accordance with § 153.046 of this chapter.



      (2)   Where applicable, landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.047 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.11) (Ord. ZTA-2-2011, passed 7-11-2011; Am. Ord. O-03-2017,
passed 6-1-2017; Am. Ord. O-1-18, passed 3-1-2018)



Editor’s note:



   Any retail use in excess of 85,000 square feet shall be required to
follow the supplemental regulations contained in § 153.075.



§ 153.117  GMC GENERAL MANUFACTURING AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   Manufacturing, refining, processing or assembly of goods
or products;



      (2)   Agriculture equipment, sales and service;



      (3)   Assembly halls, coliseums, and ballrooms;



      (4)   Auction houses, indoors, excluding livestock;



      (5)   Automobile parking lots;



      (6)   Automobile painting, upholstering, repairs,
reconditioning and body work;



      (7)   Automobile sales;



      (8)   Automobile service stations;



      (9)   Automobile wash establishments;



      (10)   Bookbinding shops;



      (11)   Building materials and lumber sales;



      (12)   Cabinet, woodworking and upholstery shops;



      (13)   Commercial schools and schools providing training in
any of the arts, sciences, trades and professions;



      (14)   Contractors storage and equipment yards;



      (15)   Convenience stores;



      (16)   Dry cleaning and laundry plants;



      (17)   Electric, plumbing, heating ventilating and air
conditioning and construction supply houses;



      (18)   Essential services, Class I and II;



      (19)   Farm equipment sales and service;



      (20)   Financial institution;



      (21)   Florist, wholesale;



      (22)   Food catering service and food vending supply;



      (23)   Freezer lockers;



      (24)   Government facilities not otherwise listed (excluding
jails, prisons and similar penal institutions);



      (25)   Greenhouses and horticultural nurseries;



      (26)   Ice plants;



      (27)   Laboratories:  dental, medical, optical and research;



      (28)   Machinery repair;



      (29)   Manufactured home and recreational vehicle sales and
service;



      (30)   Moving and storage facilities (including
mini-warehouses);



      (31)   Office-business, medical, optical and professional;



      (32)   Passenger bus terminal;



      (33)   Photo processing laboratories;



      (34)   Postal and parcel service processing facility;



      (35)   Post office;



      (36)   Product distribution plants;



      (37)   Public safety stations;



      (38)   Railroad terminals and yards;



      (39)   Recycling terminals and yards;



      (40)   Recycling sorting facility;



      (41)   Restaurants, including fast-food restaurants;



      (42)   Roofing manufacturing, repair and installation
facilities;



      (43)   Sign painting and manufacturing shops;



      (44)   Slaughterhouse/abattoir;



      (45)   Tin and sheet metal shops;



      (46)   Tire recapping shops;



      (47)   Towers and antennas 50 feet or less in height;



      (48)   Truck sales and repair;



      (49)   Trucking terminals;



      (50)   Union halls, fraternal and civic organization meeting
facility;



      (51)   Vehicular and equipment outdoor storage (as a principal
use) not for retail sales where:



         (a)   The items are owned and/or operated by the owner
of the lot upon which they are located; and



         (b)   The items are in operating condition or intended
to be operated.



      (52)   Warehouses, including mini-warehouses;



      (53)   Wholesaler, jobbers, bulk warehouses; and



      (54)   Accessory outlet store, provided that parking for the
store shall be computed separately from the principal use and reserved for
those purposes.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The City Council may allow the following
uses upon the issuance of a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Mines and quarries;



      (2)   Airports and air strips/airplane sales, services and
fuel and rentals;



      (3)   Auctions, outdoors and/or livestock;



      (4)   Day care center as a principal use (accessory day care
centers are permitted as an accessory use by right under § 153.068 of this
chapter);



      (5)   Essential services, Class III;



      (6)   Express fuel/mini-marts;



      (7)   Farmers’ markets;



      (8)   Flea markets;



      (9)   Fuel oil distribution facilities;



      (10)   Fish hatcheries;



      (11)   Junkyards, automobile graveyards and scrap salvage
yards;



      (12)   Kennels (indoor and outdoor);



      (13)   Military reserve center/national guard armory;



      (14)   Outdoor storage of vehicles and/or equipment that are
not for retail sale as a principal use that does not meet one or more
criteria listed in division (A) of this chapter;



      (15)   Penal institutions;



      (16)   Race tracks;



      (17)   Septic tank cleaning service;



      (18)   Paintball gaming facility, outdoor;



      (19)   Outdoor shooting range;



      (20)   Haunted attraction (indoor/outdoor);



      (21)   Churches;



      (22)   Recycling station - construction and demolition
material; and



      (23)   Tavern.



   (C)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   Minimum lot size:  none.



      (2)   Minimum lot width:  100 feet (as measured at the
required front setback).



      (3)   Minimum front setback:  50 feet (as measured from the
edge of the street right-of-way line).



      (4)   Minimum side setback:  20 feet, except 50 feet shall be
required on all lots that abut a Residential (R) District.



      (5)   Minimum rear setback:  30 feet, except that 50 feet
shall be required on all lots which abut a Residential (R) District.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening shall be required as provided in § 153.046 of
this chapter. Additional screening may be required so that the use is
screened from view of adjoining residential zoning districts. In the event
that the nature of the topography makes the screening from distant view from
residential areas impossible, then other measures such as heavy on-site
landscaping shall be installed to lessen any near or distant visual impacts.



      (2)   Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with §
153.047 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.12)  (Ord. ZTA-1-2009, passed 4-2-2009; Ord. ZTA-3-2010,
passed 7-1-2010; Ord. ZTA-2-2014, passed 7-10-2014; Ord. ZTA-3-2014, passed
11-13-2014; Ord. ZTA-4-2016, passed 7-7-2016)



Editor’s note:



   Any retail use in excess of 60,000 square feet shall be required to
follow the supplemental regulations contained in § 153.075.



   The term SIC shall refer to the Standard Industrial Classification
system as set forth in the SIC Manual published by the United States of
America, Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget;
and unless a use is defined in this chapter, the SIC Manual shall be used to
define, clarify or more specifically identify the uses and groups of uses
listed under the GMC District. Provided, however, while the SIC Manual uses
the term “establishments primarily engaged in” in defining types of
manufacturing operations, this chapter shall be construed to mean that if the
activity is conducted at all and is listed conditional then the entire use
shall be deemed a “conditional use” as opposed to a “permitted use.”



§ 153.118  ROS RESIDENTIAL OFFICE SINGLE-FAMILY.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following principal uses are permitted
by right.



      (1)   All permitted uses allowed in the R-15 District;



      (2)   Office buildings containing 2,000 square feet or less of
gross floor area;



      (3)   Churches including customary accessory uses. Church
owned and maintained cemeteries as an accessory use are permitted;



      (4)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools
and/or school district administrative offices;



      (5)   Family care homes;



      (6)   Customary home occupations in accordance with § 153.045
of this chapter;



      (7)   Day care center, small group;



      (8)   Private residential quarters, provided there is
sufficient off-street parking to accommodate the private residential quarters
in addition to the two off-street parking spaces required for the principal
dwelling;



      (9)   Private recreation facilities constructed pursuant to a
permit authorizing the construction of some residential development and
intended primarily for the use and enjoyment of the residents thereof; and



      (10)   Public safety stations.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following principal uses may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in
accordance with §§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter.



      (1)   Essential services, Class II;



      (2)   Rest homes, nursing care facilities and continuing care
communities;



      (3)   Day care centers;



      (4)   Florists;



      (5)   Copying service;



      (6)   Museums;



      (7)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (8)   Office buildings containing over 2,000 square feet of
gross floor area;



      (9)   Travel agency;



      (10)   Art and photography studios;



      (11)   Tailor and alteration shop;



      (12)   Libraries; and



      (13)   Barber shop/beauty shop.



   (C)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot size.



         (a)   Bed and breakfast inn:  12,000 square feet.



         (b)   Churches:  20,000 square feet.



         (c)   Copy service:  10,000 square feet.



         (d)   Day care centers:  10,000 square feet.



         (e)   Florists:  10,000 square feet.



         (f)   Museum:  21,780 square feet.



         (g)   Office buildings:  10,000 square feet.



         (h)   Rest homes, nursing care facilities and continuing
care communities:  20,000 square feet.



         (i)   Travel agency, art/photography studio,
tailor/alteration shop and library:  10,000 square feet.



         (j)   Other uses:  same as in the R-10 District.



      (2)   Minimum front setback.



         (a)   Single-family dwellings, family care homes, bed
and breakfast inns:  30 feet.



         (b)   Cemeteries and essential services, Class II:  20
feet.



         (c)   Office buildings containing 2,000 square feet or
less of gross floor area:  30 feet; except for any structure existing at the
time this chapter is enacted, the actual setback of the structure shall be
allowed for any office use provided there are no further encroachments into
the 30-foot front yard.



         (d)   All other uses:  40 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard setback (an additional ten feet shall
be provided on all side yards which abut a public street).



         (a)   Museum, office buildings, florist, copying
service, travel agency, art and photography studios, tailor and alteration
shop, library:  15 feet.



         (b)   Other uses:  same as the RMF District.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard setback.  All uses:  25 feet.



      (5)   Minimum lot width (as measured at the required front
setback).  At least 35 feet of lot width measured at the street right-of-way
line shall be required except as noted.



         (a)   Office buildings, museums, libraries, florist,
copy service, church, schools:  100 feet with at least 50 feet at the street
right-of-way line.



         (b)   Churches and schools:  120 feet with at least 50
feet at the street right-of-way line.



         (c)   Other uses:  80 feet.



      (6)   Maximum building height.  All uses:  40 feet, except
as provided in § 153.054 of this chapter.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   Screening, when required by § 153.046(A) of this
chapter, shall be installed pursuant to § 153.046 of this chapter.



      (2)   Where applicable, landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with § 153.047 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.13)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.119  MHO MANUFACTURED HOME OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)   All uses permitted in the underlying general zoning
district; and



      (2)   Manufactured homes, Class A.



   (B)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   The following uses may be allowed upon the issuance of a
conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance with §§ 153.235
through 153.244 of this chapter; and



      (2)   All uses listed as conditional uses in the underlying
general zoning district.



   (C)   Yard regulations.  All yard regulations shall be the same as
required for the underlying general zoning district. Manufactured homes,
Class A shall meet the same requirement as for a single-family dwelling.



   (D)   Screening and landscaping.  All screening and landscaping
requirements shall be the same as those required for the underlying general
zoning district. Manufactured homes, Class A, shall be treated the same as a
single-family dwelling for the purposes of screening and landscaping
regulations.



(Prior UDO, § 7.18)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.120  SH SPECIAL HIGHWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Zoning areas.



      (1)   These districts are located in areas adjacent or in
proximity to the Special Highways (existing or proposed) listed below. Each
SH overlay shall be drawn on the zoning map. The regulations contained in
this chapter shall be supplemental to those found in the underlying zoning
district, except as herein noted; and



      (2)   U.S. Highway 321. Limited access four-lane divided
highway under construction at the time this chapter is adopted.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  Uses in the SH District shall be limited to
those permitted and conditional uses listed in the underlying general zoning
district. In no case, however, shall any of the following uses be allowed to
take place on any lot which is located in the SH District.



      (1)   Manufacture of:



         (a)   Tires and inner tubes (SIC Group #301);



         (b)   Asphalt paving and roofing materials (SIC Group
#295);



         (c)   Secondary smelting processes (SIC Group #334)



         (d)   Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills (SIC Group #261,
262, 263);



         (e)   Flour, other milled grain, and feed and pet foods
(SIC #2041, 2047, 2048);



         (f)   Meat packing and poultry dressing (SIC #2011,
2015); and



         (g)   Lumber mills and sawmills (SIC #2421) and
lumber/timber storage yards.



      (2)   Livestock feed lot and sales facilities;



      (3)   Contractors’ storage yards;



      (4)   Unenclosed scrap and salvage metal storage and recycling
facilities;



      (5)   Automobile wrecking and salvage yards;



      (6)   Quarries;



      (7)   Coal sales and storage yards;



      (8)   Fuel oil distribution facilities;



      (9)   Auction sales, indoors and outdoors;



      (10)   Flea markets;



      (11)   Manufactured home sales lots;



      (12)   Tire recapping shops;



      (13)   Truck terminals;



      (14)   Radio, television or microwave transmission towers
exceeding 300 feet in height;



      (15)   Sanitary landfills;



      (16)   Roofing repair and installation facilities;



      (17)   Mobile home (manufactured home) parks; and



      (18)   Adult establishments.



   (C)   Maximum building height.



      (1)   None for nonresidential uses.



      (2)   Residential uses shall observe the maximum building
height for the underlying zoning district.



      (3)   This shall have the effect of nullifying the underlying
zoning district maximum height regulations for all nonresidential uses in the
SH District.



   (D)   Yard requirements (



      (1)   Minimum front yard setback:  In no case shall any
building be set back less than 50 feet from the right-of-way of the Special
Highway.



      (2)   Minimum side yard setback:  50 feet shall be required
if the side yard lies adjacent to the right-of-way of a Special Highway.



      (3)   Minimum rear yard setback:  50 feet shall be required
if the rear yard lies adjacent to the right-of-way of a Special Highway.



   (E)   Usage of yard and setback areas (for all uses other than one-
and two-family residential uses).



      (1)   Boundary fences, gates, security stations, flagpoles,
outdoor sculptures, fountains and similar works of art and on-premises ground
mounted identification signs are permitted in any required setback area which
adjoins a Special Highway right-of-way.



      (2)   Off-street parking and/or loading areas shall not be
allowed within any portion of any yard that lies within 50 feet from the edge
of a Special Highway right-of-way line.



      (3)   Outdoor storage and/or display, accessory structures and
uses and the dispensing of goods and services are permitted in any side or
rear yard (other than one which abuts a Special Highway right-of-way),
provided however, the dispensing automotive fuels and related products are
allowed in front yards without screening. Any outdoor storage located on the
lot shall be screened from the view of any adjoining lot or roadway and the
Special Highway. The screening may be located anywhere on the lot so long as
the outdoor storage is materially screened. The screening shall generally be
in conformance with § 153.046 of this chapter with the following exceptions:



         (a)   The screening shall consist of natural plantings
only; and



         (b)   The screening shall be in place and shall
effectively screen the outdoor storage prior to the certificate of occupancy
being issued.



      (4)   The Administrator may partially waive the requirements
for the screening in cases where he or she determines that due to topography
the screening would be impossible to install, would be unusually and
unreasonably burdensome upon the developer, or would serve no screening or
buffering purpose; provided however, that in making the waiver the spirit and
intent of this section are met.



   (F)   Signs.  Each nonresidential use shall be permitted all
identification signs as allowed in §§ 153.160 through 153.172 of this
chapter for the underlying general zoning district except as follows.



      (1)   Any nonresidential use on a separate tract of land is
permitted one ground mounted identification sign between the principal
building and the right-of-way of the Special Highway. The sign shall be no
closer than 25 feet from the edge of right-of-way of the Special Highway and
shall be limited to a height of ten feet and a sign face area of 100 square
feet. If a street lies between the principal building and the Special Highway
and that street provides the main access (i.e., street that fronts the use)
to the use, then the sign shall be installed in lieu of the identification
sign allowed pursuant to §§ 153.160 through 153.172 of this chapter. In all
other cases the sign is permitted in addition to all other signs permitted
pursuant to §§ 153.160 through 153.172 of this chapter for the underlying
general zoning district.



      (2)   In lieu of allowing one ground mounted identification
sign between the principal building and the right-of-way of the special
highway, the developer shall have the option to increase the size of one
freestanding sign on the property by 100 square feet. This bonus shall only
be available to Class C shopping centers with four or more tenants. If this
option is chosen, only one freestanding sign will be allowed on the property.



   (G)   Landscaping.



      (1)   In order to provide for a visually appealing landscape
as viewed by the motorist from the adjoining Special Highway, the first 50
feet of the yard lying between the Special Highway and the principal
structure shall be landscaped or left as natural wooded buffer (for all uses
except for single-family and two-family residential uses). Within this buffer
area, all deciduous and coniferous trees three inches caliper or larger, and
all dogwoods, redbuds and American hollies four feet high or larger shall be
considered of protected size. The protective buffer shall be left in a
natural state to the greatest extent possible. One plant unit shall be
required for every 40 feet or portion of 40 feet of lineal frontage. A plant
unit shall be composed, at a minimum, of one of the following combinations of
plants as listed below:



         (a)   A combination of existing trees of protected size
which will be retained, and which total more than 48 inches caliper;



         (b)   A combination of both existing trees of protected
size and newly planted trees that would total more than 48 inches caliper;



         (c)   Four large maturing deciduous trees and six small
maturing trees;



         (d)   Six large maturing evergreen trees and six small
maturing trees;



         (e)   Four large deciduous trees and four large
evergreen trees;



         (f)   Two large deciduous trees, four large evergreen
trees and four small maturing trees;



         (g)   Four large deciduous trees, two large evergreen
trees, and two small maturing trees; or



         (h)   Fourteen small trees.



      (2)   The arrangement and location of landscaping in the
Special Highway buffer shall be designed in a random spacing, not in a
straight line, to give the appearance of a naturalized setting and shall be
part of the landscape plan submitted for site plan review. The Administrator
shall have the authority to waive, modify, or alter the requirements of this
section on a case-by-case basis where due to unusual topography, elevation,
or location of a piece of property the strict adherence of these requirements
would serve no meaningful purpose. Any decision rendered by the Administrator
shall in no way conflict with the spirit and intent of this section and the
city’s desire to provide landscaping along a Special Highway.



   (H)   Ingress and egress points.



      (1)   Direct access onto a Special Highway shall not be
permitted. In addition, no access shall be allowed onto a ramp connecting the
Special Highway with an intersecting road. No two points of ingress and
egress (as measured at their closest distance) on any lot shall be closer
than 300 feet apart. If a lot has less than 300 feet of frontage on a road
which may be directly accessed, no more than one point of ingress and egress
(no more than one driveway) shall be allowed on the same road for each lot,
or per principal use if the principal use is located on more than one lot.
Provided however, any retail use engaged significantly in the sale of
automotive fuels to the public using pump islands shall be permitted one
additional access point along its total frontage (total frontage includes the
total for all streets on which the use fronts) provided the access point is
no closer than 36 feet from any other access point. Group projects such as
shopping centers and office parks shall be deemed to be a single principal
use. No more than two separate points of ingress and egress per lot shall be
allowed per road front except under the following conditions:



         (a)   The lot is five acres or greater in area; and



         (b)   The development is reviewed under the conditional
use or parallel conditional use permit process.



      (2)   Under these conditions, more than two points of ingress
and egress per road front per lot may be allowed.



      (3)   Wherever possible, no portion of any point of ingress
and egress shall be located closer than 200 feet from the centerline
intersection of any two roads. Whenever this distance is not possible due to
the lot dimensions, the drive shall be located as far as possible from the
intersection.



      (4)   Each driveway access shall be at least 24 feet in width
but not greater than 36 feet in width.



      (5)   It is the intent of this division to supersede the
requirements of § 153.186 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 7.19) (Ord. ZTA-5-2016, passed 9-1-2016)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.121  WSW WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Authority and enactment.  The Legislature of the State of
North Carolina has in G.S. Chapter 143, Article 21, Watershed Protection
Rules, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
of the citizenry. The City Council does hereby ordain and enact into law this
section as the Watershed Protection Standards for the city. Additionally, the
most recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps
covering the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction are adopted to provide
for interpretation of water supply watershed criteria.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. The definitions listed herein are to be used for Water
Supply Watershed Overlay District purposes and do not change or preempt any
definitions applicable to the remainder of this chapter.



      10/70 OPTION.  A development option that allows development up
to 70% built-upon area in 10% of the WS-IV PA Overlay District.



      ANIMAL UNIT.  A unit of measurement developed by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency that is used to compare different types of
animal operations.



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP).  A structural or nonstructural
management-based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce
nonpoint source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality
protection goals.



      BUFFER.  An area of natural or planted vegetation through which
stormwater runoff flows in a diffused manner so that the runoff does not
become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and
filtering of pollutants. The BUFFER is measured landward from the normal pool
elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams
or rivers.



      BUILT-UPON AREA.  Includes the portion of a development project
that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover including
buildings, pavement, gravel area (e.g., roads, parking lot, paths),
recreation facilities (e.g., tennis courts) and the like. (Wooden slatted
decks and the water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious.)



      COMPOSTING FACILITY.  A facility in which only stumps, limbs,
leaves, grass and untreated wood collected from land clearing or landscaping
operations is deposited.



      CRITICAL AREA.  The area adjacent to a water supply intake or
reservoir where risk associated with pollution is greater than from the
remaining portions of the watershed. The critical area is defined as
extending either one-half mile from the normal pool elevation of the
reservoir in which the intake is located or to the ridge line of the
watershed (whichever comes first); or one-half mile upstream from the intake
located directly in the stream or river (run-of-the-river), or the ridge line
of the watershed (whichever comes first).



      EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.  Those projects that are built or those
projects that at a minimum have established a vested right as of the
effective date of this chapter based on at least one of the following
criteria:



         (a)   Substantial expenditures of resources (time,
labor, money) based on a good faith reliance upon having received a valid
zoning permit to proceed with the project;



         (b)   Having an outstanding valid building permit as
authorized by § 153.058 of this chapter and G.S. § 160A-385.1); or



         (c)   Having expended substantial resources (time,
labor, money) and having an approved site specific or phased development plan
as authorized by §§ 153.345 through 153.354 of this chapter and G.S. §
160A-385.1.



      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL.  Any substance listed as that in:  SARA §
302, Extremely Hazardous Substances; CERCLA Hazardous Substances; or CWA §
311 (oil and hazardous substances).



      LANDFILL.  A facility for the disposal of solid waste on land in
a sanitary manner in accordance with G.S. Chapter 130A, Article 9. For the
purpose of this section, this term does not include composting facilities.



      LOW DENSITY OPTION.  A development option whereby built-upon
area shall not exceed the following standards:



         (a)   In WS-IV-CA:  24%; and



         (b)   In WS-IV-PA:  24% when developed with curb and
gutter; 36% when developed without curb and gutter.



      MAJOR VARIANCE.



         (a)   As applies to any development that must meet water
supply watershed standards, a variance that results in any one or more of the
following:



            1.   The complete waiver of a management
requirement; or



            2.   The relaxation, by a factor of more than 10%,
of any management requirement that takes the form of a numerical standard.



         (b)   Any request for a MAJOR VARIANCE must be approved
or denied by the Board of Adjustment or City Council and the North Carolina
Environmental Management Commission.



      MINOR VARIANCE.  A variance that does not qualify as a major
variance.



      NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.  All development other than
residential development, agriculture and silviculture.



      TOXIC SUBSTANCE.  Any substance or combination of substances
(including disease causing agents), which after discharge and upon exposure,
ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation into any organism, either directly
from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, has the
potential to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic
mutations, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions or suppression
in reproduction or growth) or physical deformities in the organisms or their
offspring or other adverse health effects.



      WATER DEPENDENT STRUCTURE.  Any structure for which the use
requires access to or proximity to or siting within surface waters to fulfill
its basic purpose, such as boat ramps, boathouses, docks and bulkheads.
Ancillary facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat supplies, parking
lots and commercial boat storage areas are not WATER DEPENDENT STRUCTURES.



      WATERSHED.  The entire land area contributing surface drainage
to a specific point (e.g., the water supply).



   (C)   Exceptions to applicability.



      (1)   Nothing contained herein shall repeal, modify or amend
any federal or state law or regulation, or any ordinance or regulation
pertaining thereto; nor shall any provision of this section amend, modify, or
restrict any provisions of the code of ordinances of the city; however, the
adoption of this section shall and does amend any and all ordinances,
resolutions, and regulations in effect in the city at the time of the
adoption of this section that may be construed to impair or reduce the
effectiveness of this section or to conflict with any of this its provisions.



      (2)   It is not intended that these regulations interfere with
any easement, covenants or other agreements between parties. However, if the
provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions or higher
standards for the use of building or land, then the provisions of these
regulations shall control.



      (3)   Existing development, as defined in this section, is not
subject to the requirements of this section. Expansions to structures
classified as existing development must meet the requirements of this
section, however, the built-upon area of the existing development is not
required to be included in the density calculations.



      (4)   A pre-existing lot owned by an individual prior to the
effective date of this section, regardless of whether or not a vested right
has been established, may be developed for single-family residential purposes
without being subject to the restrictions of this section. However, this
exemption is not applicable to multiple contiguous lots under single
ownership.



   (D)   Enforcement and penalties.  The provisions of § 153.999 of
this chapter shall apply when any development of land violates any provision
of this section.



   (E)   Effective date.  This section shall take effect and be in
force on July 1, 1993.



   (F)   Watershed Areas described.



      (1)   WS-IV Watershed Areas - Critical Area (WS-IV-CA).  Only
new development activities that require an erosion/sedimentation control plan
under state law are required to meet the provisions of this section. In order
to address a moderate to high land use intensity pattern, single-family
residential uses are allowed at a maximum of two dwelling units per acre. All
other residential and nonresidential development shall be allowed 24%
built-upon area. New sludge application sites and landfills are specifically
prohibited.



         (a)   Permitted uses.



            1.   Agriculture subject to the provisions of the
Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade
Act of 1990. Agricultural activities conducted after January 1, 1993 shall
have a minimum ten-foot vegetative buffer, or equivalent control as
determined by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission, along all perennial
waters indicated on the most recent version of the U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5
minute) scale topographic map. Animal operations greater than 100 animal
units shall employ best management practices by July 1, 1994, recommended by
the Soil and Water Conservation Commission.



            2.   Silviculture, subject to the provisions of
the Forest Practices Guidelines related to Water Quality (15 NCAC
II.6101-.0209, as amended).



            3.   Residential.  (See division (F)(1)(b) for
specific development guidelines.)



            4.   Nonresidential development, excluding;



               a.    The storage of toxic and hazardous
materials unless a spill containment plan is implemented;



               b.   Landfills; and



               c.   Sites for land application of sludge
residuals or petroleum contaminated soils.



         (b)    Density and built-upon limits.



            1.   Single-family residential, including planned
developments:  shall not exceed two dwelling units per acre on a
project-by-project basis. No residential lot shall be less than one-half
acre, except within an approved planned development as described in §§
153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



            2.   All other residential and nonresidential: 
development shall not exceed 24% built-upon area on a project-by-project
basis. For the purposes of calculating the built-upon area, total project
area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be
developed.



      (2)   WS-IV Watershed Areas - Protected Area (WS-IV-PA). 
Only new development activities that require an erosion/sedimentation control
plan under state law are required to meet the provisions of this section. In
order to address a moderate to high land use intensity pattern, single-family
residential uses shall develop at a maximum density of two dwelling units per
acre. All other residential and nonresidential developments shall be allowed
at a maximum of 24% built-upon area. A maximum of three dwelling units per
acre or 36% built-upon area is allowed for projects without a curb and gutter
street system.



         (a)   Permitted uses.



            1.   Agriculture subject to the provisions of the
Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agricultural, Conservation and Trade
Act of 1990.



            2.   Silviculture, subject to the provisions of
the Forest Practices Guidelines related to Water Quality (15 NCAC
II.6101-.0209).



            3.   Residential development. (See division
(F)(1)(b) for specific development guidelines.)



            4.   Nonresidential development, excluding the
storage of toxic and hazardous materials unless a spill containment plan is
implemented.



         (b)   Density and built-upon limits.



            1.   Single-family residential, including PRDs: 
development shall not exceed two dwelling units per acre, as defined on a
project-by-project basis. No residential lot shall be less than one-half
acre, or one-third acre for projects without a curb and gutter system.



            2.   All other residential, including planned
developments and nonresidential: development shall not exceed 24% built-upon
area on a project basis. For projects without a curb and gutter street
system, development shall not exceed 36% built-upon area on a
project-by-project basis. For the purpose of calculating built-upon area,
total project area shall include acreage in the tract on which the project is
to be developed.



   (G)   Buffer areas required adjacent to perennial waters.



      (1)   A vegetated buffer is required on both sides of
perennial (year-round flowing) streams and other perennial waters, such as
permanent lakes and ponds, for all new development activities as follows:



         (a)   Buffer width on each side of the stream shall be
100 feet for development activities exceeding the low-density option;



         (b)   Buffer width on each side of the stream shall be
30 feet for all uses that do not exceed the low-density option;



         (c)   Perennial streams and waters shall be those
indicated on the most recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale
topographic maps; and



         (d)   Desirable artificial stream bank and shoreline
stabilization is allowed within vegetated buffers.



      (2)   No new development is allowed in the buffer except for
water dependent structures and public projects such as road crossings and
greenways where no practical alternative exists. These activities should
minimize built-upon surface area, direct runoff away from the surface waters
and maximize the utilization of stormwater best management practices.



   (H)   Rules governing the interpretation of watershed area
boundaries.  Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the watershed
areas, as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply.



      (1)   Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately
following either street, alley, railroad or highway lines or centerlines
thereof, the lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.



      (2)   Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately
following lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
However, a surveyed plat prepared by a registered land surveyor may be
submitted to the city as evidence that one or more properties along these
boundaries do not lie within the watershed area.



      (3)   Where the watershed area boundaries lie at a scaled
distance more than 25 feet from any parallel lot line, the location of the
watershed area boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale appearing
on the zoning map.



      (4)   Where the watershed area boundaries lie at a scaled
distance of 25 feet or less from any parallel lot line, the location of
watershed area boundaries shall be construed to be the lot line.



      (5)   Where other uncertainty exists, the Zoning Administrator
shall interpret the zoning map as to the location of the boundaries. This
decision may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.



   (I)   Application of regulations.



      (1)   No building or land shall hereafter be used and no
development shall take place except in conformity with the regulations herein
specified for the watershed area in which it is located.



      (2)   No area required for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this section shall be included in the area required for another
building.



      (3)   Every residential building, which must comply with this
section and is hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot which conforms to the regulations herein specified, except
as permitted in division (J) below.



      (4)   If the use or class of use is not specifically indicated
as being allowed in the watershed area, the use or class of use is prohibited.



   (J)   Existing development.  Any existing development as defined in
this section may be continued and maintained subject to the provisions
provided herein. Expansions to structures classified as existing development
must meet the requirements of this section, however, the built-upon area of
the existing development is not required to be included in the density
calculations.



      (1)   Vacant lots.  This category consists of vacant lots for
which plats or deeds have been recorded in the office of the Register of
Deeds of the county. A lot may be used for any of the uses allowed in the
watershed area in which it is located, provided that where the lot area is
less than the minimum specified in this section, the Zoning Administrator is
authorized to issue a zoning permit.



      (2)   Uses of land.  This category consists of uses existing
at the time of the adoption of this section where the use of the land is not
permitted to be established hereafter in the watershed area in which it is
located. The uses may be continued as follows:



         (a)   When the use of land has been changed to an
allowed use, it shall not thereafter revert to any prohibited use;



         (b)   The uses of land shall be changed only to an
allowed use; and



         (c)   When the use ceases for a period of at least one
year, it shall not be re-established.



      (3)   Reconstruction of buildings or built-upon areas.  Any
existing building or built-upon area not in conformance with the restrictions
of this section that has been damaged or removed may be repaired and/or
reconstructed, provided that:



         (a)   Notwithstanding the requirements of §§ 153.135
through 153.145 of this chapter, repairs or reconstruction is initiated
within 180 days from the date of damage or removal; and



         (b)   The total amount of space devoted to the
built-upon area may not be increased unless the additional built-upon area
meets the requirements of the low density option or the 10/70 option,
whichever is applicable to the proposed development. In that case, the
previous built-upon area shall not be used to calculate maximum built-upon
area for the expansion.



   (K)   Permits.



      (1)   No building or built-upon area shall be erected, moved,
enlarged or structurally altered, nor shall any building permit be issued nor
shall any change in the use of any building or land be made until a zoning
permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. No permit shall be issued
except in conformity with the provisions of this section.



      (2)   Permit applications shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. The application shall include a completed application form and
supporting documentation required in division (K)(3) below as follows.



      (3)   Additional contents of application for zoning permit
within the water supply Watershed Overlay District. In addition to the
information required by §§ 153.255 through 153.261 of this chapter the
following information shall be required for all projects that must meet the
requirements of these regulations:



         (a)   The square footage and percent of built-upon area;



         (b)   For residential projects, total dwelling units and
dwelling units per acre;



         (c)   The accurate location of all perennial streams and
natural drainage areas on the property;



         (d)   The location and landscaping proposed for all
required buffer areas;



         (e)   Two reproducible copies of the plans and
specifications for proposed drainage facilities, including approximate
location and dimension of open drainage ways, storm sewers, culverts,
retaining ponds or areas where water is to be diverted through grading,
designed either by a North Carolina registered engineer or landscape
architect, to the extent that G.S. Chapter 89A, allow;



         (f)   Written verification that a soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan has been submitted to the approved by the
appropriate state agency; and



         (g)   Permit application fees as set by the City Council.



      (4)   Prior to issuance of a zoning permit, the Zoning
Administrator may consult with qualified personnel for assistance to
determine if the application meets the requirements of this chapter.



      (5)   Notwithstanding the requirements of § 153.255(C)(3) of
this chapter, a zoning permit that requires compliance with water supply
watershed standards shall expire if a building permit or watershed occupancy
permit for the use it not obtained by the applicant within six months from
the date of issuance.



   (L)   Building permit required.  No permit required under the North
Carolina State Building Code shall be issued for any activity for which a
zoning permit requiring watershed protection compliance until that permit is
issued.



   (M)   Watershed protection occupancy permit.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall issue a watershed
protection occupancy permit certifying that all requirements of this section
have been met prior to the occupancy of a building hereafter erected, altered
or moved and/or prior to the change of the use of any building or land.



      (2)   Watershed protection occupancy permit, either for all or
part of a building, shall be applied for at the same time as application for
a zoning permit and shall be issued or denied within ten days after the
erection or structural alterations of the building.



      (3)   When only a change in use of land or existing building
occurs, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a watershed protection occupancy
permit certifying that all requirements of this section have been met.



      (4)   If the watershed protection occupancy permit is denied,
the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing stating the
reasons for denial.



      (5)   No building or structure that has been erected, moved or
structurally altered may be occupied until the Zoning Administrator has
approved and issued a watershed protection permit.



   (N)   10/70 option.



      (1)   In addition to the built upon restrictions for the
protected area of WS-IV as stated in division (F)(2) above, new development
and expansions to existing development may occupy no more than 10% of the
protected area located within the Stanley/Hoyle Creek, Lincolnton/South Fork
Catawba River, and High Shoals/South Fork Catawba River Watersheds. Projects
may be developed up to a maximum of 70% built-upon area. Plans for
development using the 10/70 option shall be subject to review and approval by
the Zoning Administrator and subject to all rules and procedures as
established in division (K) above. Such additional intensity allocation
authorized by the 10/70 option must comply with all other applicable
provisions of the overlay district including 100 foot buffers adjacent to
perennial waters as outlined in division (G) above. The Zoning Administrator
shall keep records of the city’s use of the 10/70 option. Allocation of the
watershed acreage to be developed under this option shall be determined on a
first come-first serve basis.



      (2)   Once the 10% allocation is exhausted in each watershed
this chapter should be amended to include the high-density option.



   (O)   Appeals.  Appeals of administrative decisions and
interpretations of this article may be made to the Board of Adjustment under
the procedures described in §§ 153.275 through 153.281. Applicants may seek
variances only from the low-density regulations of this subchapter under the
procedures described in §§ 153.275 through 153.281, provided that the
Zoning Administrator shall mail a copy of the public notice of a variance
request by first-class mail to all other jurisdictions within the watershed
protection area established for the applicable watershed and any entity using
the watershed for water consumption 15 days prior to the meeting date. The
Zoning Administrator shall report all variances granted in the preceding 12
months to the Environmental Management Commission in January of each year.
The City Council shall hear all appeals for variances from the high-density
option regulations of this section following the variance procedures
established by this section and §§ 153.275 through 153.281. When the City
Council finds that a variance from the high-density option regulations is
necessary in unique circumstances to accommodate important social and
economic development, it shall prepare a record of the appeal, the evidence
presented, its deliberations and findings and its proposed decision,
including all conditions or modifications it proposes. The City Council shall
send this record and its variance request to the Environmental Management
Commission that may grant, grant with modifications or deny the request. The
Commission shall notify the City Council in writing of its decision. If the
Environmental Management Commission approves the variance request, any
conditions or stipulations it requires shall become part of the high-density
permit. Final decisions of the Commission may be appealed under the
Administrative Procedures Act of G.S. Chapter 150B, as amended.



   (P)   Facilities involved in the use, storage or manufacturing of
hazardous materials.



      (1)   The following is a list containing the names and
locations of facilities on record that use, store or manufacture hazardous
materials within the watershed.



 

Acme, Inc.


Buck Saver


2510 E. Main Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Ed’s Handy Mart #2


633 Riverside Drive


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Bell South


Southern Bell


315 S. Aspen Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Southern Bell


237 Sigmon Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

City of Lincolnton


Water Treatment Plant


1338 Reepsville Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Wastewater Treatment Plant


550 W. Highway 150 By-pass


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Fire Department


116 W. Sycamore Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Public Works Department


128 Motz Avenue


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Conoco, Inc.


2230 E. Main Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Lincoln County


Solid Waste Department


330 W. Church Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

County Jail


208 S. Government Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Burris Mfg. Co.


1164 Burris Boulevard


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Carolina Mills


Plant #5


564 South Grove Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Plant #6


569 South Grove Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Cochrane Furniture Co.


190 Cochrane Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

201 Industrial Park Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

202 Industrial Park Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Dixie Yarns


North State Knitting


1032 N. Flint Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Duke Power Company


Operations Center


121 Dave Warlick Drive


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Ferrell Gas


111-A Dave Warlick Drive


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Bulk Plan Site


South Grove Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092


Gastonia United Oil Co.






 

Mr. B.’s Food Mart


2412 East Main Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Hoyle’s  2


1210 East Main Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Hoyle’s  3


1316 North Aspen Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

General Marble


350 North 321 By-pass


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Lincoln Correctional Ctr.


150 Prison Camp Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Lincoln County Schools


Administrative Office


2660 North Highway 321


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Asbury Elementary


310 Salem Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Battleground Elementary


201 Jeb Seagle Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

G.E. Massey Elementary


1435 East Main Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Lincolnton Middle School


301 Jeb Seagle Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Lincolnton High School


803 North Aspen Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Love Memorial Elementary


1463 Love Memorial School Rd.


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

McMurray Industries


1140 N. Flint Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Mohican Mills


1419 Gaston Street Ext.


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

North State Knitting


1032 N. Flint Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Rhodes & Beal Oil Co.


1404 E. Main Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Roses Stores


1603 E. Main Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

South Fork Industries


535 Elm Grove Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Southern States


202 W. Pine Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

J.P. Stevens Company


2130 E. Main Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

J.P. Converters & Ind.


2130 E. Main Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Times Oil Corporation


1500 E. Main Street


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 

Vermont American Corp.


124 Legionaire Road


Lincolnton, NC  28092






 



   (2)   This list was obtained from the County Emergency Management
records.







 



(Prior UDO, § 7.20)  (Ord. O-03-18, passed 4-5-2018)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.122  HISTORIC OVERLAY HO DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The Historic Overlay District, hereinafter referred
to as the District, is one of the most valued and important assets of
Lincolnton. It is established for the purpose of protecting and conserving
the heritage of the city, county and state; for the purpose of safeguarding
the character and heritage of the District by preserving the District as a
whole and any individual property therein that embodies important elements of
its social, economic, cultural, political, or architectural history; for the
purpose of promoting the conservation of the District for the education,
pleasure and enrichment of residents of the district and the city, county and
state as a whole; for the purpose of fostering civic beauty; and for the
purpose of stabilizing and enhancing property values throughout the district
as a whole, thus contributing to the improvement of the general health and
welfare of the city and the residents of the District.



   (B)   Historic District establishment.



      (1)   The Historic Overlay District is hereby established as a
district which overlaps and overlays existing zoning districts, the extent
and boundaries of which are as indicated on the official zoning map for the
city. The boundaries of the Historic Overlay District are as shown on the
official zoning map.



      (2)   The requirements of the (HO) Historic Overlay District
shall be additional to other zoning district requirements and when in
conflict with other zoning district requirements, shall prevail over other
requirements of any zoning district or portions thereof which are within the
designated (HO) District.



   (C)   Permitted uses.  The Historic Overlay District contains
several zoning classifications. All uses permitted in any district, whether
by right or as a conditional use, are allowed in the Historic District
according to the procedures established for the uses.



   (D)   Required conformance to dimensional regulations; exceptions.



      (1)   Structures within the Historic Overlay District shall
observe the dimensional and other regulations of this chapter, except as
follows:



         (a)   No structure or part thereof shall extend nearer
to or be required to be set back further from the front lot line than the
average distance of the setbacks of the nearest principal buildings within
100 feet on each side of the building and fronting on the same side of the
street;



         (b)   Height (reserved);



         (c)   Side yard (reserved); and



         (d)   Rear (reserved).



      (2)   It is the intent of this section to supersede, within
the Historic Overlay District, the dimensional regulations of the basic
districts applying to the property.



   (E)   Authentic restoration or reconstruction.



      (1)   Permitted subject to approval of Historic District
Commission and Board of Adjustment, although not complying with dimensional
regulations. Where it is found by the Historic District Commission that an
application for a building permit covers activity constituting an authentic
restoration or reconstruction in the same location as the original location
and in the original conformation of the structure of historic and/or
architectural significance to the Historic District, the activity may be
approved by the Board of Adjustment, following approval by the Historic
District Commission.



      (2)   Approval subject to conditions.  The Board of
Adjustment, in approaching the authentic reconstruction or restoration, may
attach reasonable and appropriate conditions to the approval, so that the
public health, safety and general welfare shall be protected.



      (3)   Approval, limitation on.



         (a)   The Board of Adjustment shall not be authorized,
in action undertaken by this section, to approve a use of property that is
not a use permitted by right or for which a conditional use permit has been
granted by the City Council.



         (b)   In addition to any other conditions the Board of
Adjustment may make regarding the authorization, any items restored,
reconstructed, or maintained on, over, or within a public sidewalk, public
alley area, or other public way shall be the responsibility of the owner, his
or her heirs and assigns. The owner’s restoration, reconstruction, or
maintenance of any item within the area shall constitute the owner’s
agreement to protect and hold the city blameless against any and all
liability, cost, damage, or expense suffered by the city as a result of or
growing out of the restoration, reconstruction, or maintenance thereof. The
items, so approved, may be lawfully restored, reconstructed, or maintained.



         (c)   The Board of Adjustment shall not have the power
to grant permission for the construction of any structure which would project
over a public street (paved roadway) and nothing in this section shall be
construed to grant the authority to the Board of Adjustment.



   (F)   Parking waiver.



      (1)   Where the Historic District Commission, in considering
an application for a certificate of appropriateness, shall find that the
number of off-street parking spaces required by the zoning regulations for a
building or structure for which a building permit is requested would render
the building incongruous with the historic aspects of the District, it shall
recommend to the Board of Adjustment a waiver, in part or in whole, of the
off-street parking requirements.



      (2)   The Board of Adjustment may authorize a lesser number of
off-street parking spaces, provided:



         (a)   The Board finds that the lesser number of
off-street parking spaces will not create problems due to increased on-street
parking; and



         (b)   Will not constitute a threat to the public safety.



   (G)   Historic District Commission recommendations on conditional
use applications.  All use applications within the Historic Overlay District
shall be reviewed by the Historic District Commission at this next regular
meeting after the application has been submitted but in no case longer than
31 days following the submission of the application, in accord with the
requirements of this chapter. The Historic District Commission shall forward
its comments and recommendations within seven days prior to the public
hearing on the conditional use application as set forth in § 153.237 of this
chapter. The recommendations shall be submitted to the City Council along
with other documents related to the conditional use permit application.



   (H)   Certificate of appropriateness.



      (1)   Required.



         (a)   No exterior portion of any building or other
structure (including masonry walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and
pavement, or other appurtenant features) nor above-ground utility structure
nor any type of advertising sign shall be erected, altered, restored, moved
or demolished within the district until after an application for a
certificate of appropriateness as to exterior features has been submitted to
and approved by the Historic District Commission except as provided for in
division (P) below. For the purpose of this section EXTERIOR FEATURES shall
include the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of
the exterior of a building or other structure, including the color, the kind
and texture of the building material, landscaping and natural features, the
size and scale of the building and the type and style of all windows, doors,
light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures. Provided, however, a
certificate of appropriateness shall not be required when the only change in
exterior appearance is the painting of existing painted surfaces regardless
of the color of paint to be applied.



         (b)   A certificate of appropriateness must be issued by
the Commission prior to the issuance of either a zoning or building permit
granted for the purposes of constructing, altering, moving or demolishing
structures, which certificate may be issued subject to reasonable conditions
necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit is
required. Any building permit, zoning permit or other permit not issued in
conformity with this section shall be invalid.



         (c)   The city and all public utility companies shall be
required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness prior to initiating any
changes in the character of street paving, sidewalks, trees, utility
installations, lighting, walls, fences, structures and buildings on property,
easements, or streets owned or franchised by the city or public utility
companies.



      (2)   Required procedures.



         (a)   Application submitted to Administrator.  An
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from and,
when completed, filed with the Administrator. An application for a
certificate of appropriateness shall be considered by the Historic District
Commission at its next regular meeting, but in no case longer than 31 days
following the submission of the application, provided it has been filed,
complete in form and content, at least seven calendar days before the
regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission; otherwise, consideration shall
be deferred until the following meeting.



         (b)   Contents of application.  The Commission shall,
by uniform rule in its Rules of Procedure, require information as is
reasonably necessary to determine the nature of the application. An
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall not be deemed complete
until all required information has been submitted. Nothing shall prevent the
applicant from filing with the application additional relevant information
bearing on the application.



         (c)   Notification of Historic District Commission. 
Upon receipt of an application, the Administrator shall notify the Historic
District Commission at least four calendar days before its regularly
scheduled or specially called meeting.



         (d)   Notification of affected property owners.  Prior
to issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission
shall take the action as may reasonably be necessary to inform the owners of
any property likely to be materially affected by the application, and shall
give the applicant and the owners an opportunity to be heard.



         (e)   Public hearing.  In cases where the Commission
deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application.



         (f)   Commission action on application.  The Commission
shall take action on the application and in doing so shall apply the review
criteria, contained in division (I) below of this section. The Commission’s
action on the application shall be approval, approval with modifications, or
disapproval. Prior to final action on an application, the Commission, using
the guidelines in division (I) below, shall make findings of fact indicating
the extent to which the application is or is not congruous with the historic
aspects of the District. No member or alternate member shall vote on any
matter concerning an application for a certificate of appropriateness (COA)
unless that member or alternate shall have been present during the hearing
and deliberations concerning the application.



         (g)   Reasons for Commission’s actions to appear in
minutes.  The Commission shall cause to be entered into the minutes of its
meeting the reasons for its actions, whether it be approval, approval with
modifications or denial.



         (h)   Time limits.  If the Commission fails to take
final action upon any application within 60 days after the completed
application is submitted to the Administrator, the application shall be
deemed to be approved. The 60-day period may be extended through mutual
written agreement between the Commission and the applicant. The extension may
be no longer than 30 days and may be renewed.



         (i)   Submission of new application.  If the Commission
determines that a certificate of appropriateness should not be issued, a new
application affecting the same property may be submitted only if substantial
change is made in plans for the proposed construction, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration or moving; unless a period of one year has elapsed
since the denial and in that case the same application may be resubmitted.



   (I)   Review criteria.



      (1)   Intent.



         (a)   It is the intention of these regulations to
ensure, insofar as possible, that buildings or structures in the Historic
Overlay District shall be in harmony with other buildings or structures
located therein. However, it is not the intention of these regulations to
require the reconstruction or restoration of individual or original buildings
or prohibit the demolition or removal of same or to impose architectural
styles from particular historic periods. In considering new construction, the
Commission may encourage contemporary design that is harmonious with the
character of the District.



         (b)   In granting a certificate of appropriateness, the
Commission shall take into account the historic or architectural significance
of the structure under consideration and the exterior form and appearance of
any proposed additions or modifications to that structure as well as the
effect of the change or additions upon other structures in the vicinity.



      (2)   Exterior form and appearance.  The Commission in
reviewing applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall consider
the following criteria, when relevant. These criteria shall serve as
guidelines to determine whether the construction or alteration as proposed in
the application for certificate of appropriateness is compatible to those
properties within the HO-Historic Overlay District:



         (a)   Lot coverage, defined as the percentage of lot
area covered by primary structures;



         (b)   Setback, defined in § 153.031 of this chapter;



         (c)   Building or structure height, the maximum height
of all new buildings permitted in the Historic Overlay District shall be 35
feet unless the Historic District Commission authorizes a height above 35
feet. However, the authorized height shall not exceed 10% of the average
height of existing adjacent buildings. Chimneys, steeples, spires, cupolas
and the like, not intended for human occupancy, shall be reviewed on an
individual basis and shall be subject to the requirements stipulated by the
Historic District Commission certificate of appropriateness for that
particular project;



         (d)   Spacing of buildings, defined as the distance
between adjacent buildings, i.e., the recurrent relationship of building
masses to the spaces between them;



         (e)   Exterior building materials, the predominant
material shall be brick, stone, stucco, wood siding or the other material
that shall be compatible to those properties within the Historic Overlay
District;



         (f)   Proportion, shape, positioning, location, pattern
and sizes of any elements of windows and other openings;



         (g)   Surface textures, the predominant texture may be
smooth (stucco) or wrought (brick) or horizontal wood siding, or other
texture as shall be compatible to those properties within the Historic
Overlay District;



         (h)   Roof, shapes, forms and materials;



         (i)   Use of local or regional architectural traditions;



         (j)   General form and proportions of buildings and
structures, and relationship of any additions to the main structure;



         (k)   Expression of architectural detailing, such as
lintels, cornices, brick bond pattern, and foundation materials;



         (l)   Orientation of the building to the street;



         (m)   Scale, determined by the size of the units of
construction and architectural details in relation to the size of man and
also by the relationship of buildings and structures;



         (n)   Ratio of height to width of the total building
façade;



         (o)   Effect of trees and other landscape elements;



         (p)   Appurtenant fixtures and other features such as
lighting;



         (q)   Structural condition and soundness;



         (r)   Walls:  physical ingredients, such as brick,
stone or wood walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses,
building façades, or combination of these;



         (s)   Color:  the predominant color may be that of a
natural material or a painted one and shall be compatible to those properties
within the Historic Overlay District, as used in this section
“compatibility” shall also include original colors of structure, colors
which the structure had at any time during which the style(s) of the
structure were a prominent style for new construction, or any color schemes
generally representative of the original or modified architectural style(s)
of the structure and the neighborhood as determined by historical research;



         (t)   Ground covers, plants and other organic materials
and paving, paving block and bricks, and other the materials; and



         (u)   Maintenance of pedestrian scale and orientation as
well as provision for safe pedestrian movement.



      (3)   Interior arrangement not considered.  The Historic
District Commission shall not consider interior arrangement.



   (J)   Certain changes not prohibited.



      (1)   Nothing in this section of this chapter shall be
construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior
architectural feature in the Historic District which does not involve a
substantial change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, nor to
prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or
demolition of any feature which the Building Inspector or similar official
shall certify in writing to the Commission is required by the public safety
because of an unsafe or dangerous condition.



      (2)   Nothing in this section of this chapter shall be
construed to prevent a property that is not prohibited by other law.



      (3)   Nothing in this section of this chapter shall be
construed to prevent:



         (a)   The maintenance; or



         (b)   In the event of an emergency, the immediate
restoration of any existing ground utility structure without approval of the
Historic District Commission.



   (K)   Delay in demolition of buildings within Historic District. 
An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the
demolition of a building, structure or site within the Historic Overlay
District may not be denied. However, the effective date of a certificate may
be delayed for a period of up to 180 days from the date of approval. The
maximum period of delay authorized by this section shall be reduced by the
Commission where it finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be
permanently deprived of all beneficial use of or return from the property by
virtue of the delay. During the period the Historic District Commission shall
negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a
means of preserving the building or site. If the Historic District Commission
finds that a building or site has no particular significance or value toward
maintaining the character of the district, it shall waive all or part of the
period and authorize earlier demolition or removal.



   (L)   Review of application by Commission.  As part of its review
procedure, the Commission may view the premises and may seek the advice of
the State of North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources or other expert
advice as it may deem necessary under the circumstances.



   (M)   Appeal of decision.



      (1)   An appeal may be taken to the Board of Adjustment from
the Commission’s action in granting or denying any certificate, which
appeals:



         (a)   May be taken by an aggrieved party;



         (b)   Shall be taken within times prescribed by the
Historic District Commission by general rule; and



         (c)   Shall be in the nature of certiorari.



      (2)   Any appeal from the Board of Adjustment’s decision in
any case shall be made in accordance with § 153.281(B) of this chapter.



   (N)   Compliance.



      (1)   Compliance with the terms of the certificate of
appropriateness shall be enforced by the Administrator. Failure to comply
with a certificate of appropriateness shall be a violation of the zoning
regulations. The discontinuance of work or the lack of progress toward
achieving compliance with a certificate of appropriateness for a period of
six months shall be deemed as a failure to comply with a certificate of
appropriateness. The certificate of appropriateness shall be effective for 12
months from the date of issuance by the Zoning Officer. If all necessary work
or progress has not been completed within 60 days of the end of the
certificate’s time limit, the applicant may apply for an extension from the
Historic District Commission. The application must be made 30 days prior to
the end of the certificate’s time limit.



      (2)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit,
impair, or limit in any way the power of the city to prevent the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or removal of
buildings, structures, appurtenant fixtures, or outdoor signs in the Historic
District in violation of the provisions of this chapter. The enforcement of
any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement of any other
remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.



   (O)   Unsafe or dangerous conditions.  The construction,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving or demolition of any exterior
architectural features, which the Building Inspector or similar official
shall certify is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or
dangerous condition, shall not be prevented by the requirements pertaining to
the Historic Overlay District.



   (P)   Review and approval of minor works.



      (1)   The Administrator shall have the authority to issue a
certificate of appropriateness if an application or inquiry falls under one
of the following categories of minor works:



         (a)   Storm windows (providing color matches window
trim);



         (b)   Normal size television and radio antennas (citizen
band and ham operators shall require a certificate of appropriateness issued
by the Historic District Commission);



         (c)   Roof and basement ventilators; and



         (d)   Window air conditioning units, outdoor portions of
single or two-family residential central air conditioning or heating units.



      (2)   If the Administrator does not issue a certificate of
appropriateness, he or she shall advise the applicant to make a formal
application to the Historic District Commission. The Administrator is not
required to issue any certificate of appropriateness and may at his or her
discretion refer any matter to the Historic District Commission. The Historic
District Commission may deny no application for a certificate of
appropriateness without formal action.



(Prior UDO, § 7.23)



NONCONFORMITIES



§ 153.135  PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate and limit the
continued existence of uses and structures established prior to the effective
date of this chapter or any amendment subsequent thereto that do not conform
to this chapter. Any nonconformity created by a change in the classification
of property or the text of this chapter shall be regulated by the provisions
of this subchapter. Many nonconformities may continue and in certain
circumstances may make limited expansions, but the provisions of this
subchapter are designed to limit or curtail substantial investment in
nonconformities and to bring about eventual elimination and/or lessen the
impact upon surrounding conforming uses in order to preserve the integrity of
this chapter.



   (B)   While the intent of this subchapter prefers the eventual
elimination of nonconforming uses, the City Council hereby finds that zoning
in the city has generally not been successful in eliminating nonconformities,
particularly viable ones, and that the public interest may be better served
by allowing limited expansions of certain nonconformities whereby the impact
of the nonconformity on surrounding and uses is lessened.



(Prior UDO, § 8.1)



§ 153.136  NONCONFORMING USES OTHER THAN MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS, SIGNS AND
JUNK YARDS.



   (A)   Nonconforming uses of land or structures, and nonconforming
structures that contain nonconforming uses, may continue only in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Normal structural repair and maintenance may be performed to
allow the continuation of a nonconforming use (except as required in division
(E) below of this section).



   (C)   A nonconforming use shall not be expanded, nor shall a
nonconforming use be enlarged by additions to the structure in which the
nonconforming use is located (either attached or detached) except pursuant to
§ 153.279(B) of this chapter. Any occupation of additional lands beyond the
boundaries of the lot on which the nonconforming use is located is
prohibited. An existing nonconforming residential use may, without hearing
before the Board of Adjustment be enlarged or altered, or be permitted in the
R-8 District, provided that no additional dwelling units result therefrom.
Any residential enlargement or alteration shall be in compliance with all
yard requirements of the structures as required in the R-8 District.



   (D)   When a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use,
it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use.



   (E)   If a nonconforming use is abandoned for 180 days or more, the
use shall not be allowed to re-establish. All new uses in the structure shall
thereafter be conforming. If the use is destroyed (i.e., received damage to
an extent of more than 60% of its replacement cost at the time of
destruction), it may only be allowed to re-establish in accordance with a
permit issued by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in § 153.279 of this
chapter.



   (F)   A nonconforming use may not be changed to a different
nonconforming use except in accordance with a permit issued by the Board of
Adjustment after having followed certain procedures and having made certain
findings as set forth in § 153.279 of this chapter.



   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a
nonconforming manufactured home not located in a manufactured home park may
be replaced with another manufactured home provided:



      (1)   The replacement manufactured home either:



         (a)   Meets all the minimum requirements for a Class A
manufactured home; or



         (b)   Meets all the minimum requirements for a Class B
manufactured home plus division (4) of a Class A manufactured home, as set
forth in the definition located in § 153.031 of this chapter;



      (2)   The replacement manufactured home is placed on the lot
in a manner which meets all the setback requirements of the zoning district
in which it is to be located or the requirements of the R-8 District,
whichever is greater;



      (3)   The replacement manufactured home is placed on the lot
within 180 days following removal of the existing manufactured home;



      (4)   Upon replacement of the existing manufactured home, the
property will conform to § 153.051(A) of this chapter; and



      (5)   The property is not located in any HO-Historic Overlay
District.



(Prior UDO, § 8.2)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.137  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   (A)   A nonconforming structure devoted to a use permitted in the
zoning district in which it is located may continue only in accordance with
the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Normal repair and maintenance may be performed to allow the
continuation of nonconforming structures.



   (C)   A nonconforming structure may not, under any circumstances, be
enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity.



   (D)   (1)   If a nonresidential nonconforming structure is
destroyed to an extent of more than 60% of its replacement cost at the time
of destruction, it may be rebuilt in a nonconforming manner only if a permit
for construction has been issued by the Board of Adjustment in accordance
with § 153.279 of this chapter. A residential structure which is destroyed
to an extent of more than 60% of its replacement cost at the time of
destruction may be reconstructed on the lot. If the structure can be placed
on the lot in a conforming manner, it shall.



      (2)   Otherwise, the residential structure shall be placed in
a manner most in conformance with all applicable regulations contained in
this chapter. A building permit for reconstruction must be secured no later
than 180 days from the date of destruction of the residential structure.



   (E)   Should a nonconforming structure be moved for any distance on
the lot of record, it shall be placed in a manner most in conformance with
this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 8.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.138  NONCONFORMING ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES.



   A nonconforming accessory use or accessory structure may be expanded
only if the nonconforming features of that use or structure are not expanded
so as to increase the degree of nonconformity.



(Prior UDO, § 8.4)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.139  NONCONFORMING LOTS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below of this chapter, in
any district where a lot has been recorded with the County Office of the
Register of Deeds, and is not in violation of the zoning regulations of the
city prior to the effective date of this chapter, and the lot does not comply
with the minimum lot area and width requirements for the zoning district in
which the lot is located, the lot may be used for any use permitted in that
zoning district, provided that the principal and accessory structures meet
all applicable front, side and rear yard requirements for that zoning
district as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   If two or more adjacent unimproved lots, neither one of which
meet the lot width and/or area requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located are of single ownership and are of record at the time of
adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto, and if these lots, in
combination, met the dimensional requirements established for lot width and
area, the lands involved shall be deemed to be an undivided lot. For the
purpose of this chapter, the lot(s) shall be used or sold by the owner and
all future assigns in a manner that is in compliance with lot, width and area
requirements or as otherwise provided in this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 8.5)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.140  SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING.



   In accordance with § 153.046(E) of this chapter, certain lots are
required to provide screening. All the lots shall be required to install
screening within seven years after the effective date of this chapter except
as provided in § 153.046(E) and except where the screening would encroach
upon the required sight triangle as described in § 153.052 of this chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall require any use which is required to dedicate
land used for parking for screening purposes to provide additional off-street
parking and/or loading to compensate for those areas so dedicated unless an
expansion of the principal use is requested. No expansion of a use can occur
unless all required screening, off-street parking and loading requirements
and all other requirements of this chapter have first been met.



(Prior UDO, § 8.6)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.141  NONCONFORMING OFF-STREET PARKING AND/OR LOADING.



   On any lot which contains a use which does not comply with the
off-street parking and loading regulations contained in §§ 153.185 through
153.188 of this chapter, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for
an external expansion of any principal building or accessory structure on the
lot which would result in a need to increase the number of off-street parking
and/or loading spaces required until all off-street parking and loading
requirements and all other applicable requirements of this chapter have first
been met. A change in the principal use can occur, however, provided that no
external expansion in the principal building occurs and also that the
required number of off-street parking and loading spaces is the same or less
than the former use.



(Prior UDO, § 8.7)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.142  NONCONFORMING MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME) PARKS.



   (A)   (1)   Any manufactured home park which is not constructed
in accordance with the standards set forth in § 153.202 of this chapter
and/or is a use which is not a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, shall be allowed to continue in operation for a period of ten years
following the effective date of this chapter.



      (2)   Thereafter, the manufactured home parks shall either:



         (a)   Cease operation and all manufactured homes shall
be removed;



         (b)   Be reconstructed to conform to the following
requirements:



            1.   Space dimensions and sizes shall be dictated
by on-site sewage disposal standards contained in county’s environmental
health regulations. Otherwise no setback, minimum lot size or other
dimensional requirements shall apply; and



            2.   No manufactured home shall be placed in a
manufactured home park unless it meets the standards of either Class A
manufactured home or Class B manufactured home as defined in § 153.031 of
this chapter.



         (c)   The location of each manufactured home stand must
be at an elevation, distance and angle in relation to the adjacent access
drive so that placement and removal of the manufactured home is practical by
means of customary moving equipment. All manufactured homes shall have a
continuous brick, cinder block, concrete block, stucco, stone or other
masonry-type underpinning or other skirting specifically manufactured for
manufactured homes, or pressure treated wood (but plain standard surface
pressure treated plywood is not acceptable), unpierced except for required
ventilation and an access door. The underpinning and skirting shall be
installed under all elements of the manufacture home. Each manufactured home
in the park shall conform to the State Department of Insurance Standards for
tie-down requirements. All replacement skirting in nonconforming manufactured
home parks shall be of a nonreflective type;



         (d)   Section 153.202(J) (manufactured home parks) shall
apply;



         (e)   Each manufactured home park shall have a space
number affixed either to the manufactured home or on a post or stand made of
durable material. The number shall be set at a location as to clearly
indicate the space to which it is assigned;



         (f)   Interior streets must be sufficient to carry
normal traffic entering and leaving the manufactured home park;



         (g)   Section 153.202(P) (manufactured home parks) shall
apply;



         (h)   Section 153.202(Q) (manufactured home parks) shall
apply;



         (i)   Section 153.202(BB) (manufactured home parks)
shall apply; and



         (j)   Where a manufactured home park is adjacent to a
public street or road, street landscaping shall be required as follows:



            1.   The landscaping shall be provided in a
designated landscaped area, which shall include, as width, at least the first
12 feet of the front yard and side yard as measured from the street
right-of-way line;



            2.   Landscaping shall consist of, at a minimum,
four small trees and 12 shrubs or four large trees per 100 linear feet of lot
frontage on street right-of-way. No part of the landscaped area shall be left
as bare soil; or



            3.   In the event that unusual topography or size
of a parcel to be developed would make strict adherence to these requirements
serve no meaningful purpose or would make it physically impossible to install
and/or maintain the required screen, the provisions of § 153.046(D)of this
chapter shall apply.



      (3)   A manufactured home park that is a nonconforming use may
continue after the ten-year period only if it conforms or is improved to
conform to the requirements of § 153.202 of this chapter. Provided however,
no manufactured home park, as long as it remains a nonconforming use, shall
be allowed to occupy lands beyond the boundaries of the tract on which it was
located at the time it became nonconforming except to comply with the
requirements of § 153.202 of this chapter. In no case shall any
nonconforming manufactured home park either nonconforming as a use or
nonconforming due to the standards of this chapter be allowed an increase in
the number of manufactured home spaces unless it shall first become both a
conforming use and conforming to the standards of § 153.202 of this chapter.



      (4)   In meeting the requirements of § 153.202 certain
requirements in that section are waived for nonconforming manufactured home
parks in bringing them into conformance with this chapter. Those requirements
waived are as follows:



         (a)   Section 153.202(A), Occupancy;



         (b)   Section 153.202(B), Minimum Park Area;



         (c)   Section 153.202(L), Public Road Frontage of Park;
and



         (d)   Section 153.202(M), Ingress and Egress.



   (B)   During the period nonconforming manufactured home parks are
allowed to continue in operation as provided for in this section the
following requirements shall be met:



      (1)   Any expansion of the manufactured home parks (this is
only permitted where a manufactured home park is a conforming use) shall
conform to § 153.202 of this chapter;



      (2)   If the park ceases operation for a period of greater
than 90 days it shall only be re-established in accordance with §§ 153.200
through 153.202 of this chapter (cessation of operation occurs when either
all manufactured homes have been removed or when a manufactured home park is
closed by a public authority due to violation of law); and



      (3)   When a space vacancy occurs or when one manufactured
home is replaced with another manufactured home, the replacement manufactured
home shall meet the requirements of either Class A or Class B manufactured
homes as defined in § 153.031 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 8.8)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.143  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   All existing on-premises freestanding signs that exceed the
maximum sign face size, sign height, maximum number of signs or spacing
requirements of this chapter shall be brought into compliance with the
requirements of this chapter or removed entirely, which means the entire sign
and any associated equipment, within ten years of this effective date of this
chapter.



   (B)   When two or more signs are made nonconforming because of not
adhering to spacing requirements, the age of permit shall determine which
sign shall be removed; the sign with the oldest valid permit shall be
permitted to stay.



   (C)   Signs not permitted in a zoning district:



      (1)   Advertising signs within the city extraterritorial
jurisdiction shall be allowed to continue as nonresidential nonconforming
structures as described in § 153.137 of this chapter.



      (2)   If a sign is not permitted use, but is an identification
sign for a lawful nonconforming use, the sign may be used for as long as the
nonconforming use is allowed to continue; except that the sign, within ten
years following the effective date of this chapter or the date the use became
nonconforming due to some later amendment to this chapter, shall at a minimum
meet all the requirements for the sign as specified for the next descending
zone (§ 153.315(G)) permitting the use.



   (D)   All other nonconforming signs not provided for otherwise in
this section and prohibited by § 153.167 of this chapter shall be removed
entirely or otherwise brought into conformance with this chapter, whichever
is applicable, within six months of the effective date of this chapter,
except that portable signs shall be removed entirely or otherwise brought
into conformance with this chapter, whichever is applicable, within one year
of the effective date of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 8.9)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.144  EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIRED REMOVAL AFTER A SPECIFIED PERIOD OF TIME
(AMORTIZATION).



   (A)   Nonconforming signs which contain, in lieu of any other copy,
otherwise lawful, noncommercial copy that does not direct attention to a
business operated for profit, or to a commodity or service for sale, provided
the sign complies with the size, height, lighting, spacing and setbacks
requirements of this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of §
153.143(C).



   (B)   Normal maintenance of all nonconforming signs, including
necessary nonstructural repairs, incidental alterations or copy alterations
which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming features of the sign,
shall be permitted during the amortization period for the sign. However, no
structural alteration, enlargement or extension shall be made to a
nonconforming sign unless the alteration, enlargement or extension of the
nonconforming features of the sign or by an order of the Administrator to
ensure the safety of the structure.



(Prior UDO, § 8.10)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.145  NONCONFORMING JUNKYARDS.



   Any junkyard less than one acre in area and located in a district not
permitting junkyards shall be removed entirely within four years from the
effective date of this chapter. Any junkyard one acre or more in area and
located in a district not permitting junkyards may remain in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter, provided however, § 153.279(B) shall not
apply to junkyards. Any junkyard that does not meet the setback requirements
for outdoor storage upon the effective date of this chapter shall meet the
requirements within two years of the effective date. For the purpose of this
section, the area of a junkyard shall be the area within the continuous
external boundary formed by the limits of the ground surface covered by junk
materials.



(Prior UDO, § 8.11)  Penalty, see § 153.999



SIGNS



§ 153.160  GENERAL INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to support and
complement the various land uses allowed in the city and its extraterritorial
area by the adoption of policies and regulations concerning the placement of
signs.



   (B)   The City Council does hereby find and declare:



      (1)   The outdoor placement of signs to be a necessary means
of communication to the public and a necessary accessory use of many
principal uses, but, that the erection of signs should be controlled and
regulated in order to:



         (a)   Promote the health, safety, welfare and
convenience and enjoyment of travel on and protection of the public
investment in streets and roads in the city area; and



         (b)   To promote the reasonable, orderly and effective
display of signs, displays and devices.



      (2)   It is also the intent of this chapter to prevent signs
from dominating the visual appearance of the area in which they are located.



(Prior UDO, § 9.1)



§ 153.161  SIGN ILLUMINATION.



   (A)   The letter  “N” means that the sign shall not be lighted.



   (B)   The letter  “L” means that the sign may be illuminated.



   (C)   All lighted signs shall have the lighting from an internal
source or directed in a manner as to illuminate only the face of the sign.



(Prior UDO, § 9.2)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.162  UNSAFE SIGNS.



   Any sign which is determined by the Administrator as being insecure, in
danger of falling or otherwise endangering the public safety shall be
immediately removed by the property owner unless it is repaired and made to
otherwise comply with the requirements of this subchapter.



(Prior UDO, § 9.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.163  SIGN AREA.



   Sign area shall be deemed to be the area within a single, continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of characters, lettering, logos,
illustrations or ornamentations, together with any material or color forming
an integral part of the display or to differentiate the sign from the
background to which it is placed. Structural supports bearing no sign copy
shall not be included in the sign area. If a sign is attached to an entrance
wall or fence, only that portion of that wall or fence onto which the sign
face or letters are placed shall be calculated in the sign area. Only one
side of a sign shall be included in the calculation.



(Prior UDO, § 9.4)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.164  SIGN HEIGHT.



   The height of a sign shall be measured from the highest point of a sign
to the average ground surface grade immediately below it.



(Prior UDO, § 9.5)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.165  PERMIT REQUIRED AND CODE COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or replace any
sign or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a sign permit for
the sign from the Administrator as required by these regulations.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, changing or replacing the copy on
an existing lawful sign shall not require a permit, provided the copy change
does not change the nature of the sign so as to render the sign in violation
of this chapter.



   (C)   All signs requiring a permit shall be installed in accordance
with the North Carolina Building and Electrical Codes.



(Prior UDO, § 9.6)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.166  SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMIT.



   The following types of signs are exempted from permit requirements of
§ 153.165 of this chapter and may be placed in any zoning district. The
signs shall be in conformance with any applicable requirements contained in
this chapter. There shall be no limit to the number of signs on any lot,
except as herein prescribed. All signs (except government signs) shall be
located outside a road right-of-way.



   (A)   Government signs;



   (B)   Memorial signs, plaques or grave markers that are
noncommercial in nature;



   (C)   Public interest signs;



   (D)   On-premises instructional signs not exceeding four square feet
in area apiece;



   (E)   Identification signs not exceeding three square feet in area
(one only per premises);



   (F)   Incidental signs;



   (G)   Campaign and election signs provided that:



      (1)   Each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area;



      (2)   All signs shall be removed within seven days after the
election for which they were made; and



      (3)   Property owner shall be held responsible for violators.



   (H)   Temporary real estate signs advertising specific property for
sale, lease, rent or development shall be located as follows:



      (1)   One sign advertising real estate “For Sale,” “For
Rent,” “For Lease” or “For Development” not greater than ten square
feet in area in all Residential (R) Districts and 64 square feet in area in
nonresidential districts may be located on the property being advertised
provided the sign is located behind the street right-of-way line. If the
property so advertised lies on a corner lot, then a second sign may be
permitted so long as the signs are at least 400 feet apart as measured by the
shortest straight line;



      (2)   In addition to the on-site sign(s), a maximum of three
directional signs, each not exceeding two square feet in area, shall be
permitted to be located off the subject premises. The message of the signs
shall be limited to the name of the property or development being advertised,
a directional arrow, mileage to the subject property and the type of offering;



      (3)   All temporary signs shall be removed within seven days
after the property has been sold, rented, leased and the like; and



      (4)   No more than three temporary directional signs
advertising a specific shopping center, planned mixed-use development,
subdivision and the like may also be permitted off-site. Each sign shall be
no greater than three square feet in area.



   (I)   Permanent subdivision identification signs not exceeding 18
square feet;



   (J)   Construction signs provided that:



      (1)   Signs in conjunction with any single-family residential
use or duplex shall not exceed ten  square feet apiece;



      (2)   Signs in conjunction with all other uses shall have a
maximum area of 50 square feet apiece;



      (3)   Only one sign per premises shall be erected;



      (4)   Signs shall not be illuminated;



      (5)   Signs shall only appear at the construction site; and



      (6)   Signs shall be removed within seven days after the
completion of the project.



   (K)   Temporary farm products signs provided that:



      (1)   Only one sign per premises shall be erected;



      (2)   The signs shall be located on the premises where the
products are sold;



      (3)   Signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area; and



      (4)   Signs shall be removed within seven days of the
termination of sale activities.



   (L)   Temporary special event signs or banners for religious,
charitable, civic, fraternal or similar organizations provided that:



      (1)   Signs shall be erected no sooner than 30 days before and
removed no later than five days after the event;



      (2)   All signs shall be located on private property except
the signs may be located within a road right-of-way subject to City Council
approval or on other public property subject to approval of the governing
board of the public entity owning the property; and



      (3)   Portable signs for that use may be allowed.



   (M)   Temporary paper or cardboard signs attached to the inside of
windows of occupied commercial uses provided the signs do not cover more than
70% of the window area of the side of the building on which the signs are
attached;



   (N)   Other temporary banners in nonresidential districts, provided
that:



      (1)   One banner per nonresidential use shall be allowed
provided that each banner is located five feet from a street right-of-way and
out of the sight triangle. Banners must not be larger than 24 square feet in
size;



      (2)   The temporary banners are not permitted in the Central
Business District. Banner regulations in the Central Business are addressed
in § 153.170(C) of this chapter; and



      (3)   No banners shall extend above the second floor level of
a building.



   (O)   One on-premises and three off-premises yard sale signs per
yard sale. All signs shall be removed within 24 hours after the yard sale has
been terminated. The maximum area of each sign shall be three square feet;



   (P)   Directional signs provided that:



      (1)   The signs may only be used in conjunction with a
religious, charitable, civic, fraternal and similar organization or an
industrial/office park, lodging facilities or similar activity;



      (2)   No more than three directional sign per principal use
may be erected;



      (3)   All directional signs shall be located at least five
feet from the edge of a road right-of-way;



      (4)   All directional signs greater than three feet in height
as measured from the grade of the road upon which it fronts shall be located
outside the required sight triangle as defined in § 153.031 of this chapter;



      (5)   All directional signs shall not be illuminated;



      (6)   All directional signs shall be freestanding signs.
Portable signs shall be prohibited;



      (7)   There shall be no greater than four directional signs on
separate supports at the intersection of any two roads;



      (8)   More than one sign may be placed on the same supports;



      (9)   No two directional signs hung from separate supports
shall be located within five feet of each other; and



      (10)   The maximum area of any directional sign shall be six
square feet.



   (Q)   Off-premises temporary special event signs provided that:



      (1)   No more than four temporary signs per event may be
erected;



      (2)   All these signs shall be located at least five feet from
the edge of a street right-of-way.



      (3)   Any sign greater than three feet in height as measured
from the grade of the road upon which it fronts shall be located outside the
required sight triangle as defined in § 153.031 of this chapter;



      (4)   All these signs shall not be illuminated;



      (5)   There shall be no greater than four signs on separate
supports at the intersection of any two roads;



      (6)   The maximum area of any temporary special event sign
shall be six square feet; and



      (7)   Signs shall be erected no sooner than 30 days before and
removed no later than five days after the event.



(Prior UDO, § 9.7)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.167  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   (A)   Any sign which the Administrator determines to obstruct the
view of motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians using any street or walkway,
approach to any street intersection or ingress to or egress from any driveway
or parking area, or which obscures or interferes with the effectiveness of
any traffic sign;



   (B)   Illuminated, highly reflective signs or spotlights which the
Administrator determines to hamper the vision of motorists or bicyclists;



   (C)   Signs, lights, rotating disks, words and other devices that
resemble traffic signals, traffic signs or emergency vehicle lights;



   (D)   Signs, other than government signs, which contain lights,
rotating disks, words and other devices not erected by a public authority
that may be erroneously construed as government signs or emergency warning
signs;



   (E)   Any exterior sign that interferes with free passage from or
obstructs any fire escape, downspout, window, door, stairway, ladder or
opening intended as a means of ingress or egress or providing light or air;



   (F)   Any sign placed on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, hydrant,
bridge, tree or other surface located on, over or across any public street or
right-of-way unless authorized by the City Council or the State Department of
Transportation;



   (G)   Any sign, other than a government sign, with visible moving
parts either windblown or motorized except as provided in § 153.166(N) of
this chapter;



   (H)   Any sign located in a way as to intentionally deny an
adjoining property owner visual access to an existing sign;



   (I)   Flashing signs or any signs with flashing or intermittent
light or lights or reflective devices of changing degree of intensity or
color. Signs with devices which produce flashing light and signs which
produce scrolled messages are prohibited, however, signs which give time and
temperature are permitted, provided the messages are limited to only time
and/or temperature. If a time and temperature sign alternates between a time
message and a temperature message it shall continuously show one message a
minimum of three seconds time before switching to the other message;



   (J)   Portable signs (excluding temporary signs otherwise permitted
in § 153.166(L) of this chapter);



   (K)   Vehicular signs;



   (L)   Advertising signs; and



   (M)   Other signs not expressly permitted by this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 9.8)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.168  SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL RESIDENTIAL (R) DISTRICTS.



   Signs allowed without a permit are listed in § 153.166 of this
chapter. The following signs may be placed in districts subsequent to the
issuance of a permit by the Administrator. All other signs shall be
prohibited.



   (A)   Signs on premises of multi-family developments and
manufactured home parks, planned developments and in the R-25 District
essential services Class III and produce stands are regulated as follows.



      (1)   Types of sign permitted.  Identification:  ground
mounted only.



      (2)   Permitted number of signs.  One per premises per public
street front.



      (3)   Maximum area of signs.  Twenty-six square feet.



      (4)   Permitted illumination.  L, N.



      (5)   Permitted height.  Five feet.



   (B)   Signs on premises of day care centers, nursing home, rest
homes and homes for the aged and public safety stations.



      (1)   Types of sign permitted.  Identification:  ground
mounted, pole or wall.



      (2)   Permitted number of signs.  One per premises.



      (3)   Maximum area of signs.  Sixteen square feet.



      (4)   Permitted illumination.  L, N.



      (5)   Permitted height.



         (a)   Ground mounted:  five feet;



         (b)   Pole sign:  six feet; and



         (c)   Wall sign:  height lowest roof eave.



   (C)   Signs on premises of small ground day care centers and bed and
breakfast inns are regulated as follows.



      (1)   Types of sign permitted.  Identification:  ground
mounted, pole or wall.



      (2)   Permitted number of signs.  One per establishment.



      (3)   Maximum area of signs.  Six square feet.



      (4)   Permitted illumination.  L, N.



      (5)   Permitted height.



         (a)   Ground mounted:  five feet;



         (b)   Pole sign:  six feet; and



         (c)   Wall sign:  height lowest roof eave.



   (D)   Signs on premises of churches, schools, country clubs and
publicly or privately-owned and operated outdoor recreation facilities are
regulated as follows.



      (1)   Types of sign permitted.  Identification and bulletin
board; ground mounted, pole or wall.



      (2)   Permitted number of signs.  One identification sign and
one bulletin board.



      (3)   Maximum area of signs.  Thirty-two square feet for the
identification sign; 64 square feet for the bulletin board.



      (4)   Permitted illumination.  L, N.



      (5)   Permitted height.  Five feet.



   (E)   Cemeteries are regulated as follows.



      (1)   Type of sign permitted.  Identification:  ground
mounted only.



      (2)   Permitted number of signs.  One identification sign per
entrance.



      (3)   Maximum area of signs.  Twenty square feet.



      (4)   Permitted illumination.  L, N.



      (5)   Permitted height.  Five feet.



   (F)   In the R-O or ROS Districts, offices; and any other
nonresidential uses in Residential (R) Districts not otherwise covered in
this section.



      (1)   Type of sign permitted.  Identification:  ground
mounted, pole and wall.



      (2)   Permitted number of signs.



         (a)   Ground mounted or pole:  one.



         (b)   Wall:  no limit.



      (3)   Maximum area of signs.  Thirty-two square feet for
ground mounted, pole and wall.



      (4)   Permitted illumination.  L, N.



      (5)   Permitted height.



         (a)   Ground mounted:  five feet.



         (b)   Pole sign:  ten feet.



(Prior UDO, § 9.9)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.169  SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE O-I, N-B, G-B, P-B AND GMC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Generally.  The following are regulations for all wall signs
and freestanding signs for all uses, provided however, these regulations
shall not be applicable to freestanding signs in shopping centers, business
parks, office buildings and other multi-tenant developments. Regulations for
these uses are found in division (B) below of this section. Signs allowed
without a permit are found in § 153.166 of this chapter. All other signs
shall be prohibited.



      (1)   Types of sign permitted.  Business, identification.



      (2)   Permitted number of signs.



         (a)   Wall:  no limit.



         (b)   Freestanding (pole or ground mounted):  one;
provided however, no freestanding sign shall be permitted if § 153.172(C)(4)
is applicable.



      (3)   Maximum area of signs.



         (a)   Wall.  A maximum of 10% of the wall area of any
wall on the building. Except as provided in § 153.172(B), in no instance
shall any principal use be allowed to have an aggregate wall sign area in
excess of 10% of the wall area.



         (b)   Freestanding.  The area of the sign shall be
based upon the classification of the road upon which the principal building
containing the use being identified fronts. The following schedule shall
apply.



 


Road Classification (In Accordance with the Lincolnton Thoroughfare Plan)

 

Maximum Sign Area (Sq. Ft.)



Major thoroughfare
 

64



Minor thoroughfare
 

64



All other streets
 

32




 



      (4)   Maximum height.



         (a)   Wall.  Signs shall not be allowed to extend above
the parapet of the building.



         (b)   Freestanding.  The height of freestanding signs
shall be based upon the road on which the principal building containing the
use being identified fronts. The following schedule shall apply:



 


Road Classification (In Accordance with the Lincolnton Thoroughfare Plan)

 

Maximum Sign Height (Ft.)



Major thoroughfare
 

25



Minor thoroughfare
 

25



All other streets
 

20




 



      (5)   Permitted illumination.  L, N.



   (B)   Shopping center and other multi-tenant freestanding
identification signs.



      (1)   Types of sign permitted.  Identification.



      (2)   Permitted number of signs.



         (a)   A shopping center or planned mixed use development
either of which contains two or more nonresidential uses located in a unified
building or group of buildings may have one freestanding identification sign
giving the name of the development and/or the name of the businesses and
other uses occupying the development.



         (b)   A second sign shall be permitted if the
development has direct access from two or more public streets. No other
on-premises freestanding signs shall be permitted.



         (c)   In lieu of allowing a second freestanding sign for
the development, the developer shall have the option to increase the size of
one freestanding sign on the property by 100% larger than what is required in
division (A)(3) above. This bonus shall only be available to Class C shopping
centers with four or more tenants.



      (3)   Maximum area of signs.  The maximum area of
freestanding identification signs shall be as indicated in division (A)(3) of
this chapter.



      (4)   Permitted illumination.  L, N.



      (5)   Permitted height.  The maximum height of the sign(s)
shall be as indicated in division (A)(4) of this chapter.



      (6)   Permitted location.  If two freestanding signs are
located on the same premises, the signs shall be located at a minimum
distance of 100 feet from each other as measured by the shortest straight
line connecting each sign. All freestanding signs shall be located behind the
street right-of-way.



(Prior UDO, § 9.10)  (Ord. ZTA-1-2010, passed 5-6-2010)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.170  SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE C-B CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT AND THE CBT
CENTRAL BUSINESS TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Generally.  Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter,
signs in the C-B and CBT Districts shall be limited to wall signs and canopy
or awning signs. Freestanding signs are limited to ground signs and allowed
only in accordance with the conditions and provisions outlined in division
(F).



   (B)   Wall signs.



 


General Location

 

Specific Location

 

Maximum #

 

Maximum Area

 

Max. Hght.



Building walls
 
Any location on building wall face
 

N/A

 
10% of the wall area, not to exceed 100 sq. ft.
 
Not above parapet of building


Windows
 
First floor windows
 

1

 
20% of total window space 
 

N/A



Windows
 
Upper floor windows, if different business
 

1

 
50% of window
 

N/A



Outside entrance to upper floors
 
Above or beside entrance
 

1

 
8 sq. ft. above entrance; 2 sq. ft. beside entrance
 

N/A



Front of building feet
 
For historic plaques
 

1

 
4 square feet
 

6




 



   (C)   Canopy and awning signs.  A sign message on a canopy or
awning shall contain only the name of the business, street address and/or the
type of business, type of goods sold or services rendered.



      (1)   Each business is permitted up to one sign hung under a
canopy or awning provided the message on the sign is perpendicular to the
building and the sign is at least eight feet above the surface of the
sidewalk and is no more than eight square feet in size.



      (2)   A business is permitted to use up to one canopy or
awning sign provided that the sign message does not extend in any direction
above, below or beyond the canopy or awning edge.



   (D)   Temporary commercial advertising banners.  Temporary
commercial advertising banners including grand opening, sale, going out of
business and other similar commercial banners are permitted in the Central
Business District subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   A temporary use permit must be secured from the Planning
Department before a banner is placed upon a premises.



      (2)   The banners shall be placed upon a premises no longer
than 12 weeks in a year. Permits may be issued in two-week increments (i.e.
six permits per year) or any combination of time frames up to a continuous
12-week provided that the total time a banner shall be displayed on a single
premises shall not exceed 12 weeks per year. Permit applications shall be
accompanied by a to-scale rendering depicting the banner.



      (3)   The banners shall be professionally prepared.



      (4)   The banners shall be no larger than 32 square feet in
size.



      (5)   Banners may be displayed at any location on the front
façade of the premises on which it is located.



      (6)   A temporary use permit for a commercial advertising
banner shall be issued only after the permit applicant has secured a bond
payable to the city in the amount of $50. If the banner is removed within the
time frame for which it was permitted, the $50 bond shall be refunded to the
permit bearer. If the banner becomes a violation, the city shall redeem the
$50 bond.



   (E)   Portable sidewalk signs.  Notwithstanding the requirements of
§ 95.06, Obstructions (on streets and sidewalks) and § 95.08, Placing
objects on streets and sidewalks, of the code of ordinances, portable
sidewalk signs (as defined in § 153.031 of this chapter) shall be permitted
in the Central Business (CB) and CBT Districts provided that placement of the
signs upon a street right-of-way or public property shall be approved by the
City Council or its designee.



   (F)   Ground signs. Freestanding  identification signs are 
limited to ground signs subject to the following conditions and standards: 



      (1)   The associated business is located in a building that is
set back at least ten feet from the abutting sidewalk. If sidewalk does not
exist along the street frontage, the building is located at least ten feet
from the  back of  the edge of pavement or curb.



      (2)   The sign is to be located a minimum of  five feet
behind the abutting sidewalk. If sidewalk does not exist along the street
frontage, the sign is to be located at least ten feet from  the back of the
edge of pavement or curb.



      (3)   The sign is to be  located a minimum of five feet from
any side lot line.



      (4)   The sign is to be located outside of any sight triangle
at a street or driveway.



      (5)   The dimensions of the sign  shall conform to the below:



         (a)   Cantilevered ground sign/ post and panel sign.







 



 

Dimensions


Display surface (max)
 
9 sq. ft.


Support height (max)
 
10 ft.


Sign height (max)
 
6 ft.


Display surface height, width (max)
 
3 ft.



 



         (b)   Monument ground sign.







 

Dimensions


Display surface (max)
 
8 sq. ft.


Support height (max)
 
8 ft.


Sign height (max)
 
10 ft.


Display surface height, width (max)
 
12 in.



 



      (6)   Area associated with the text of a building name or
address is exempt from  above maximum display surface calculations.



      (7)   The design and materials used in the construction of the
sign shall be consistent with the downtown lincolnton design guidelines for
freestanding signage.



      (8)   No freestanding sign within the CBD or CBT district
shall be erected until an application for design review has been submitted to
and approved by the Design Review Committee (DRC) charged with review and
approval of such applications. The DRC shall be a committee comprised of City
staff and appointed by the City Manager.



         (a)   Application approval  is required prior to the
issuance of a sign permit. The sign permit may be issued subject to
reasonable conditions necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.



         (b)   An approved application for design review shall be
required whether or not other permits may be required, but said approval does
not obviate the necessity of procuring other permits as may be required by
law; provided, however, any permit issued other than in conformity with this
chapter shall be invalid.



(Prior UDO, § 9.11)  (Ord. ZTA-1-2016, passed 2-4-2016; Am. Ord. O-04-19,
passed 6-6-2019) )  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.171  SIGNS IN THE SH SPECIAL HIGHWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   See § 153.120(H) of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 9.12)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.172  SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.



   (A)   Generally.  The following are general specifications
applicable to the various permitted signs. Additional specifications
regarding size, number, location and permitted types of signs are set forth
in the individual zoning districts.



   (B)   Wall sign.



      (1)   The maximum permitted aggregate area of wall signs per
premises may be increased beyond that which is normally allowed using either
(but not both) of the following methods (only division (B)(1)(b) of this
section shall be allowed for business within shopping centers):



         (a)   If a freestanding sign is not used on the
premises, the aggregate area of wall signs may be increased by 25% per
premises, provided however, no increase shall be allowed in the C-B District.



         (b)   In the G-B and P-B Districts the aggregate area of
all wall signs per premises may be increased based on the distance the
principal building is set back from the required front setback line. The
increase shall be in accordance with the following table, provided however,
any increase shall not allow the aggregate sign size to exceed 10% of the
front wall area of the premises to which the sign is located.



 


Principal Building Distance Setback From the Required Front Setback

 

Allowed Aggregate Area Wall Sign Area Increase






0 - 49 ft.

 

0%




50 - 99 ft.

 

25%




100 - 149 ft.

 

50%




150 - 199 ft.

 

75%




200 - 249 ft.

 

100%




250 - 299 ft.

 

125%




300 - 349 ft.

 

150%




350 - 399 ft.

 

175%




400 - ft. or more

 

200%





 



      (2)   No wall sign shall project more than 18 inches from the
building wall. Further, no wall sign or its supporting structure shall cover
any window or part of a window.



      (3)   Canopy and awning signs may be substituted for part or
all of the allowable wall signage per premises. Signs may be painted or
printed onto a canopy or awning. In no instance shall any canopy or awning
sign extend into a street right-of-way. This division shall not apply to the
C-B District. For canopy and awning sign regulations for the C-B District,
see § 153.170(C).



      (4)   A projecting sign may be substituted for part or all of
the allowable wall signage per premises. A projecting sign shall not project
more than four feet from a building. Except as provided in § 153.171 of this
chapter, a projecting sign shall not extend into a street right-of-way.



      (5)   In the C-B District a projecting sign may extend over a
public sidewalk by being attached to the building face, canopy or awning
provided the sign is at least eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk
and is no more than eight square feet in size.



   (C)   Freestanding signs.



      (1)   All freestanding signs shall be located behind the
street right-of-way. Any sign greater than three feet in height as measured
from the grade of the road upon which it fronts shall be located outside the
required sight triangle as defined in § 153.031 of this chapter.



      (2)   The bottom of the sign face of any pole sign, which is
located within five feet of the street right-of-way, shall be at least ten
feet in height as measured from the grade.



      (3)   No freestanding sign shall be located closer than five
feet to any adjacent side lot line.



      (4)   A freestanding sign may only be located along (and
visible from) a street from which the principal building containing the use
being identified is set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way of the
street. If no such area exists on the premises then no freestanding sign may
be erected.



(Prior UDO, § 9.13)  (Ord. ZTA-1-2016, passed 2-4-2016)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.173  HOTEL AND LODGING FACILITIES SIGN PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Main ID sign. 



      (1)   Maximum sign area: 280 square feet.



      (2)   Maximum height: 65 feet.



   (B)   Secondary sign.



      (1)   Maximum sign area: 64 square feet on thoroughfares and
35 square feet on all other streets.



      (2)   Maximum height: 25 feet on thoroughfares and 20 feet on
all other streets.



   (C)   Both main ID and secondary signs.  If both a main ID sign and
a secondary sign are erected by the hotel and lodging facility, then no
directional signage as allowed in § 153.166(P) would be permitted. If
property is located in a Special Highway Overlay District, a third sign could
not be erected as permitted in § 153.120(H).



(Ord. ZTA-1-2010, passed 5-6-2010)



§ 153.174  ADDITIONAL PROVISION FOR CHURCH SIGNS.



   (A)   Signs on premises of churches are allowed in accordance with
the preceding provisions related to types of signs permitted, permitted
number of signs, maximum sign area, permitted illumination, maximum sign
height, etc.



   (B)   The provisions outlined in § 153.167, Prohibited Signs, are
applicable to church signs with the exception outlined below:



      (1)   Churches located on lots of at least ten acres in size
are permitted one multi-color LED/digital changing message board. Sign
messages may change but cannot flash or scroll.



      (2)   Such sign shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the
right-of-way of any abutting public road.



      (3)   This exception is not applicable in the CB and CBT
zoning districts.



(Ord. O-04-2017, passed 6-1-2017)



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS



§ 153.185  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every new use, or an enlargement, expansion or alteration of
an existing use, shall require off-street parking in compliance with this
subchapter, except that all off-street parking requirements shall be waived
within the C-B District.



   (B)   The number of required off-street parking spaces shall be
increased when a change of use of either a structure or of land requires
additional parking spaces in compliance with this subchapter. Parking spaces
may be decreased when a change of use requires fewer spaces than provided for
in the previous use.



   (C)   (1)   A principal use that is not deficient in the number
of off-street parking spaces provided may expand without having to provide
additional off-street parking spaces under certain circumstances. The
circumstances are:



         (a)   When, after the expansion, the number of
off-street parking spaces provided still meets or exceeds the required
minimum; and



         (b)   If the expansion results in the need to create no
greater than 10% or ten, whichever is smaller, additional spaces. These
additional spaces may be waived on a one-time basis only. The waiver may only
be applied once to any individual principal use, or to any shopping center,
office park or similar planned multi-tenant development.



      (2)   In no instance shall a reduction be allowed for the
number of off-street parking spaces parking for any use which expands when,
prior to the expansion, the use was deficient in the number of off-street
parking spaced provided.



   (D)   A certificate of compliance will not be issued for any use
until all applicable off-street parking and loading requirements in
accordance with this chapter have been met and are in place and ready for use.



   (E)   All off-street parking areas shall be located as follows:



      (1)   Off-street parking spaces shall generally be provided on
the same lot of record as the principal use. In instances where the parking
cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot of record, it shall be provided
on a separate lot of record, 50% or more whose area is located within 500
feet of the lot of record on which the principal use is located. All
off-street parking areas located in a Residential (R) District shall require
the issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council in accordance
with §§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter;



      (2)   (a)   Cooperative provisions for off-street parking
may be made by contract between owners of adjacent properties, and the
contract shall be filed with the Administrator. The parking area provided on
any one lot may be reduced to not less than one-half the number of parking
spaces required or otherwise provided for the use occupying the lot. The end
result of the cooperative parking shall be that the total number of parking
spaces provided equals or exceed that which would be required or otherwise
provided for each use if computed separately.



         (b)   Any sharing of parking spaces by uses located on
different parcels shall be guaranteed by a legally binding written agreement
between the owner of the parking area and the owner of any use located on a
different lot and served by the parking area;



      (3)   No off-street parking area shall be located over an
active or auxiliary septic tank field;



      (4)   The temporary parking or storage of manufactured homes
shall be prohibited in all areas that do not permit manufactured homes or in
manufactured home sales lots; and



      (5)   For all nonresidential uses, no off-street parking or
loading areas shall be located within 12 feet of any street right-of-way line.



   (F)   Design standards for parking areas are as follows.



      (1)   Except as here in provided, each parking space shall
contain a rectangular area of at least 19 feet in length and nine feet in
width. Whenever parking areas consist of spaces set aside for parallel
parking, the dimensions of the parking spaces shall be not less than 22 feet
in length and nine feet in width. Lines demarcating parking spaces may be
drawn at various angles in relation to curbs or aisles, so long as the
parking spaces so created contain within them the rectangular area required
by this section.



      (2)   Parking area aisle widths shall meet the following
minimum dimensions:



 


Aisle Width (Ft.)

 

Parking Space Angle (in Degrees)



One-way traffic
 

13

 

13

 

18

 

24



Two-way traffic
 

19

 

21

 

23

 

24




 



      (3)   All off-street parking areas with more than 15
off-street parking spaces that are regularly used at least five days per week
shall be graded, paved and surfaced with asphalt, concrete or equivalent
protection against potholes and dust. Off-street parking areas that are not
required to have the surfaces shall be graded and surfaced with crushed
stone, gravel or other like material to provide a surface which is stable and
will help reduce dust and erosion. For any off-street parking area which does
not require a paved parking area surface, whenever an area abuts a paved
street, the driveway leading from the street to the area (or, if there is no
driveway, the portion of the parking area that opens onto the streets) shall
be paved in a manner as herein provided to a distance of 15 feet back from
the edge of the paved street. This requirement shall not apply to
single-family or two-family residences or any other use that is required to
have five or less off-street parking spaces.



      (4)   All off-street parking areas shall be designed so that
vehicles cannot extend over roadways, drives, adjoining property, or
sidewalks or bump against any wall, vegetation or other obstruction.



      (5)   Circulation patterns within off-street parking areas
shall be designed so that vehicles can proceed safely without posing a danger
to pedestrians or other vehicles both inside and outside the off-street
parking area.



      (6)   Parking spaces that are required to have paved surfaces
shall be appropriately demarcated with painted lines.



      (7)   See § 153.047 of this chapter for parking lot
landscaping requirements.



   (G)   Permits for driveway locations on state-maintained roads shall
be obtained from the State Department of Transportation.



   (H)   Storm drainage facilities shall be required, and shall be so
designed as to protect any public right-of-way or adjacent property from
damage.



   (I)   The requirements for off-street parking spaces shall be
computed as follows:



      (1)   When units of measurement determining the number of
required parking spaces result in a fractional space, any fraction of
one-half or more shall require one parking space;



      (2)   Lots containing more than one principal use shall
provide parking in the amount equal to the total of the requirements for each
use; and



      (3)   Off-street parking spaces designed for use by the
physically handicapped shall be provided  as required by the North Caroline
Building Code.



   (J)   The following listing indicates the minimum number of
off-street parking spaces required for any use developed or expanded.



   (K)   The following listing indicates the minimum number of
off-street parking spaces required for any use developed or expanded. 
Parking space calculations for proposed off-street parking lots in the CBT
District shall be reduced by 33% of the total amount calculated using the
formulas required in this section. (The use classification is shown in bold
face print and is followed by each minimum number of parking spaces required.)



 


Use

 

Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Required





Animal hospital, clinic, veterinarian or kennel
 
One space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Art and photo studies
 
One space per 300 feet of gross floor area


Auction houses
 
One space for each three persons in seating or standing capacity of the main
auction hall


Automobile repair, paint or body shops
 
One space per employee during the shift of greatest employment plus four
spaces per bay


Automobile sales
 
See Sales lots


Automobile washing and cleaning establishments
 
One space for each three employees, and reserve spaces equal to three times
the capacity of the establishment


Banks, savings and loans and other financial institutions
 
One space per each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the first 1,000 sq.
ft. and 1 space for each 300 additional sq. ft. of gross floor area


Barber shop or beauty shop
 
Three spaces per barber or beautician during hours of greatest employment


Bars, nightclubs and private entertainment clubs
 
One space for each employee during the shift of greatest employment plus one
space for each three seats


Bus station
 
Four spaces for each loading station, plus one space for each employee during
the shift with greatest employment


Cemeteries
 
One space per employee during the shift of greatest employment plus parking
on private internal roads with room for cars to pass parked cars on the roads


Charitable and welfare organizations
 
One space per employee during the shift with greatest employment plus one
space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Child advocacy center
 
3.3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area


Churches, synagogues, other places of worship
 
One space per employee during the shift with greatest employment plus one
space for each four seats in the sanctuary


Colleges, vocational and professional schools
 
One space for each three students plus one space per employee during the
shift of greatest employment


Convenience store
 
One space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus two spaces for each
fuel nozzle


Customary home occupations
 
One space plus the number of spaces required for the residential use


Day care centers, nurseries, preschools and kindergartens
 
One space per employee during the shift of greatest employment plus one space
per ten children of certification capacity


Dwellings, one-family
 
Two spaces for each one dwelling unit


Dwellings, two-family
 
Two spaces for each one dwelling unit


Dwellings, multi-family (designed specifically for elderly and/or handicapped
persons)
 
One and one-fourth spaces per dwelling unit


Dwellings, multi-family (except those dwellings designed specifically for
elderly and/or handicapped persons)
 
One and one-half spaces for each efficiency and one bedroom dwelling unit,
two spaces for each two bedroom dwelling unit and three spaces for each three
or more bedroom dwelling unit


Elementary and junior high school
 
One and three-fourths spaces for each room used for instruction or
administration, or one space for each four seats used for assembly purposes,
whichever is greater


Essential services Class III
 
One space per employee during shift of greatest employment plus one space for
each vehicle used in the operation plus one space per 200 sq. ft. of floor
area open to the public


Family care homes
 
One space for each three employees (total employees), plus one for each two
residents


Food caterer
 
One space for each employee during shift of greatest employment plus one
space for each vehicle used in the operation


Funeral homes
 
One space for each four seats in the chapel or chapels, plus two spaces for
each three employees, plus one space for each vehicle used in the operation;
in addition, off-street parking area shall be provided, on the site, to
accommodate a minimum of 30 passenger vehicles for the purpose of forming a
funeral procession; in the event that an on-site area is not available, the
off-street area may be provided within 300 feet of the funeral home, as
measured to the nearest property lines


Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment repair shops; showroom of
a plumber, decorator, electrician or similar trade; laundry and machinery
sales
 
One space per 800 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus one space for the largest
number of employees per shift


Golf courses
 
One space for the largest number of employees per shift plus four spaces per
hole plus one space for each vehicle used in the operation (excluding golf
carts)


Hospitals
 
Two spaces per patient bed; not including bassinets


Interior decorator service
 
One space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Jails
 
One space per employee during the shift with greatest employment; plus one
space for each eight beds, plus sufficient spaces for law enforcement
vehicles and vehicles used in the jail operation


Laboratories, analytical and testing
 
One space per employee during the shift with greatest employment plus one
space for each 800 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Libraries
 
One space for each 350 sq. ft. of public space, plus one space for each
employee during the shift of greatest employment


Lumber or building material stores
 
One space per employee during the shift with greatest employment plus one
space for each 300 sq. ft. of retail sales space or showroom floor area plus
one space for each vehicle used in the operation (outdoor storage or lumber
sheds are not counted as retail sales space)


Maintenance services operations center (janitorial, carpet cleaning,
exterminator and the like)
 
One space per employee during shift of greatest employment during the shift
with greatest employment plus one space for each vehicle used in the
operation; the spaces required for employees may be reduced by 0.75 for each
employee that reports to work off-site at least 75% of workdays


Manufacturing, processing or fabrication plants, offices for building trades
 
One space per employee during the shift with greatest employment


Medical and dental offices and clinics
 
One parking space for each patient treatment or examination room (or other
patient treatment space), plus one space for each 50 sq. ft. of waiting room
area, plus one space for each nondoctor employee during shift of greatest
employment plus one space for each doctor practicing at the clinic


Military reserve center
 
Four spaces for each five personnel, including reservists expected to report
for duty at the facility on any day of maximum use


Motels, hotels and bed and breakfast inns (the number of required off-street
parking spaces for restaurants, lounges and banquet facilities located within
a motel and hotel shall be computed separately)
 
One space for each guest room or suite plus one space for each employee on
the shift of maximum employment


Museums and art galleries
 
One space for each 300 sq. ft. of exhibit space, plus one space for each
employee during the shift of greatest employment


Nursing homes, rest homes, homes for the aged
 
Three spaces for each five beds


Offices, professional, business or public, (excluding medical and dental
offices and clinics)
 
One space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Places of public assembly not other wise listed such as auditoriums and
stadiums and not constructed pursuant to a permit authorizing the
construction of a public community center, public or private school or a
residential development
 
One space for each four seats of seating capacity


Post office
 
One space per employee during the shift of greatest employment plus one space
for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Private residential quarters
 
One space per private residential quarters


Product distribution centers
 
One space for each employee during shift of greatest employment plus one
space for each vehicle used in the operation plus one space for each 100 sq.
ft. of public area (e.g., sales areas)


Public safety stations
 
One space for each employee during the shift of greatest employment


Radio and television stations
 
One space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus one space for each
four seats in viewing areas, plus one space for each vehicle used in the
operation


Recreation facilities, privately owned, outdoor, such as athletic fields,
swimming or tennis clubs, amusement parks, not otherwise listed and not
constructed pursuant a permit authorizing the construction of come
residential development
 
One space per 200 sq. ft. of area within enclosed buildings plus one space
for every three persons that the outdoor facilities are designed to
accommodate when used to the maximum capacity


Recreation facilities, publicly owned, outdoor, such as fields, tennis
courts, swimming pools, playgrounds, parks and the like, not otherwise listed
and not constructed pursuant to a permit authorizing the construction of
another use such as a school
 
One space per 200 sq. ft. of area within enclosed athletic buildings plus one
space for three persons that the outdoor facilities are designed to
accommodate when used to the maximum capacity


Recreation facilities, indoor, not otherwise listed (e.g., gymnasium
community center, physical fitness centers or clubs, pinball or video or
arcade game centers and the like)
 
One space for every three persons that the facilities are designed to
accommodate when fully utilized (if they can be measured in such a fashion -
example, tennis courts) plus one space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area
used in a manner not susceptible to the calculation, or one space for each
three seats (fixed in the largest assembly room) whichever is greatest


Restaurants (including fast food restaurants)
 
One space for each employee during the shift of greatest employment plus one
space for each three restaurant seats, plus reservoir lane capacity equal to
five spaces per drive-thru window (Note: Two drive-thru windows serving one
line shall be deemed two drive-thru windows)


Retail business and consumer service outlets (except as otherwise listed in
this section)
 
One space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Sales lots and showrooms (automobile and mobile home)
 
Four spaces for each salesperson plus one space per other employee during the
shift with greatest employment; these spaces shall be in addition to other
spaces used to park all vehicles for sale or on display and in addition to
spaces required in this section for automobile repair use classification
where sales and repairs are provided by the same establishment; customer and
employee parking shall be so designated and shall not be used for inventory
parking except while demonstrating a vehicle to a particular customer


Senior high school
 
Five spaces for each room used for instruction or administration or one space
for each four seats used for assembly purposes, whichever is greater;
assembly purposes shall be deemed to include the capacity of either indoor or
outdoor assembly, whichever is greater


Service stations
 
One space located away from pumps for each fuel pump nozzle plus two spaces
for each service bay plus one space for each employee during the shift of
greatest employment, plus sufficient parking area to accommodate vehicles at
pumps without interfering with other parking spaces


Shopping centers
 
One space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the first 500,000 sq.
ft. plus one space per additional 300 sq. ft. above the first 500,000 sq.
ft., but excluding uses other than retail business and consumer service
outlets, whose off-street parking requirements are listed separately;
off-street parking for these uses shall be computed separately; common
pedestrian walkway areas inside enclosed shopping malls are not counted in
gross floor area, however the areas occupied by sales establishments and open
courts where prepared food is sold and consumed shall be counted


Theaters, indoor
 
One space for each employee during the shift of greatest employment plus one
space for each four seats


Truck terminal, warehouses and moving/storage companies
 
One space per employee during the shift with greatest employment in addition
to spaces to be used for vehicles used in the operation


Wholesale sales
 
One space per employee during shift of greatest employment plus, one space
per 500 sq. ft. of office area, plus one space for each vehicle used in the
operation, plus one space for each 500 sq. ft. devoted to on-premises sales
such as customer self-service areas and/or showrooms and sales counters


Video tape rental shops
 
One space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the first 1,000 sq. ft. and
one space for each additional 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus one space
for each employee on the shift of greatest employment


Other uses not listed
 
The Zoning Administrator may establish a parking requirement for any
application for use not listed herein on the basis of similar uses creating
similar parking needs as listed in this section; the decision of the Zoning
Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment




 



(Prior UDO, § 10.1)  (Ord. ZTA-5-2009, passed 11-5-2009; Ord. O-03-2019,
passed 6-6-2019)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.186  DRIVEWAYS FOR ALL USES OTHER THAN ONE OR TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.



   (A)   Wherever possible no driveway shall access a public street
closer than 100 feet from the right-of-way of an intersecting street.
Wherever possible no drive shall access a thoroughfare at a point closer than
150 feet from the intersection of the thoroughfare with the right-of-way of
another public street. Where these distances are not possible due to lot
dimensions or depth, the drive shall be located as far as possible from the
intersection. No more than one driveway access to a street will be permitted
for each 150 feet (or fraction thereof) of frontage on the street and in no
case shall any lot or tract contain greater than two driveway cuts per road
frontage.



   (B)   Provided however, any retail use engaged significantly in the
sale of automotive fuels to the public using pump islands shall be permitted
one additional access point along its total frontage (total includes the
total for all streets on which the use fronts) provided the access point is
no closer than 36 feet from any other access point and there will be no more
than two driveways for any street adjoining the property. Each driveway
access shall be at least 24 feet in width but not greater than 36 feet in
width.



   (C)   No use may access a public street where, at the point of
access, the use is not a permitted use on the side of the street to which the
use is accessing.



(Prior UDO, § 10.2)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.187  OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  In order to assure a proper and uniform development
of off-street loading areas and to relieve traffic congestion in the streets,
the off-street loading requirements set forth in § 153.186 will apply in all
zoning districts except the C-B District. These requirements will apply to
new structures and uses and to additions to existing structure and uses.
(Also see § 153.185(E)(5).)



   (B)   Minimum off-street loading space requirements.  The following
minimum loading space requirements shall apply for the appropriate use



      (1)   Office, restaurant, hotel or motel uses.



 


Gross Floor Area
(Sq. Ft.)

 

Minimum Number of Loading Spaces




0 - 5,000

 

None




5,001 - 49,000

 

1




50,000 - 99,000

 

2




100,000 - or more

 
2 plus 1 for each 100,000 sq. ft. in excess of 100,000 sq. ft.



 



      (2)   Other commercial establishments, shopping centers or
industrial uses.



 


Gross Floor Area
(Sq. Ft.)

 

Minimum Number of Loading Spaces






0 - 5,000

 

None




5,001 - 19,999

 

1




20,000 - 49,999

 

2




50,000 - 79,999

 

3




80,000 - 99,999

 

4




100,000 - 149,000

 

5




150,000 - or more

 
5 plus 1 for each 50,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area in excess of 150,000 sq.
ft.




 



   (C)   Design of loading spaces.



      (1)   Off-street loading spaces must be designed and
constructed so that all maneuvering to park and unload vehicles for loading
and unloading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines
of the premises. Loading spaces must be designed so as not to interfere with
the normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way.
Where feasible, off-street loading shall be located in the rear year.



      (2)   Each loading berth shall have a paved surface and be a
minimum of 12 feet in width and 35 feet in length. Each berth shall also have
a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. For any use which is required to
furnish three or more loading berths, at least one of every three berths
shall have a minimum width of 12 feet, minimum length of 65 feet and a
minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet.



(Prior UDO, § 10.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.188  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL
ZONES.



   (A)   This section applies to off-street parking in support of any
principal use not specifically listed as a permitted use or conditional use
in a Residential (R) District. Off-street parking in support of any principal
use listed as permitted or conditional in a Residential (R) District is
allowed as a customary accessory use.



   (B)   In order to construct off-street parking lots in a Residential
(R) District, a conditional use permit must first be issued by the City
Council in accordance with §§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter. All
parking lots shall meet the following minimum design criteria.



      (1)   Parking areas shall be used for the parking of
automobiles only, with no sales, storage, repair work, dismantling or
servicing of any kind permitted.



      (2)   All required parking spaces shall be of a design and
located so as to be convenient and readily usable by the patrons.



      (3)   Sufficient area shall be provided within the property
lines so that all vehicles may enter and leave in a forward motion.



      (4)   Where the boundary of a parking area permitted pursuant
to this section is located in, directly adjoins or is separated by a street
from a Residential (R) District, screening shall be installed pursuant to §
153.046(C) of this chapter. The screening shall be installed along the
outside boundaries of the parking area (which may include streets and/or
property lines) except that the screening shall not be required along any
interior property line or street separating the parking area from the
principal use. Also, landscaping in accordance with § 153.046 of the chapter
shall be installed for all parking areas permitted pursuant to this section.



      (5)   All parking lots shall be constructed in a manner that
contamination by dust or dust clouds will not exist. This is to be
accomplished by concrete, asphalt or blacktop surfacing.



      (6)   If nighttime parking is to be permitted it shall be
lighted with the provision that the lights shall be shielded so as to prevent
direct beaming into adjoining areas located in a Residential (R) District.



(Prior UDO, § 10.4)  Penalty, see § 153.999



MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS



§ 153.200  COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PART.



   All new manufactured home parks or expansions of existing manufactured
home parks shall be developed in accordance with the standards of this
subchapter. In certain circumstances manufactured home parks existing at the
date of this chapter is adopted are required to be redeveloped and/or
improved to conform in whole or in part to standards of this subchapter.
Applicability of the standards of this subchapter to existing manufactured
home parks are set forth in § 153.142 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 11.1)



§ 153.201  MANUFACTURED HOME PARK SITE PLAN AND APPLICATION APPROVAL.



   A manufactured home park site plan and application may be approved by
the City Council only after having first been reviewed by the Planning Board.
A fee, as set forth by City Council, shall accompany each manufactured home
park application. This fee shall be in addition to any other applicable fees,
such as fee for a conditional use permit application.



   (A)   (1)   The Planning Board shall consider a site plan and
application only after a completed application has been submitted to the
Administrator. (Note: Prior to submission of the site plan and application,
and prior to any disturbance of any land or vegetation it is recommended that
the applicant consult with the Administrator or his or her designee in order
for the applicant to be briefed on the requirements of this chapter and that
consideration be given to natural features of the site.) Prior to the formal
submission of the site plan and application the applicant is encouraged to
submit a preliminary sketch plan for review by the Administrator.



      (2)   The formal site plan and application shall, as a
minimum, include the following items:



         (a)   The name of the manufactured home park, the names
and addresses of the owner(s) and the designer of the park, date, approximate
north arrow and scale, and the boundary line survey of the tract with
accurate linear and angular dimensions drawn to scale by a registered
surveyor or engineer. A sketch vicinity map with north arrow shall be
included showing the relationship between the proposed manufactured home park
and the surrounding area;



         (b)   The locations of existing and platted property
lines, streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, bridges, known gravesite
areas, water mains, sewers, culverts, drainpipes and any utility easements,
both on the land to be developed as a manufactured home park and on land
immediately adjoining. The names of adjoining subdivisions and the names of
owners of all adjoining parcels of land shall be noted;



         (c)   The names, proposed location and approximate
dimensions of proposed streets, entrances, exits, walkways, easements,
recreation areas, parking areas, parks and other spaces, reservations,
manufactured home spaces (with area calculations and proposed space numbers
shown) and building lines (with setback distances shown). See § 153.202(C)
for staking requirements where individual septic tanks will be used. For all
proposed internal streets within the manufactured home park the following
information shall be provided:



            1.   Rights-of-way, location and dimensions;



            2.   Pavement widths;



            3.   Approximate grades;



            4.   Design engineering data for all corners and
curves;



            5.   Typical street cross sections; and



            6.   Road names and whether to be public or
private.



         (d)   Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewer lines,
water lines, hydrants, storm drainage and the like) showing feasible
connections to existing and proposed utility systems; plan for electric
lighting; and the location and number of trash dumpsters and mail boxes;



         (e)   Proposed screening, including wall, fences or
planting areas as well as treatment of any existing natural features;



         (f)   Delineation of areas within the regulatory
floodplain as shown on the official flood hazard boundary maps;



         (g)   Proposed number and location of signs including
both park identification signs and space identification numbers;



         (h)   Proposed phasing, if any, and approximate
completion time of the project;



         (i)   The above divisions (A)(2)(a) through (A)(2)(h)
shall be submitted on a plan drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or
one inch equals 100 feet on sheet(s) not exceeding 24 inches by 36 inches.
Twenty copies shall be submitted. Additional copies may be required by the
Administrator if outside agency review is deemed appropriate;



         (j)   A management plan describing at a minimum how the
common facilities will be maintained and how the park will be maintained in
accordance with § 153.202(BB) of this chapter;



         (k)   If a conditional use permit is required the
applicant’s site plan and application is submitted in lieu of the
application required by § 153.236(A) of this chapter provided the site plan
contains any additional information required by the section.



   (B)   The Administrator shall present any properly completed site
plan and application to the Planning Board for review at the next meeting.
The application must have been submitted to the Administrator at least 15
days prior to the meeting in order to be considered. If individual septic
tanks are to be used or if review of the plan is to include outside agencies
additional time for review prior to consideration by the Planning Board may
be needed. The additional time shall be determined by the Administrator.



   (C)   The Planning Board shall have a maximum of 45 days from the
date at which it met to review the application to submit its recommendation
to the City Council. If a recommendation is not made during the 45-day
period, the application shall be forwarded to the City Council without a
recommendation from the Planning Board.



   (D)   When dealing with the application review process, it may be
desirable to request additional information in order to evaluate the project
and its relationship to the surrounding area. Therefore, the Administrator,
Planning Board and/or City Council may request needed additional information
as they deem necessary that the applicant must furnish within seven days of
the request.



   (E)   Once the Planning Board has considered the proposal and
forwarded its recommendation to the City Council, the City Council shall then
review and take action on the manufactured home park plan. Approval of the
manufactured park plan by the City Council shall not constitute approval of a
conditional use permit when a conditional use permit is required.



   (F)   If a conditional use permit is required, the procedures in
§§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter shall be followed.



   (G)   Upon completion of the project (or each phase thereof) a
complete set of “as-built” drawings shall be furnished to the city.



(Prior UDO, § 11.2)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.202  STANDARDS.



   This section sets forth the standards required for all new manufactured
home parks and expansions of existing manufactured home/manufactured
home/trailer parks.



   (A)   Occupancy.



      (1)   There must be at least five improved manufactured home
spaces at first occupancy.



      (2)   No manufactured home space shall be occupied, nor
certificate of compliance issued unless the requirements of this chapter have
been met.



   (B)   Minimum park area.  All manufactured home parks shall have a
gross land area of at least three acres.



   (C)   Space sizes and staking.



      (1)   All manufactured homes within the park shall be located
in designated manufactured home spaces.



      (2)   Minimum space sizes shall be as follows:



         (a)   Where a well and septic tank are on the same
space:  20,000 square feet;



         (b)   Where one of either public or community water
service or public or community sewer service are provided to each space: 
15,000 square feet;



         (c)   Where both public or community water and sewer
services are provided to each space:  5,000 square feet;



         (d)   The above space sizes are to be deemed the minimum
size requirements and may be increased due to requirements for placement of
well and septic tank systems (such as soil conditions and separation
distances), the topography of the land or other factors. The applicant shall
indicate on the application the specific number of bedrooms per manufactured
home for which the septic tank system should be evaluated; and



         (e)   Where individual septic tanks will be used, each
manufactured home space shall have all corners marked during the application
review and construction phase of the project. Failure to have each space
clearly identified will slow the review process.



   (D)   Suitability of land for spaces.



      (1)   Each manufactured home space shall be located on ground
not located within the 100-year floodplain as established by maps published
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



      (2)   No manufactured home shall be placed on land having
excessive slope or other characteristics making the land unsuitable for
placement of manufactured homes.



      (3)   Each manufactured home space shall be graded so as to
prevent any water from ponding or accumulating on the space.



   (E)   Space widths.



      (1)   Each manufactured home space shall be at least 30 feet
in width at the interior street line and 45 feet in width at the front yard
setback line.



      (2)   The interior street line is a line 11 feet away from the
edge of pavement and running parallel thereto.



      (3)   Exception may be made to the minimum width at the street
for panhandle spaces, however all setbacks must be met and no portion of the
panhandle may be used for measuring setbacks.



   (F)   Setbacks.



      (1)   Minimum front, side and rear yards shall be provided as
follows for each space.



      (2)   Where a required screening area as provided in §
153.046 of this chapter lies between the manufactured home space and the
property line or street right-of-way (a street other than an interior
manufactured home park street), the setback shall be measured from the edge
of the screen nearest the manufactured home):



         (a)   The minimum setback for any structure within a
manufactured home park from a publicly maintained street right-of-way line or
from any property line shall be 40 feet.



         (b)   Otherwise, all manufactured home spaces shall have
the following minimum setbacks (unless otherwise specified):



            1.   Front setback (from interior streets):  20
feet (Note: division (O)(3)(e) below);



            2.   Side setback:  Ten feet minimum on one side,
but both side yards must total to a combined 30 feet; and



            3.   Rear setback:  15 feet.



   (G)   Location of accessory structures and common structures.



      (1)   Structures accessory to a particular manufactured home
shall be located only on the lot containing that manufactured home.



      (2)   All structures shall be:



         (a)   Residential in character;



         (b)   Be located only in the side or rear yards;



         (c)   Be no closer than five feet from the manufactured
home space boundary and no closer than then ten feet from any manufactured
home; and



         (d)   If located in the rear yard the structure(s) shall
occupy no more than 30% of the area of the rear yard. Provided however, for
carports not exceeding two car spaces the only requirements shall be that the
structures observe the same front yard setback as required for the
manufactured home and that the structures be located no closer than five feet
from any property line. Accessory structures of benefit to all residents of
the manufactured home park shall be permitted within the park. The structures
(i.e., community pools, club houses and the like) shall be located at least
20 feet from any interior street line and 30 feet from any manufactured homes
located within the park.



   (H)   Manufactured home standards.  No manufactured home shall be
placed in a manufactured home park unless it meets the standards of either
Class A manufactured home or Class B manufactured home as defined in §
153.031 of this chapter.



   (I)   Stand, underpinning and tie-down.



      (1)   The location of each manufactured home stand must be at
an elevation, distance and angle in relation to the adjacent access drive so
that placement and removal of the manufactured home is practical by means of
customary moving equipment.



      (2)   All manufactured homes shall have continuous brick,
cinder block, concrete block, stucco, stone or other masonry-type
underpinning or other non-reflective skirting specifically manufactured for
manufactured homes or pressure treated wood (but plain standard surface
pressure treated plywood is not acceptable), unpierced except for required
ventilation and an access door.



      (3)   The underpinning or skirting shall be installed under
all elements of the manufactured home.



      (4)   Each manufactured home in the park shall conform to
North Carolina Department of Insurance Standards for the tie down
requirements.



   (J)   Steps and patios.



      (1)   All manufactured homes within the park shall be equipped
with two sets of steps.



      (2)   All manufactured home spaces shall contain a
manufactured home patio. The patio shall be constructed of four-inch thick
concrete and shall be at least 64 square feet in area and shall be located at
the front entrance to each manufactured home.



      (3)   In lieu of concrete patios, raised decks constructed of
pressure treated wood and in accordance with the North Carolina Building Code
and at least 64 square feet in area may be permitted.



   (K)   Space numbers.



      (1)   Each manufactured home space shall have a space number.



      (2)   Numerals shall be at least three and one-half inches in
height and shall be placed on a post or stand made of durable material
between 18 and 24 inches above the ground and placed near each space driveway
at least four feet but not greater than 15 feet from the nearest edge of
pavement of the interior street.



      (3)   The number shall be set at a location as to clearly
indicate the space to which it is assigned.



   (L)   Public road frontage of park.  All manufactured home parks
shall have a minimum public road frontage of 50 feet on at least one street.



   (M)   Ingress and egress.



      (1)   Each manufactured home park shall have direct access
onto a public road.



      (2)   Manufactured home parks shall not be located on through
lots unless the park is designed in a manner that does not encourage
motorists from using the park as a means of traveling from one public street
to another.



      (3)   Parks having less than 40 spaces shall have at least one
designated area that contains both an entrance and an exit to the park.



      (4)   Parks having 40 or more spaces shall have one additional
separate designated area with both an entrance and an exit to the park for
each 40 or more spaces or fraction thereof.



   (N)   Park identification signs.



      (1)   All manufactured home parks shall have at least one
ground mounted park identification sign but shall not have more than one park
identification sign per public street from entrance.



      (2)   Park identification signs shall not exceed 36 square
feet in sign face area nor five feet in height.



      (3)   Each manufactured home park shall have a name and the
name of the park shall be shown on the identification sign.



   (O)   Interior street, drainage and markings.



      (1)   No structure within a manufactured home park shall have
direct access to a public street.



      (2)   Access to all manufactured homes and accessory
structures within the manufactured home park shall be made using internal
streets. All internal streets within a manufactured home park shall be
privately owned and maintained. All streets shall be paved to a minimum width
of 20 feet.



      (3)   Specific construction standards for internal streets are
as follows:



         (a)   A base course of at least four inches of compacted
crushed stone must be applied for the entire required paved with of drives;



         (b)   A surface course of at least one and one-half
inches of plant mixed asphalt or Class A bituminous surface must be applied
for the entire required paved width of drives in conformance with the State
Department of Transportation specifications for subdivision roads;



         (c)   Permanent street names shall be assigned to all
internal streets. Street names shall not be similar in name to any existing
streets in the Lincolnton planning and zoning jurisdiction or postal zone.
Permanent street name signs shall also be installed at street intersections
within the park; and



         (d)   Permanent traffic control signs shall be installed
within the park. The signs shall include at a minimum the following:



            1.   Stop sign(s) where park streets access public
roads;



            2.   Stop sign(s) at the intersection of interior
streets, (it is recommended that all four-way intersections be controlled by
four-way stop signs);



            3.    “No parking” signs along interior
streets at intervals sufficient to be readable except where streets have been
paved to a width of at least 30 feet;



            4.   One way streets shall be marked as at
appropriate intervals and “do not enter” signs shall be posted where
streets become one way or where streets intersect with one-way streets; and



            5.   See division (O)(3)(g) below.



         (e)   Each street shall have a graded and grassed
shoulder on both sides and grassed (or stabilized with stone rip rap)
drainage ditch on either side. The width and slopes of the shoulder and
drainage ditch shall meet the minimum construction standards of the State
Department of Transportation (NCDOT), Division of Highways for Subdivision
Road. Where terrain will not permit a drainage ditch, a continuous slope of
one foot of vertical distance for each three feet of horizontal distance,
following a six feet in width, will be permitted. Neither the street pavement
nor the ditch/shoulder area shall be within any required area of a
manufactured home space or required manufactured home setbacks. Where drive
accesses cross the ditch, a pipe of at least 12 inches in diameter shall be
placed under the drive along the course of the ditch. In lieu of non-curb and
gutter streets the developer may provide curb and gutter streets; but the
streets, together with all storm drainage appurtenances, shall meet all the
minimum construction standards for subdivision roads of the State Department
of Transportation, Division of Highways.



         (f)   The manufactured home park must be designed and
graded in a manner as to allow for the adequate runoff of stormwater. Storm
drains must be provided with sufficient inlets located at points of surface
water accumulation to adequately intercept the flow of surface stormwaters.



         (g)   Speed reduction bumps on paved internal streets
are permissible, but they shall be painted and appropriate signs indicating
the bump must be placed along the street.



         (h)   All dead-end internal streets that provide access
to three or more manufactured home spaces shall be provided with a permanent
turn-around. All turn-arounds shall have a minimum paved surface diameter of
70 feet.



         (i)   Streets and roads within the manufactured home
park shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street
shall intersect at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Where streets intersect
with a state maintained road, the design standards of NCDOT shall apply.



         (j)   Maintenance of all internal streets, signage and
all drainage facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
manufactured home park. The street shall be maintained in a manner to be free
from pot holes, breaks in the pavement, rough surfaces, ponding of water
during rainy periods, excessive washing of drainage ditches, and other
associated problems which would impede or cause hazards to motor vehicles.



   (P)   Parking.



      (1)   At least two off-street parking spaces with not less
than four inches of crushed stone or other suitable material (such as asphalt
paving or bituminous surface treatment (BST) paving) on a well-compacted
sub-base shall be provided for each manufactured home space. Required parking
spaces may be located in the required front or side yards of the manufactured
home space. Parking spaces shall be located outside the roadway, shoulder or
drainage ditches. One or more separate common visitor parking areas may be
located within the park but shall not be located within any manufactured home
space, roadway, shoulder, drainage ditch or required buffer or open space
recreation areas.



      (2)   Utility lots designated for the storage of campers,
boats, vacant manufactured homes and the like, may be located within the
manufactured home park in designated areas. All vacant manufactured homes not
then intended for occupancy shall be located in the lot(s). A maximum of one
vacant manufactured home per ten manufactured home spaces may be stored on
the lot(s). All lots shall meet all screening requirements in accordance with
§ 153.046 of this chapter.



   (Q)   Trash facilities.



      (1)   At least one covered garbage or trash container with a
minimum capacity of 24 gallons, but not exceeding a capacity of 32 gallons
shall be provided for each manufactured home. Containers shall be placed on
racks and the racks shall be located within the manufactured home park at a
point that is readily accessible for collection. All refuse must be placed in
refuse containers and it shall be the responsibility of the park operator to
provide sufficient container capacity to meet the needs of each household. In
lieu of cans and racks, covered roll-out trash/garbage containers may be
provided. In lieu of requiring individual garbage and trash containers for
each manufactured home, trash dumpsters may be installed in convenient
locations, but not on any individual manufactured home space. If dumpsters
are provided, each dumpster shall be located at least 50 feet from any
property line or public street right-of-way and at least 40 feet from any
manufactured home. All dumpsters shall be materially screened from any
adjacent manufactured home in the park. It shall be the responsibility of the
manufactured home park owner or operator to pick up trash from the containers
or dumpsters at least once per week.



      (2)   The owner or operator shall also be responsible for
hauling and disposing of trash in accordance with all county and state
regulations. The burning of refuse within the manufactured home park is not
permitted.



      (3)   In lieu of the owner providing refuse pickup, the owner
may request that, if the manufactured home park is located in the city
limits, the city provide pickup by use of standard city roll- out containers.
However, in that case the city may require street construction standards in
excess of those set forth in division (O) above in terms of stone base and
pavement thickness, pavement widths and street design/alignment in order that
city refuse trucks can be accommodated.



   (R)   Lighting.



      (1)   Manufactured home parks that contain over five
manufactured home spaces or contain more than one internal street shall
contain streetlights throughout the manufactured home park.



      (2)   Lights shall be located at all internal street
intersections, at the intersection of any internal street and a public street
and elsewhere in the park at a maximum of 300 feet intervals.



   (S)   Electric, telephone and cable television utilities.



      (1)   Each manufactured home space shall have individual
electric and telephone service connections provided. All electric, telephone
and cable television, and other utility lines shall be placed underground.



      (2)   Each manufactured home must have an individual metered
connection to an electric supply and must have an approved fuse disconnect
box at the metered location. All wires from meter to manufactured home must
be buried underground cable in conformance with the North Carolina Electrical
Code.



   (T)   Mailboxes.  Spaces within the manufactured home park shall be
provided for cluster mailboxes. Cluster mailboxes, approved by the United
States postal service, shall be located at convenient places within the park.
Individually owned and located mailboxes shall not be allowed. All cluster
mailboxes shall be located within the manufactured home park and shall not
front directly on any public road nor be located within any designated
manufactured home space. At least one mailbox per manufactured home space
shall be provided and the residents of the manufactured home occupying that
space shall be provided with a key to open and close the corresponding
mailbox. At least one separate parking space shall be provided adjacent to
each cluster mailbox for each 25 boxes in the cluster.



   (U)   Administrative office.  One manufactured home may be used
solely as an administrative office within the park or an administrative
office may be located in a manufactured home that is used as a residence by
the resident manager. An administrative office is not required.



   (V)   Water service.



      (1)   An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of
water shall be provided in each manufactured home park. Where a municipal or
county water supply is available, connection shall be made thereto and its
supply used exclusively.



      (2)   When municipal or county water supply is not available,
adequate water supply shall be developed and its supply used exclusively, in
accordance with the standards of the state and the County Health Department.
Any water supply must be capable of providing 300 gallons of water per day
per manufactured home space.



      (3)   Each space shall be provided a minimum three-fourth-inch
size copper or PVC water service line.



   (W)   Sewage facilities.



      (1)   (a)   Adequate and safe sewage disposal facilities
shall be provided in all manufactured home parks. Collection systems and
sewage treatment plants complying with the requirements of the North Carolina
Department of Health and Environment and the County Health Department shall
be provided. Individual septic tank systems are permissible in accordance
with the requirement of the County Health Department’s Sewage Disposal
Regulations. There shall be no more than one manufactured home connected to
an individual septic tank.



         (b)   Each manufactured home space shall be provided
with at least a three-inch PVC or ABS, Schedule 40 or equivalent sewer riser.



         (c)   A concrete apron shall be installed around all
sewer connection pipes for support and protection. The sewer riser pipe shall
be located on each space so that the sewer connection is located a distance
of at least 100 feet or greater from any ground water supply.



         (d)   All materials used for sewer connections shall be
semi-rigid, corrosion resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface
shall be smooth.



         (e)   A clean-out shall be provided at each space.
Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the sewer connection. The sewer
connection shall extend at least four inches above ground elevation.



      (2)   (a)   Community sewage disposal systems (commonly
referred to as package plants), as permitted by the state, shall be an
acceptable method of disposal of residential sewage for manufactured home
parks within the jurisdiction of this chapter when connection to a publicly
owned and maintained sewer system is not possible. When connection to a
publicly owned and maintained sewer system is possible, all manufactured
homes within the manufactured home park shall be connected to the system. The
following information must be submitted when a sewage package plant is
proposed.



         (b)   The developer shall indicate on the plans that a
sewage package plant is being proposed for the manufactured home park, and
show on the preliminary plan the following:



            1.   Size and location of the package treatment
plant;



            2.   All proposed sewer lines, including:



               a.   Location and size of gravity lines;



               b.   Location and line size of force main;
and



               c.   Location and size of pump stations.



            3.   Location of discharge point into surface
water stream; and



            4.   All associated easements and rights-of-way.



      (3)   The developer shall provide a copy of the state permit
application to the City Administrator and the County Health Department at the
time of application.



      (4)   The developer shall submit at the time the application
for a permit is submitted to the state, the following information:



         (a)   Name of owner and licensed operator of the plant
and name of the licensed firm that will operate the package plant, if
different from the owner;



         (b)   Amount of liability insurance required for
operation of the system;



         (c)   Name of owner and responsible party for the
package plant; and



         (d)   Other pertinent information.



      (5)   The developer shall submit the following, upon
completion:



         (a)   A set of as-built plans and drawings, certified by
the project engineer for the package treatment plant and all sewer lines,
pump stations and other devices used in the sewer system;



         (b)   Operation and maintenance agreements for:



            1.   The package treatment plant; and



            2.   The sewer lines and other devices that are a
part of the sewer system.



         (c)   Copy of the executed and notarized agreement(s)
for the ownership and maintenance of the package plant and sewer lines;



         (d)   Copy of insurance liability riders, required by
the state, pertaining to the operation of the package plant;



         (e)   Copy of the approved state permit, along with any
and all conditions set forth in the operating permit; and



         (f)   A copy of other agreements and information for
plans pertaining to the maintenance and operation of the sewer system.



      (6)   (a)   The package plant shall be operated and
maintained in accordance with the approved permit from the state. In addition
to the operational requirements of the state permit, the owner or operator of
the package plant shall maintain a daily inspection log of visits to the
package plant and shall include the following:



            1.   Date and time of inspection;



            2.   Signature of operator making inspection; and



            3.   Notation of any problem and corrective action
taken.



         (b)   A copy of this log shall be submitted monthly to
the County Health Department by the tenth day of the following month. Failure
to submit the log report will be deemed a violation of this chapter.



      (7)   Manufactured home park sewer systems using package
plants as the main treatment facility should be designed to accommodate the
eventual connection to a public sewer system at the time that main outfall
lines are placed in areas serving the manufactured home park.



   (X)   Screening.



      (1)   All manufactured home parks shall be screened from all
adjoining properties and public streets. Screening shall be located within
the manufactured home park and shall materially screen all structures within
the manufactured home park from all adjacent properties and public streets.
All manufactured home setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the
screened area nearest the manufactured home.



      (2)   Required screening shall be installed and maintained in
conformance with the standards set forth in § 153.046 of this chapter,
provided however, no wall or fence or planted berm shall be used unless the
applicant proposes the wall, fence or berm as a supplement to a planted
screen installed in accordance with § 153.046(C)(1) of this chapter.



   (Y)   Interior landscaping.



      (1)   Where manufactured home spaces share an interior rear
manufactured homes space line, a row of trees shall be planted. The row shall
contain a minimum of four trees per 100 linear feet.



      (2)   These trees may be planted within either manufactured
home space within five feet of the shared rear space line. The trees shall be
of the varieties as herein listed, unless other varieties are approved either
by:



         (a)   The City Council in the issuance of a conditional
use permit; or



         (b)   The Administrator after the conditional use permit
has been granted.



      (3)   Varieties of trees:



         (a)   Willow oak (Quercus phelios);



         (b)   Water oak (Quercus nigra);



         (c)   Shumard oak (Quercus shumardi);



         (d)   Green ash;



         (e)   Sugar maple;



         (f)   Bradford pear;



         (g)   River birch (single-stemed);



         (h)   Carolina hornbeam;



         (i)   Hackberry; and



         (j)   Yoshino cherry.



      (4)   In addition to trees required by division (Y)(1) above,
on each space there shall be provided one additional tree of the above
referenced varieties (other varieties approved by either the City Council or
the Administrator). The tree shall be located at least eight feet from any
rear space line and outside any interior street right-of-way.



      (5)   Figure E below illustrates the requirements of this
division. Where any existing trees can contribute to meeting these
requirements, the applicant is encouraged to use them in lieu of new plant
materials provided the spirit and intent of this division are met.




Figure E










 



   (Z)   Open space areas.  Open space areas are required as follows
for parks having spaces smaller than 10,000 square feet.



      (1)   None of the following may be counted as an open space
area:



         (a)   Any portion of a manufactured home space;



         (b)   Any parking areas or any area used as a utility
lot as set forth in division (P) above;



         (c)   Any required street, ditch or shoulder area,
except that traffic medians and islands designated as special landscape areas
may be counted as open space areas;



         (d)   Any land occupied by a building, swimming pool,
tennis court or other structure;



         (e)   Any minimum screen area required by §
153.046(C)(1); and



         (f)   Any area designated for common trash facilities.



      (2)   (a)   Open space areas may consist only of one or
more of the following provided the areas are not excluded by division (Z)(1)
above:



            1.   Buffer areas in addition to any minimum
screen areas required by § 153.046(C)(1);



            2.   Natural wooded areas;



            3.   Open fields or lawns;



            4.   Garden plots designated for exclusive use by
the tenants of the manufactured home park;



            5.   Special landscaped areas; containing plant
material such as traffic islands, medians and flower gardens; and



            6.   Recreation areas in addition to any minimum
recreation area(s) required by division (AA) below.



         (b)   The amount of required open space area shall be
calculated as follows:



 


For Each Manufactured Home Space in the Following Space Size Category

 

Amount of Area To Be Designated for Open Space




9,000 to 9,999 sq. ft.

 

100 sq. ft.




8,000 to 8,999 sq. ft.

 

150 sq. ft.




7,000 to 7,999 sq. ft.

 

250 sq. ft.




6,000 to 6,999 sq. ft.

 

500 sq. ft.




5,000 to 5,999 sq. ft.

 

1,000 sq. ft.



Exception:  Where the total open space area required for the manufactured
home park totals less than 2,000 square feet according to the above formula,
no open space area shall be required.



 



      (3)   Open space areas shall be well-maintained by the park
owner to prevent the overgrowth of plant material and or other conditions
that could create unsafe or unhealthy conditions for park residents or
adjoining property owners.



      (4)   The designated open space area within a manufactured
home park may consist of a single area or multiple areas.



   (AA)   Recreation area(s).



      (1)   This division requiring designated recreation areas
shall only apply to manufactured home parks having ten or more manufactured
home spaces less than 9,000 square feet in size. Where the application is for
an enlargement of an existing manufactured home park, the existing spaces
shall be counted for determining the threshold for providing recreation areas
and for determining the amount of recreation area required. In these cases,
any recreation areas within the existing park shall also be counted toward
meeting the requirements of this section.



      (2)   The total minimum area to be designated within the park
as recreation areas shall be calculated according to the following formula.



 


For Each Manufactured Home Space in the Following Space Size Category

 

Amount of Area To Be Designated for Recreation




Below 5,000 sq. ft. (this applies only to expansion of existing manufactured
home parks)

 

1,000 sq. ft.




5,000 to 6,999 sq. ft.

 

500 sq. ft.




7,000 to 8,999 sq. ft.

 

250 sq. ft.




 



      (3)   When the calculation of required recreation area
according to the above formula is greater than zero but less than 10,000
square feet, the minimum area required shall be increased to 10,000 square
feet.



      (4)   The designated recreation area(s) within a manufactured
home park may consist of a single area or multiple areas, however, each
manufactured home park must have at least one contiguous recreation area of
at least 10,000 square feet and no area designated for recreation purposes
shall be less than 1,000 square feet in size. Recreation areas may consist
of, but are not limited to, adult and/or child play areas with play
apparatus, picnic areas, outdoor exercise facilities, playgrounds,
ballfields, shuffleboard courts, volleyball courts, tennis courts, basketball
courts and swimming pools. Unimproved areas or buffer areas shall not be
counted as required recreation areas. If a developer elects to provide
recreation areas in excess of the amount required by this section, the excess
may be counted toward the required open space area as required by division
(Z) above. All recreation areas shall be maintained in good condition for the
intended recreation purpose at all times by the manufactured home park owner.



   (BB)   Maintenance.  The grounds of a manufactured home park shall
be kept free of trash, litter and debris. Grounds, buildings and storage
areas shall be properly maintained to prevent infestation by rodents, vermin
and insects. All grounds shall have proper drainage to prevent the
accumulation of water. It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured
home park owner to maintain the manufactured home park in accordance with
these standards at all times.



(Prior UDO, § 11.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS



§ 153.215  PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.



   All planned residential developments (PRDs) shall be developed in
accordance with the standards of this section.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   Planned residential developments (PRDs) may consist of
either single-family dwellings, duplexes or multi-family dwellings or a
mixture of the housing types. A variety of dwelling types and physical
arrangements may be permitted such as single-family detached houses, lot-line
houses, village houses, twin houses, duplexes, patio houses, atrium houses,
townhouses, other cluster arrangements or other multi-family arrangements
such as storied or stacked dwelling units allowing a maximum of up to three
units stacked vertically over top of each other. These dwelling unit types
are defined in § 153.031 of this chapter.



      (2)   The purpose for special regulations for planned
residential developments is to promote variety, innovation and flexibility in
development by allowing certain variations in lot sizes, dwelling unit types
and/or design requirements the intended purpose of which is to:



         (a)   Permit a creative approach to the development of
residential land;



         (b)   Accomplish a more desirable environment than would
be possible through the strict application of minimum requirements of this
chapter;



         (c)   Provide for an efficient use of land;



         (d)   Enhance the appearance of neighborhoods through
preservation of natural features;



         (e)   Provide for recreational areas and open space; and



         (f)   Provide an opportunity for new approaches to
living environment and provide an environment of stable character compatible
with surrounding residential areas.



      (3)   In keeping with the stated purpose of this section, PRDs
are only allowed on a conditional use basis.



   (B)   Project requirements.  The following minimum requirements
shall be applicable to planned residential developments.



      (1)   Minimum project site size.  Two acres.



      (2)   Maximum density.



         (a)   Density shall be calculated on the basis of gross
site area (project street, public or private, are included in gross site
area) and fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.



         (b)   Allowed densities for PRDs for each applicable
zone are as follows:



 


Zone

 

Basic Density Allowed (Units Per Acre)




R-25

 

6




R-10

 

3




R-8

 

6




RMF

 

8




R-O

 

14



Note:  Division (C) below provides for a schedule of density bonuses over
the above listed basic maximum densities where projects meet certain
requirements set forth in this division.



 



      (3)   Dwelling unit types.  Allowed dwelling unit types for
PRDs for each applicable zone are as follows:



 

Dwelling Unit
 

R-25

 

R-10

 

R-8

 

RMF

 

RO





Single-family detached houses
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Lot-line houses
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Village houses
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Patio houses
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Twin houses
 

Yes

 

No

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Duplexes
 

Yes

 

No

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Townhouses
 

Yes

 

No

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Atrium houses
 

Yes

 

No

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Multi-family and other developments
 

Yes

 

No

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes





 



      (4)   Public water and sewer.  Public water and sewer must be
provided to the site.



      (5)   Minimum front yard setback or setback from any dedicated
street. Fifty feet at project boundary.



      (6)   Minimum side yard setback at project boundary.  Thirty
feet (except on corner lots where 50 feet shall be provided.)



      (7)   Minimum rear yard setback at project boundary. Thirty
feet.



      (8)   Minimum lot width (as measured at required front yard
setback).  One hundred feet. In no case shall the front lot width at the
street right-of-way line be less than 50 feet.



      (9)   Maximum building height.  Forty-eight feet.



      (10)   Minimum unobstructed open space.  Fifty percent. (As
used in this section the term UNOBSTRUCTED OPEN SPACE shall mean all land of
the gross site area (including street rights-of-way to be dedicated), which
is not covered by buildings or other structures. Off-street parking areas and
drives are counted as unobstructed open space but are not counted as improved
common open space.)



      (11)   Parking.



         (a)   Where parking is provided by private drives for
individual dwelling units, space shall be provided for parking at least one
and one-half cars at each dwelling unit.



         (b)   Where common parking areas are used at least one
and one-half parking spaces shall be provided for each one-bedroom unit, one
and three-quarters for each two bedroom dwelling unit and two for each three
or more bedroom dwelling unit. However, where dwellings are designed
specifically for elderly and/or handicapped persons the minimum parking
requirements shall be one and one-fourth parking spaces per dwelling unit.



      (12)   Ground entrance.  At least one ground entrance to
every dwelling shall be located within 100 feet of the parking area within
the development designated to serve that dwelling.



      (13)   Private streets.  Private streets within the
development shall be so designed and constructed to carry vehicular traffic
from public streets to parking or service areas within the development. All
private streets shall meet the following requirements.



         (a)   Private streets must have a minimum right-of-way
width of 30 feet, exclusive of parking bay areas, and have a minimum pavement
width of 20 feet, measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement.
Additional widths will be required where parallel parking is to be provided.



         (b)   Angled parking areas directly adjoining private
streets will be permitted on one side of the street only at any point along
the street (i.e., double loaded parking is not permitted along private
streets.) the combined length of parking areas along private streets may not
exceed 50% of the length of the adjoining roadway. The parking areas may be
alternated from one side of the street to the other. All other angled parking
areas must be clearly separated from the private street by at least a barrier
island.



         (c)   The edge of pavement of any private street shall
be no closer than 20 feet to any multi-family principal building. However,
private streets may be within ten feet of accessory buildings.



      (14)   Multi-family units.  In projects where multi-family
units (dwelling units where more than two units are attached) are proposed
there shall be an area or areas of improved common open space. The area or
areas in combination shall be at least 10,000 square feet in area or 500
square feet in area per multi-family dwelling unit, whichever is greater. (As
used in this section the term IMPROVED COMMON OPEN SPACE shall mean land
and/or water areas within the site designated for development, exclusive of
lands occupied by streets, street rights-of-way or off-street parking, not
individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and
intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development
and to be inclusive of all undeveloped, onsite, side yard areas that are
adjacent to multi-family residential buildings that are maintained by the
property owner, or areas which have been improved with recreational areas and
amenities such as but not limited to playgrounds, ballfields, tennis courts,
nature trails, gardens, swimming pools, clubhouses and the like.)



      (15)   Screening.



         (a)   Screening shall be required at the following
locations:



            1.   Along major thoroughfares (as shown on the
city’s thoroughfare plan), but the screen shall not hinder sight distance
where project streets or entrances intersect with thoroughfares;



            2.   Along a property line or a street bounding
the project where the property line or street separates multi-family housing
areas within the project and existing single-family residential areas outside
the project; and



            3.   Along a property line or a street bounding
the project where the property line or street separates the project from any
areas zoned or used for nonresidential purposes.



         (b)   The screening shall materially screen the project
from the view of the adjoining project from the view of the adjoining
property, and in the case of divisions (B)(15)(a)1. and (B)(15)(a)3.
immediately above, the adjoining property from the view of the project. The
screening shall otherwise be in compliance with § 153.046 of this chapter.



         (c)   In cases where screening is required by this
chapter and devices such as existing vegetation or topographical features or
extreme size of the tract involved would render the installation of screening
unnecessary, the City Council is hereby empowered to accept the existing
features as meeting the general screening requirements. The decision shall be
based on the spirit and intent of this section. The vacancy or non-use of
adjacent property shall not negate the necessity for installation of
screening. If at any time after the existing features are accepted, the
features are altered so as to render them inadequate as screening as
described in this section, to achieve the required screen, the developer
shall be required to make the necessary improvements to achieve the required
screen.



      (16)   Additional requirements for multi-family projects. 
The following additional requirements apply to multi-family projects.



         (a)   No principal residential building side (front,
rear, left or right) shall be located closer than ten feet to the edge of
pavement of any private street or off-street parking area within the
development.



         (b)   Off-street parking areas and all internal streets
shall provide safe and convenient access for firefighting and refuse
collection vehicles and other service and delivery vehicles.



         (c)   The arrangement of buildings shall not create long
alleyways between the rear of residential buildings on the site.



         (d)   The front entrance to any residential building
shall not directly face the rear of any other residential building.



         (e)   [For provisions regarding stacking of dwelling
units, see division (A)(1) above.]



         (f)   No exterior wall of a building shall run
unarticulated for a horizontal distance of more than 40 feet.



         (g)   No multi-family principal building shall be
located closer than 25 feet to any other principal building within the
development.



         (h)   All walls of greater than 200 square feet shall
have at least six square feet of window area per 200 square feet of total
wall area, however, this requirement shall not apply to walls facing
alleyways.



      (17)   Phases.  Each phase of a multi-phased project shall be
able to stand as an independent project unless the initial phase constructed
is designed in a manner which will support the entire development upon
completion of the initial phase. As used in this section, the term PHASE
shall refer to that portion of the project for which the applicant requests a
conditional use permit. At no point in the development of a multi-phase
project shall the density of residential development in a completed phase of
the project area exceed the maximum density established approved for the
project.



   (C)   Density bonus.



      (1)   A density bonus of up to 40% over the basic density
normally allowed may be approved by the City Council when granting the
conditional use permit. The density bonus must be based upon the amount of
unobstructed open space greater than the minimum 50% and the amount of land
area to be used for improved common open space.



      (2)   Both the unobstructed open space test and the improved
common open space test must be met in accordance with the schedule below in
order for a project to be considered for the respective density bonus. All
improved common open space not covered by buildings or structures shall also
be deemed unobstructed open space. The bonuses listed on the schedule shall
be maximum bonuses and the City Council, at its discretion may grant a
smaller bonus.



      (3)   Application for the density bonus must accompany the
preliminary site plan when the plan is submitted for approval. Bodies of
water shall constitute no more than 25% of the unobstructed open space nor
more than 50% of the improved common open space used for calculating the
maximum allowable density bonus.



      (4)   The density bonus schedule shall be as follows:



 


Maximum % of Site (Gross Land Area) to be Unobstructed Open Space

 

Minimum % of Site (Gross Land Area) to be Improved Open Space

 

Allowable Density Bonus (% Increase in Units per Acre)




51% to 55%

 

12%

 

8%




56% to 60%

 

14%

 

16%




61% to 65%

 

16%

 

24%




66% to 70%

 

18%*

 

32%




Over 70%

 

20%

 

40%



* Minimum improved open space shall be 20% when units over units are
developed in a PDR project.



 



(Prior UDO, § 12.1)  (Ord. ZTA-4-2014, passed 1-7-2015)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.216  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (MIXED USE).



   All mixed use planned unit developments (PUDs) shall be developed in
accordance with the standards of this section, provided however, any
residential components of the developments shall also conform to all the
requirements of § 153.215(B) above of this chapter except §
153.215(B)(16)(e).



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to establish requirements
and review procedures for mixed-use projects that may include a full range of
housing types and compatible commercial and institutional uses. In order to
encourage high-quality design and innovative arrangements of buildings and
open space uses throughout the project site, these regulations provide for
substantial flexibility from conventional use and dimensional requirements of
the zoning districts.



      (2)   In keeping with the purpose of these regulations,
planned unit developments, where allowed, are always a conditional use
subject to the procedures set forth in §§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this
chapter.



   (B)   Project requirements.  The following minimum requirements
shall be applicable to mixed use planned unit developments.



      (1)   Minimum project size.  Five acres.



      (2)   Maximum density/intensity.



         (a)   For residential portions of the project the
maximum densities shall be those listed in § 153.215(B) of this chapter. The
density bonuses in accordance with § 153.215(C) of this chapter shall
likewise be applicable.



         (b)   Except as provided in § 153.120(E), SH Overlay
District, or § 153.121, WSW Water Supply Watershed District, for
nonresidential portions of the project the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) and
maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) shall be:



 


Use Type

 

FAR

 

ISR



Office use
 

.35

 

.50



Commercial/retail
 

.35

 

.75



Industrial/wholesale/trucking/warehousing
 

.25

 

.50




 



      (3)   Uses allowed within the project.  All uses listed as
either permitted or conditional in the zoning district in which the project
is proposed. Residential dwelling unit types are allowed in accordance with
§ 153.215(B)(3) of this chapter.



      (4)   Residential areas.  Unless otherwise specified in this
section, residential portions of planned unit developments shall meet all
requirements of § 153.215(B) of this chapter.



      (5)   Nonresidential areas.  Nonresidential portions of
planned unit developments shall meet the following requirements.



         (a)   Public water and sewer.  Public water and sewer
must be provided to the site.



         (b)   Minimum front yard setback or setback from any
dedicated street.  Fifty feet at project boundary.



         (c)   Minimum side yard setback at project boundary. 
Thirty feet (except on corner lots where 50 feet shall be provided).



         (d)   Minimum rear yard setback at project boundary. 
Thirty feet.



         (e)   Minimum lot width (as measured at required front
yard setback).  One hundred feet. In no case shall the front lot width at
the street right-of-way line be less than 50 feet.



         (f)   Maximum building height.  Forty feet.



         (g)   Off-street parking and loading.  Off-street
parking and loading areas shall conform to all minimum requirements for each
use as set forth in §§ 153.185 through 153.188 of this chapter. Off-street
parking areas shall be separated from interior streets within the project. No
parking space shall be located on, along or otherwise be directly assessed by
an interior street. All off-street loading areas (for loading and unloading
of goods) shall be located in the rear of buildings except that the areas may
be located at building sides when screened from view at the front of the
building.



         (h)   Private streets.  Private streets within the
development shall be so designed and constructed to carry vehicular traffic
from public streets to parking or service areas within the development. All
private streets shall, at a minimum, meet the following requirements:



            1.   Minimum pavement widths, back of curb to back
of curb.



               a.   Local access street.  Thirty-two feet.



               b.   Collector street.  Forty feet.



            2.   The edge of pavement of any private street
shall be no closer than 40 feet to any building except that a street may be
located within 20 feet of an accessory building and except that this
requirement shall not apply to passenger and goods loading and unloading
drives and facilities.



            3.   All streets and parking areas shall be paved
and bordered by a standard 24-inch concrete curb and gutter. Storm drainage
shall be installed in accordance with the standards required by the city.



         (i)   Screening.  Screening shall be required at the
following locations:



            1.   Along major thoroughfares (as shown on the
city’s thoroughfare plan), but the screen shall not hinder sight distance
where project streets or entrances intersect with thoroughfares;



            2.   Within the project, along the boundaries
between areas planned for nonresidential uses, and areas planned for
residential uses. The screening shall be located on the nonresidential side
of the boundary. Private recreation areas associated with residential uses
shall not be required to be screened from residential uses;



            3.   Along a property line or a street bounding
the project where the property line or street separates the project from any
areas zoned or used for residential purposes;



            4.   The screening shall materially screen the
project from the view of the adjoining property, and from the view of
residential areas within the project. The screening shall otherwise be in
compliance with § 153.046 of this chapter; and



            5.   In cases where screening is required by this
chapter and devices such as existing vegetation or topographical features or
extreme size of the tract involved would render the installation of screening
unnecessary, the City Council is hereby empowered to accept the existing
features as meeting the general screening requirements. The decision shall be
based on the spirit and intent of this section. The vacancy or non-use of
adjacent property shall not negate the necessity for installation of
screening. If at any time after the existing features are altered so as to
render them inadequate for screening, as described in this section to achieve
the required screen, the developer shall be required to make the necessary
improvements to achieve the required screen.



         (j)   Paved facilities.  Except for pedestrian walkways
and pedestrian courts and paved facilities specifically designed and
designated for passenger or goods loading and unloading no paved facilities
(streets, drives or parking areas) shall be located closer than 20 feet from
the front or rear of any building or ten feet from the side of any building.



         (k)   Off-street parking areas.  Off-street parking
areas and all internal streets shall provide safe and convenient access for
firefighting and refuse collection vehicles and service and delivery vehicles.



         (l)   Front entrances.  The front entrance to any
principal building shall not directly face the designated goods loading area
of any other principal building, unless there is a separation of at least 150
feet between the building and sufficient landscaping to materially screen the
loading area from view from the front of the opposing building.



         (m)   Location of principal buildings.  No principal
building shall be located closer than 70 feet to any other principal building
within the development.



         (n)   Phases.  Each phase of a multi-phased project
shall be able to stand as an independent project. As used in this section,
the term PHASE shall refer to that portion of the project for which the
applicant is seeking a conditional use permit.



(Prior UDO, § 12.2)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.217  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   Planned residential developments and planned unit developments (mixed
use) are always conditional uses in zones where allowed. The conditional use
permit application and review procedures, therefore, serve as the primary
procedures for review of planned developments. There are, however, additional
submissions required for planned developments and one additional step in the
review procedure (sketch plan review by the Administrator). A separate fee,
as established by the City Council, must also be submitted for planned
developments. The purpose of this section is to set forth the special
application and review procedure for planned developments.



   (A)   Sketch plan submission.  Prior to formal submission of the
full planned development plan, a sketch plan shall be submitted to the
Administrator. The sketch plan shall be prepared by a registered architect,
engineer or land surveyor currently licensed and registered by the
appropriate State Board. At a minimum the sketch plan shall contain or be
accompanied by the following:



      (1)   A sketch vicinity map including north arrow showing the
location of the planned development in relation to neighboring tracts,
subdivisions, roads and waterways;



      (2)   The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract
proposed to be in the planned development;



      (3)   The total acreage of the planned development;



      (4)   Locations of any existing public streets or utilities
and rights-of-way of the facilities;



      (5)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the
planned development and the existing uses of land adjoining it;



      (6)   General locations of existing natural features of the
site such as wooded areas, water features and significant topographic
features;



      (7)   The proposed street layout with approximate pavement and
right-of-way width;



      (8)   Existing property lines and approximate (sketch)
locations of proposed property lines within the development showing all
proposed lots or other divisions of land;



      (9)   Sketch of conceptual building locations;



      (10)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner;



      (11)   The name, if any, of the proposed planned development;



      (12)   Streets and lots of adjacent developed or platted
properties; and



      (13)   The zoning classification of the tract and of adjacent
properties.



   (B)   Sketch plan review procedures.  The sketch plan should be
submitted at least 30 days prior to the date the applicant expects to submit
his or her formal application for the planned development/conditional use
permit.



      (1)   The Administrator shall, within 21 days of receipt of
the sketch plan, review the sketch plan for general compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   The Administrator shall advise the applicant or his or
her authorized agent of the regulations pertaining to the proposed planned
development and the procedures to be followed in the preparation and
submission of the formal application. One copy of the sketch plan shall be
retained as a part of the record of the Administrator with another copy being
returned to the applicant or his or her authorized agent along with any
comments made by the Administrator.



   (C)   Formal plan submission.  Following the Administrator’s
review and submission of comments on the sketch plan, or after 21 days
following submission of the sketch plan has elapsed without the Administrator
having submitted his or her comments to the applicant, the applicant may
submit his or her formal application for the planned development and
application for conditional use permit. The formal application must be
submitted to the Administrator at least 15 days prior to the Planning Board
meeting at which it is to be reviewed. Timing of the submission and waivers
of submission deadlines shall in all respect conform to the requirements set
forth in § 153.236(C) of this chapter.



      (1)   The formal plan shall contain all of the information set
forth in § 153.236(A) of this chapter, and in addition shall contain or be
accompanied by the following information:



         (a)   Title block containing development name, name of
owner, date or dates plan was plan was prepared, a scale drawing in feet per
inch listed in words or figures, north arrow, the name of the applicant;



         (b)   A sketch vicinity map with north arrow showing the
relationship between the proposed planned development and surrounding area;



         (c)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all
owners, mortgagees, registered land surveyors, land planners, architects,
landscape architects and professional engineers responsible for the planned
development;



         (d)   The registration numbers and seals of the
professional engineers, land surveyors and/or architects;



         (e)   Locations of proposed property lines and proposed
divisions of land within the development;



         (f)   The names of owners of adjoining properties;



         (g)   For all proposed public streets and private
streets proposed within or adjoining the development the following
information:



            1.   Rights-of-way, location and dimensions;



            2.   Pavement widths;



            3.   Approximate grades;



            4.   Design engineering data for all corners and
curves;



            5.   Typical street cross-sections; and



            6.   Road names and whether to be public or
private.



         (h)   The location and dimensions of existing and
proposed utilities;



         (i)   Location of any proposed recreation or facilities
and other areas designated as, and meeting the requirement of, improved
common open space as set forth in § 153.215(B)(14) of this chapter (area in
square feet of each area shall be provided);



         (j)   The future users and ownership (dedicated or
reservation for public use to a governmental body, for owners’ use to duly
constituted homeowner’s association, or for tenants’ use and remaining in
developer’s ownership) of recreation and open space lands;



         (k)   Location and proposed use of any existing wooded
areas within the development site;



         (l)   Existing and proposed topography at minimum
two-foot elevation intervals;



         (m)   Marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes,
streams or stream beds and any other natural features affecting the site;



         (n)   Average calculations for the entire planned
development, for each proposed division of land within the development, for
each phase of the development and by general land use within each phase; and



         (o)   The name and location of any site or buildings
within the proposed development or within any contiguous property that is
listed on the U.S. Department of Interior’s National Register of Historic
Places, or is designated as a local historic property by the county, or is
within the HO-Historic Overlay Zone as set forth in this chapter.



      (2)   The Planning Board shall review the application for the
planned development at the same time with its review of the application for a
conditional use permit. If a conditional use permit (CUP) is recommended, the
Planning Board shall then recommend whether to approve, deny or approve
subject to changes being made, the plan for the planned development. The
Planning Board shall issue the recommendation according to the same schedule
for issuing a recommendation on the CUP as set forth in § 153.236 of this
chapter.



      (3)   (a)   Once a recommendation has been received from
the Planning Board, or the 45-day Planning Board review period has expired,
the City Council shall initiate its review of the planned development plan.
The City Council’s schedule for review and rendering a decision on the plan
shall be in accordance with the same schedule and contemporaneous with the
procedures set forth in § 153.237 of this chapter.



         (b)   In rendering its decision on the planned
development plan the Council may approve the plan as submitted, disapprove or
approve subject to changes being made to the plan by the applicant. After it
has reviewed and rendered a decision on the planned development plan, the
City Council shall render a decision on the CUP.



      (4)   Upon completion of the project (or each phase thereof) a
complete set of “as-built” drawings shall be furnished to the city.



(Prior UDO, § 12.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.218  PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS IN WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED OVERLAY DISTRICT;
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Minimum lot sizes are not applicable to single-family cluster
development projects; however, the total number of lots shall not exceed the
number of lots allowed for single-family detached developments in § 153.121
of this chapter. Built-upon area or stormwater control requirements of the
project shall not exceed that allowed for the critical area or the protected
area, whichever applies.



   (B)   All built-upon areas shall be designed and located to minimize
stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize concentrated
stormwater flow.



   (C)   The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or
natural state. Where the development has an incorporated property owner’s
association, the title of open space area shall be conveyed to the
association for management. Where a property owner’s association is not
incorporated, a maintenance agreement shall be filled with the property deeds.



(Prior UDO, § 12.4)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.219  TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENTS.



   A traditional neighborhood development (TND) is a type of planned unit
development (PUD) that contains both residential and nonresidential uses. A
TND is a conditional use in the underlying zoning district and is a
development that substantially meets the guiding principles of traditional
neighborhood development design as set forth in this section. TNDs, by their
very nature, are built in a more urban, compact configuration. Accordingly,
many of the setback, bulk and off-street parking requirements, requirements
dealing with accessory dwelling units, and the one principal use per lot
requirement that may otherwise be prescribed for the underlying zoning
district are hereby either relaxed or waived. Similarly, many of the
subdivision standard requirements found in § 153.395 of this chapter are
also waived.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose and intent of this section
is to set forth guiding principles for traditional neighborhood development
design and to allow relief to some of the PRD/PUD standards in §§ 153.215
and 153.216 when the developments are found to substantially meet the guiding
principles of this section.



   (B)   Guiding principles.  For organizational purposes, the guiding
principles have been divided into six categories; however, most principles
relate to multiple categories. A TND must substantially meet each of these
principles. Where the development application does not meet a particular
principle, the applicant shall submit written justification substantiating
why that principle cannot be met, unless the principle is described as
optional. The guiding principles are as follows.



      (1)   Public realm principles.



         (a)   The central element of traditional neighborhood
design is the emphasis and weight given to the public realm (the streets and
plazas, and the public open spaces such as parks, playgrounds, greens and
natural areas, together with semi-public spaces which frame the public realm
and provide transition between public and entirely private spaces).



         (b)   TNDs feature well-designed public spaces, special
emphasis on public and cultural buildings, and special design treatment for
vista terminations.



         (c)   A sense of enclosure is maintained along the
public street through an appropriate ratio between the height of building
fronts and the distance between buildings on opposite sides of the street.
Where the street frontage consists of single story buildings or open space,
street trees can be a substitute for front building walls to maintain this
sense of enclosure.



         (d)   Nonresidential buildings are set at or very near
the sidewalk. In most situations, the same is true for attached housing.
Single-family homes have relatively shallow setbacks, typically one-fourth to
one-third the lot width. Encroachments are allowed for porches, steps, bay
windows and balconies.



         (e)   The public realm shall be appropriately
landscaped. Unless good landscape design would otherwise dictate, each street
shall be provided with an orderly regimen of street trees of substantial
nursery stock, which will grow quickly to provide a street canopy. Planting
strips wide enough to accommodate street trees typically separate sidewalks
from street roadways. See division (B)(2)(f) below.



         (f)   Single-family home lots in TNDs are typically
smaller and narrower than in conventional subdivisions. A substantial amount
of land area savings from reduced lot sizes is dedicated toward common areas.



         (g)   1.   Narrower lots necessitate alternative
treatment of certain fixtures that can diminish the aesthetic quality of the
public realm. A system of rear access lanes (alleys) can provide garage
access at the rear of the lot. This is especially preferred for lots less
than 50 feet in width. When built to a 16-foot standard with a 24-foot
right-of-way, the alley can also serve as an appropriate location for
electric, gas, cable television and telephone equipment as well as access for
garbage pickup and mail delivery. On lots at least 50 feet wide, alternate,
less preferred methods of garage access include (in descending order of
preference):



               a.   A front driveway accessing a garage
behind the house or near the back of the lot;



               b.   Turning the garage so that it does not
face the front (provided the garage is flush with or set behind the front
building line);



               c.   Setting the garage at least 20 feet
behind the front of the house; or



               d.   Providing special architectural
treatment to the house to visually de-emphasize a garage at the front.



            2.   Where alleys are not available, other
measures shall be taken to hide utility equipment; however, fire hydrants are
always located on the fronting street, ideally situated on planting strip
bulb-outs at intersections.



         (h)   TNDs are designed so that there are linkages
between the private realm and the public realm while protecting private
spaces. Single-family detached homes typically have front porches large
enough for sitting (with a six- to eight-foot minimum depth), and attached
dwellings typically have sitting porches or front stoops. Always for single
homes served by alleys, and where feasible and designed appropriately for
town homes, private spaces are protected at the rear using privacy devices
according to the development guidelines. The bottom floor of any dwelling
whose sidewalk-facing wall is within five feet of the sidewalk shall be
elevated sufficiently above the sidewalk to provide additional privacy inside
the dwelling.



         (i)   TNDs are designed to feature vista terminations at
multiple locations. Vistas can terminate to important buildings, parks and
greens, civic features in a “town” or “village” center, a carefully
sited dwelling, a curve in the road, natural green edge, distant objects and
scenery, and other features as appropriate. Entry into the community usually
uses an important vista termination to provide a sense of place arrival.



         (j)   Utility wiring shall be underground and decorative
street lighting fixtures are encouraged, but not mandated.



      (2)   Transportation system principles.



         (a)   TNDs always have a connecting web of streets,
typically provided by a grid or modified grid street pattern. The street
system is organized in a comprehensible network hierarchy that forms an
orderly discernable neighborhood structure.



         (b)   Cul-de-sacs shall be avoided unless natural site
or site boundary conditions require them. In those situations, special street
design features such as street eyebrows and cul-de-sac loops are encouraged
instead of standard ball-end cul-de-sacs.



         (c)   Curved as well as straight streets are allowed;
however, each must contribute to the connecting web. Where possible, curved
streets maintain the same cardinal orientation. Long blocks shall be avoided
with the average block length in a TND being no greater than 600 feet; the
average block perimeter shall be 1,800 feet.



         (d)   While the sense of enclosure described in division
(B)(1)(c) above will help to reduce traffic speeds, additional design
measures will be needed to slow traffic. Examples of the measures include the
features as bulbing out the curb line at intersections, traffic circles or
roundabouts, streets no wider than necessary to provide adequate access,
design for and encouragement of on-street parking, and safe but
unconventional street geometrics. The internal streets shall be designed to
feel safe driving at a speed no more than 25 mph. Note: Street requirements
of § 153.395 of this title are waived in TNDs.



         (e)   1.   Back-to-back street widths within a TND
are as follows.



 


Width

 

Street






34–38 feet

 
A main street in a TND with marked parking on both sides



32–34 feet

 
Secondary streets with marked parking on both sides



27–29 feet

 
Other through streets with marked parking on one side



24–26 feet

 
Standard streets with unmarked parking allowed to stagger from side to side



20–24 feet

 
Low density local streets with unmarked parking on one side



20 feet

 
One-way streets with parking on one side



16 feet

 
Public residential alleys with commercial alleys typically being 24 feet




 



            2.   Where possible, streets are encouraged to
narrow to 22 to 24 feet at intersections and at mid-block cross walks. Curve
radii at intersections shall be ten to 20 feet, depending on street function.
Standard vertical curb is preferred, and it is required on all residential
streets without driveways (auto access is provided via a rear alley) and all
commercial streets. NOTE: One-way streets, although allowed, are strongly
discouraged.



         (f)   TNDs shall always be designed to be walkable and
pedestrian-friendly communities in the fullest sense. They shall contain
sidewalks on both sides of the street and, in addition, may contain a network
of off-road walking and bike trails. Sidewalks are well separated from the
roadway with planting strips that are planted with indigenous, mostly
deciduous shade trees (on commercial streets sidewalks may extend to the curb
with street trees planted in grates or other sufficiently sized planting
space). Planting strips shall be a minimum of six feet in width, but may be
reduced to no less than four feet in width in situations that are both
unusual and difficult. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width on
residential streets, with wider widths on commercial streets.



         (g)   TNDs always have multiple points of ingress and
egress from collector and arterial roads. The street system shall also flow
seamlessly to adjoining neighborhoods, both existing or planned in the future.



         (h)   TNDs are never gated communities.



         (i)   Off-street parking lots should generally not front
along a public street. On-street parking shall be provided throughout the
development and particularly so on streets with commercial buildings and/or
attached housing. Where additional parking is needed, it is usually provided
behind buildings in the interior of the block. The calculation of parking
needs for nonresidential uses will always take into consideration available
on-street parking. Parking lots shall include shade trees and no space in a
parking lot shall be further than 60 feet from the trunk of a large tree.
Each large tree shall be planted in a planting area sized and shaped to
enable healthy growth. Pedestrian access from interior block parking area is
best provided via a mid-block passageway to the street front. This passageway
can also be used for other activities such as front entrances for small
shops, access to second floor apartments, outdoor dining, outdoor vendors and
outdoor display of plants, flowers and other appropriate items for sale.



      (3)   Mixed use principles.



         (a)   TNDs shall contain a significant mixture of
principal uses (both residential and nonresidential).



         (b)   TNDs shall also contain a mixture of residential
types.



         (c)   TNDs should be designed to offer housing at a
variety of affordability levels. Allowing garage apartments and granny flats
at the rear of single home lots, in accordance with the development’s
private guidelines (whether rented or not) is encouraged. These innovative
(but historically traditional) housing forms help to accommodate family
situations and promote income diversity within the TND.



         (d)   Live-work units (shop or office at the street
level and residence at the second level) and upper-story apartments over
ground-floor businesses are encouraged.



         (e)   In TNDs, denser housing and live-work units are
typically located closer to the neighborhood center with a transition outward
to less dense housing such as detached single-family homes. This principle
should not be construed to discourage the careful blending of housing types
as this transition occurs.



         (f)   Schools and churches are encouraged to locate
within a TND as is the provision of pedestrian and bicycle routes to connect
to the facilities inside or outside the TND.



         (g)   Where buildings are on both sides of the street,
similar building types should face each other to the greatest degree
possible. Single-family detached houses, townhouses, live-work units,
apartment buildings and store buildings are examples of building types.



         (h)   TNDs are expected to provide some on-site and/or
adjacent to site employment opportunities. This can include employment in the
services and stores within the TND, live-work units (the owner dwelling over
his or her shop or office), or larger employment centers such as office
buildings.



      (4)   Architectural principles.



         (a)   The architectural style within a TND shall respond
to the surrounding fabric of buildings and spaces and to local traditions.
The principle that structures should be seamlessly linked to their
surroundings (within the TND) transcends the issue of style.



         (b)   Any principal building within a TND shall exhibit
principles of human and pedestrian scale and shall contribute appropriately
to the pedestrian life of the street. Front yard setbacks and the amount of
off-street parking located in a front yard shall be minimal.



         (c)   Architecture within a TND shall reflect styles
that are complimentary of each other. Private development controls shall
assure a variety styles or sub-styles that serve to compliment each other
while providing for overall consistency and reflection of the principles of
traditional neighborhood design.



         (d)   Commercial buildings shall typically take on a 
“shop front” type appearance and shall be joined by common walls. The
buildings shall be set with the front and entrance at the sidewalk along the
street. The buildings shall typically be two or more stories high.
(Typically, uses on upper floors or occupied by residential and offices uses.
However, the city may allow “low-impact” retail uses such as bookstores,
restaurants, music stores and the like to occupy a second story.) 
Commercial buildings shall not face intersecting streets with blank walls.



         (e)   Building articulation and setback encroachments
for porches, stoops, steps, bay windows, bay windows and awnings, balconies
and other features that form the transition between the public and private
realms are encouraged.



         (f)   Corner-lot homes should face the front door to the
larger street (unless the street is a thoroughfare), except for an end-unit
townhouse or row house, which may turn the corner with its front (unless the
side street is an alley). Fronting a townhouse on both the primary street and
the intersecting street with two doors and/or wrap-around porch is encouraged.



      (5)   Neighborhood center principles.



         (a)   TNDs shall have at least one defined neighborhood
center. Neighborhood centers typically feature uses such as shops and
services, live-work units, attached dwellings, apartments over businesses, a
formal open space such as a village square or green, or public/civic
buildings (church, community building/center and post office are examples).



         (b)   Automobile oriented uses are typically not found
in a neighborhood center and drive-through facilities are strongly
discouraged (with exceptions made for bank drive-through windows.)



         (c)   A public gathering space such as a plaza, green or
square is usually present along with one or more focal features in or near
this public space such as a clock tower, fountain, monument, bandstand and/or
public art which serve to terminate vistas and define the community.



         (d)   The TND neighborhood center is ideally located
near the geographic center of the development; however, it may also identify
itself jointly with a thoroughfare bordering the TND (and therefore, be
located near this major road or be linked to this road with an entrance
street) in order that businesses within the center may more easily attract
patrons from outside the development. This can serve to improve chances for
economic success of the TND center. Ideally, the neighborhood center is no
farther than one-fourth mile radius of most dwellings; however, a
neighborhood center that is within 2,400 feet of 80% of the dwellings in the
TND is acceptable in order to allow the center to identify itself jointly
with an adjoining thoroughfare.



         (e)   Development form in the center typically reflects
the traditional Main Street or town square vernacular of Lincolnton as
described in division (B)(5)(d) above and parking is provided in accordance
with division (B)(2)(b) above.



         (f)   Other civic uses are encouraged, including schools
and day care centers; however, the uses shall take on design features and lot
sizes in keeping with traditional principles and a walkable community. Office
employment may occur at the TND center or along major roads adjoining the TND.



         (g)   At least one site, prominent in its location,
should be reserved at or near the neighborhood center, for an important
community or civic building such as a community center, church, school,
amenity center (club house and recreation facility) or community hall.



      (6)   Open space and natural site characteristic principles.



         (a)   A TND shall always have one or more public open
space areas such as greens, village squares, parks and playgrounds. They may
also have substantial amounts of natural or semi-natural open spaces that
typically feature more informal amenities such as walking/bicycling trails
and picnic areas.



         (b)   There is always a significant civic space such as
a town square, green, commons or plaza in a neighborhood center within the
TND.



         (c)   Small parks or greens shall be distributed
throughout the TND, usually within 1,000 feet walking distance of any
dwelling within the TND.



         (d)   Pre-existing or natural water features should be
retained and made a community asset.



         (e)   Major tree stands shall be incorporated into
public open spaces, wherever feasible.



         (f)   The neighborhood design shall adapt itself, as
much as possible, to the existing topography to minimize the amount of
grading necessary to achieve a viable street network.



         (g)   Parks, plazas and commons shall be equipped with
proper furnishings and shade trees to encourage outdoor sitting, human
interaction and people watching; while some common areas should be grassed
and left open (except for street trees) to encourage the types of
leisure/recreational activities that require open areas.



   (C)   TND design standards.



      (1)   The TND shall have a minimum area of ten acres and shall
be served by public water and sewer.



      (2)   The TND may contain the following types of residential
dwelling units:



         (a)   Single-family detached dwelling units;



         (b)   Lot-line houses;



         (c)   Village houses;



         (d)   Patio houses;



         (e)   Twin houses;



         (f)   Townhouses;



         (g)   Atrium houses;



         (h)   Multi-family developments; and



         (i)   Dwellings located on the second story (or higher)
over ground floor commercial uses.



      (3)   The TND can contain the following types of
nonresidential uses:  all permitted and conditional uses allowed in the N-B
Neighborhood Business Zoning District except mini-warehouses.



      (4)   Where TND commercial uses adjoin residential uses
outside the TND, or when TND non-single family residential uses adjoin
single-family residential uses outside the TND, screening in accordance with
§ 153.046 shall be provided on the adjoining portion of the TND. Otherwise,
screening for a TND shall not generally be required. Notwithstanding, the
City Council may require screening in any other situation along the boundary
of a TND or inside a TND as a condition for approval wherever it deems
appropriate for the protection of adjoining properties or to establish
necessary transition.



      (5)   Where parking is provided by private drives for
individual dwelling units, space shall be provided for parking at least two
cars at each dwelling unit. This requirement may be reduced to one car per
dwelling where on-street parking is designed into the street system.



      (6)   Except for rear access alleys, driveways and parking
drives/aisles, private streets are not allowed in TNDs.



      (7)   Off-street parking areas and all internal streets shall
provide safe and convenient access for emergency service and refuse
collection vehicles and other service and delivery vehicles.



      (8)   Any TND containing 50 or more dwelling units shall have
at least one point of ingress and egress onto a major or minor thoroughfare
as depicted on the most up-to-date version of the city’s thoroughfare plan.



      (9)   The initiation of the nonresidential phase of a TND may
follow at any time after the initiation of construction of at least 25% of
the non-multi-family (i.e., detached) residential dwelling units.



      (10)   Nonresidential buildings shall observe setbacks of 30
feet minimum along any external project boundary that is not a street and a
minimum of zero feet where a street right-of-way is the external boundary.



      (11)   TNDs shall follow the same procedures for approval
through the conditional use permit process as set forth in §§ 153.217 and
153.236 except that the following additional requirements will be required in
the site plan submission.



         (a)   Typical building front elevations representing the
various building types proposed within the development shall be submitted for
approval.



         (b)   Cross-section drawings of typical street areas
from building profile to opposing building profile. A typical profile for
each building type is needed.



         (c)   A copy of draft or model private building and lot
design controls proposed for the TND shall be submitted for approval. This
document will be referenced in the approval action. Actual final design
controls to be used can be approved in the formal plan submission.



         (d)   In approving a conditional use permit for a TND,
the City Council shall find, in addition to the findings set forth in §
153.237(B), that the proposed TND substantially meets the guiding principles
for TNDs as set forth in division (B) above.



(Prior UDO, § 12.5)



§ 153.220  TRANSITIONAL INFILL DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   A transitional infill development (TID) is a type of TND that
is characterized by smaller project areas and higher density, innovative
development. In addition, a TID contains residential uses only. The project
size of a TID shall be between one-half to ten acres in area and shall
contain at least three dwelling units. TIDs shall be allowed in the R-8, R-O,
R-MF and O-I Zoning Districts subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit by the City Council.



   (B)   A TID may be established only on parcels that meet all of the
following criteria.  Follow the procedures for establishing a TND, as
established in § 153.219, except that the following principles may not apply
to all TIDs:



      (1)   Neighborhood centers shall not be required in a TID;



      (2)   TIDs need not be planned to connect with neighboring
developments (whether existing or planned);



      (3)   TIDs need not contain a mixture of housing types; and



      (4)   Common open space may not be required in smaller-sized
TIDs.



   (C)   Additional criteria for TIDs.



      (1)   Front-loaded garages of any structured shall not be
placed side by side and shall be recessed a minimum of five feet from the
street side façade.



      (2)   Otherwise, setback and yard regulations for a TID shall
be as follows.



 


Attached Housing




Setback/Height Standard

 

Minimum (ft)

 

Maximum (ft)



Side yard setback (end unit only)
 

0

 

40



Rear yard setback
 

25

 

N/A



Building height
 

N/A

 

35



Front yard
 
The front yard setback for all principal structures facing an existing public
street shall be equal to (and not exceed) the average of all front setbacks
for all principal structures located on the same side of the same street
within 300 feet of any portion of the tract upon which the TID is to be
constructed. Notwithstanding, balconies, stoops, stairs, open porches, bay
windows and awnings shall be allowed to encroach up to five feet within the
required front yard setback. For all internal streets within the TID, there
shall be no required front yard setbacks.



 



 


Detached Housing




Setback/Height Standard

 

Minimum (ft)

 

Maximum (ft)



Side yard setback
 

5

 

N/A



Rear yard setback
 

20

 

N/A



Building height
 

N/A

 

35



Front yard
 
The front yard setback for all principal structures facing an existing public
street shall be equal to (and not exceed) the average of all front setbacks
for all principal structures located on the same side of the same street
within 300 feet of any portion of the tract upon which the TID is to be
constructed. Notwithstanding, balconies, stoops, stairs, open porches, bay
windows and awnings shall be allowed to encroach up to five feet within the
required front yard setback. For all internal streets within the TID, there
shall be no required front yard setback.



 



(Prior UDO, § 12.6)  Penalty, see § 153.999



CONDITIONAL USES



§ 153.235  CONDITIONAL USES.



   This subchapter provides for a number of uses to be located by right in
each general purpose zoning district subject to the use meeting certain area,
height, yard and off-street parking requirements. In addition to these uses,
the subchapter allows some uses to be allowed in these districts subject to
the issuance of a conditional use permit. The purpose of having conditional
uses is to ensure that they would be compatible with surrounding development
and in keeping with the purposes of the general zoning district in which they
are located.



(Prior UDO, § 13.1)



§ 153.236  PROCEDURES.



   The procedures for securing a conditional use permit shall be as
follows:



   (A)   Ten copies of a completed written application for a
conditional use permit shall be filed with the Administrator. The application
shall be submitted on official forms provided by the Administrator and shall
be accompanied by the following items:



      (1)   A scaled boundary survey showing the total acreage, and
present zoning classifications for the property(ies) for which the
conditional use permit is sought, date and north arrow. On this survey shall
be sketched the information required by this section;



      (2)   All existing easements, rights-of-way and required
setbacks for the lot(s) for which the conditional use permit is sought;



      (3)   Proposed use, size, layout and setbacks of all proposed
structures and proposed uses of land. For residential uses this shall include
the number of units and an outline of the area where all principal and
accessory structures will be located. For nonresidential uses, this shall
include the approximate gross floor areas of all structures and an outline of
the area where the structures will be located;



      (4)   Traffic, parking and circulation plans, showing the
proposed locations and arrangement of parking spaces and access points to
adjacent streets;



      (5)   Landscape plan showing proposed screening and
landscaping, including location of walls, fences, berms and natural plantings
as well as treatment of any existing natural features within the site;



      (6)   Delineation of areas within the regulatory floodplain as
shown on the official flood hazard boundary maps;



      (7)   Proposed number, size, type and location of freestanding
signs;



      (8)   Proposed phasing, if any, and approximate completion
time of the project;



      (9)   The owner’s names and addresses, tax parcel numbers
and existing land use(s) of all adjoining properties;



      (10)   A sketch vicinity map with north arrow shall be
included showing the relationship between the proposed use and surrounding
area; and



      (11)   Other information as the Planning Board may request as
provided for in division (F) below.



   (B)   No application shall be considered complete unless it contains
or is accompanied by all items listed in this section of this chapter and a
fee, in accordance with a fee schedule approved by the City Council for the
submittal of conditional use permit applications.



   (C)   All completed applications shall be submitted to the
Administrator at least 15 days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which
it is to be reviewed. This requirement may be waived by a unanimous vote of
the Planning Board membership present at a meeting of the Planning Board
occurring less than 15 days prior to the date of submission. In no case shall
the meeting at which the Planning Board initially reviews the application
occur greater than 60 days after the required number of copies of the
completed application have been submitted by the applicant to the
Administrator.



   (D)   If the conditional use permit application is for a property
located within an HO-Historic Overlay District the Administrator shall, upon
his or her receipt of the application, promptly notify the chairperson of the
Historic District Commission and submit copies of the application to the
Historic District Commission in order that the Historic District Commission
may review and make a recommendation on the application in accordance with §
153.122(G) of this chapter.



   (E)   The Planning Board shall have a maximum of 45 days from the
date at which it initially met to review the application to submit its
recommendation to the City Council. If a recommendation is not made during
the 45-day period, the application shall be forwarded to the City Council
without a recommendation.



   (F)   (1)   When dealing with the conditional use permit process
and with the rezoning of properties to a conditional use district, it may be
necessary to request information in addition to that listed in this division
in order to evaluate a proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding
area. Therefore, the Planning Board (and/or City Council) may request
additional information of the applicant, as it deems necessary.



      (2)   A request for additional information shall stay any
further consideration of the application by the Planning Board or City
Council. This information may include (but not be limited to) the following:



         (a)   Permanent and construction phase plans for the
control of sedimentation and erosion control (for projects subject to State
Sedimentation Pollution Control Act) and plans for the control of stormwater
drainage and run-off;



         (b)   Existing and proposed topography at four-foot
contour intervals or less;



         (c)   The existing and proposed location of all water
and sewer lines and fire hydrants intended to serve the proposed development;



         (d)   Proposed number, type and location of signs; and



         (e)   A traffic impact study of the proposed development
prepared by a qualified transportation or traffic engineer or planner. The
traffic impact study shall include the following information:



            1.   Existing traffic conditions within the study
area boundary;



            2.    The distribution of existing and proposed
trips through the street network;



            3.   Analyses of the capacities of intersections
located within the study area boundary;



            4.   Recommendations for improvements designed to
mitigate traffic impacts and to enhance pedestrian access to the development
from the public right-of-way;



            5.   Other pertinent information, including but
not limited to noise, and impacts on air quality and other natural resources;
and



            6.   Traffic volumes generated by the existing and
proposed development on the parcel, including the morning peak, afternoon or
evening peak and average daily traffic levels.



(Prior UDO, § 13.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



Cross-reference:



   Landscaping, see § 153.047



   Screening, see § 153.046



§ 153.237  CITY COUNCIL DECISION.



   (A)   Public hearing.  Once a recommendation has been received from
the Planning Board, or the 45- day Planning Board review period has expired,
the City Council shall hold (after notice) a public hearing concerning the
application for a conditional use permit.



   (B)   Notice of public hearing.  Notice of the public hearing shall
be as follows.



      (1)   A notice shall be published in a newspaper having
general circulation in the city area once a week for two successive weeks,
the first notice to be published not less than ten days nor more than 25 days
prior to the date established for the public hearing. In computing the time,
the date of publication is not to be included, but the date of the hearing
shall be included.



      (2)   A notice shall be conspicuously placed by the city in
the City Hall not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the date
established for the public hearing.



      (3)   The city shall conspicuously post a notice on the
subject property at least ten days but not more than 25 days prior to the
public hearing.



      (4)   At least ten but not more than 25 days prior to the
public hearing, a notice of the proposed zoning change and hearing shall be
sent by the city by first class mail to the applicant, the property owner of
the property in question (if different than the applicant) and to all
contiguous property owners.



   (C)   Special conditions and conditional use permit.  If the City
Council should find, after conducting a public hearing, that a conditional
use permit should be granted, the City Council may impose additional,
reasonable and appropriate special conditions upon the conditional use
permit, as it deems necessary. Any conditions should relate to the
relationship of the proposed use to surrounding property, proposed support
facilities such as parking areas and driveways, pedestrian and vehicular
circulation and access systems, screening and buffer areas, landscaping, the
timing of development and other matters that the City Council may find
appropriate or the petitioner may propose. The conditions to approval may
include dedication of any rights-of-way or easements for, or construction of
streets, water, sewer or other public utilities necessary to serve the
proposed development. The petitioner will have a reasonable opportunity to
consider and respond to any additional requirements prior to approval or
denial by the City Council. In no instance shall any of these conditions be
less restrictive than any requirements that would pertain to that particular
development found elsewhere in this chapter.



   (D)   Burden of proof.  The applicant has the burden of producing
competent, material and substantial evidence tending to establish the facts
and conditions which divisions (E)(2) and (E)(4) of this section require. If
any person submits evidence allegedly contrary to any of the facts or
conditions listed in divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this chapter, the burden
of proof for overcoming the evidence shall rest with the applicant.



   (E)   Required findings for all conditional use permits.  The City
Council shall issue a conditional use permit only after having evaluated an
application and having determined that:



      (1)   The use will not materially endanger the public health
or safety if located where proposed and developed according to plan;



      (2)   The use meets all required conditions and specifications;



      (3)   The use will not substantially injure the value of
adjoining or abutting property unless the use is a public necessity; and



      (4)   The location and character of the use, if developed
according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the
area in which it is to be located and will be in general conformity with the
city land use plan and other plans for the physical development of the city
as officially adopted by the City Council.



(Prior UDO, § 13.4)



§ 153.238  ADDITIONAL REVIEW CRITERIA.



   The following specific review criteria for each of the following
conditional uses shall be addressed by the City Council in addition to those
general review criteria set forth in § 153.237(E). (Note: The City Council
recognizes that these review criteria may in some respects duplicate the
general review criteria set forth in § 153.237(E) but that these criteria
are provided to more specifically address issues that are particularly
critical to certain uses).



   (A)   Planned residential developments.



      (1)   The location and character of the development will be in
keeping with the stated purpose for allowing planned residential developments
as set forth in § 153.215(A) of this chapter.



      (2)   The proposed ingress and egress points will not result
in a substantial amount of vehicular traffic to be channeled onto adjacent
local streets (noncollector/nonthoroughfare streets).



   (B)   Manufactured home parks.



      (1)   The proposed ingress and egress points will not result
in a substantial amount of vehicular traffic to be channeled onto adjacent
local streets (noncollector/nonthoroughfare streets).



      (2)   The manufactured home park will not only meet the
minimum screening specifications set forth in this chapter but that the
result of the screening will be to screen the manufactured home park from
view from adjoining properties and adjoining street rights-of-way.



   (C)   Manufacturing uses.



      (1)   The use will not overly impact the ability of the city
to collect and/or treat any wastewater generated by the use or the ability of
the city to treat and distribute any potable water needed by the use.



      (2)   The use will not overly impact (impact beyond capacity)
the system of streets serving the use or that improvements will be made to
the streets in consort with the development of the use, the result of which
will be adequate handling of the additional traffic generated.



      (3)   Not only will the use meet the minimum screening
requirements of this chapter, but also that additional screening will be
installed, as necessitated by the visual characteristics of the particular
use, that the use will be screened from view of adjoining residential
districts, or that the nature of the topography makes the screening from
distant view from residential areas impossible and that other measures such
as heavy on-site landscaping will be taken to lessen any near or distant
visual impacts.



   (D)   Arcade or amusement center or game room.



      (1)   If the use is not located in a Class C Shopping Center,
it will be located no closer than 300 feet from any Residential (R) District.



      (2)   The hours of operation will be limited to the hours
between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m.



   (E)   Multi-family developments.  The proposed ingress and egress
points will not result in a substantial amount of vehicular traffic to be
channeled onto adjacent local streets (non- collector/nonthoroughfare
streets).



   (F)   Communication towers.  The tower will not result in
interference with the safe operation of aircraft in relation to existing or
planned airport facilities.



   (G)   Adult establishments.



      (1)   No business shall locate within 1,000 feet of any other
adult establishment as measured in a straight line from property line to
property line, with no considerations as to intervening structures, roads or
landforms.



      (2)   No adult establishment shall be located within 1,000
feet of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, child day
care or nursery school, public park or playground or residentially zoned
property. The 1,000-foot distance shall be measured on a straight line from
property line to property line, with no consideration as to intervening
structures, roads or landforms.



      (3)   There shall not be more than one adult establishment on
the same property or in the same building, structure or portion thereof.



      (4)   No other principal or accessory use may occupy the same
building, structure, property or portion thereof with any adult establishment.



      (5)   No printed material, slide, video, photograph, written
material, live show or other visual presentation shall be visible, nor shall
any live or recorded voices, music or sounds be heard from outside the walls
of the establishment.



      (6)   Wall signs as permitted in §§ 153.169(A) and
153.172(B)(1)(b) are permitted as a means for advertising adult
establishments. No freestanding signs shall be permitted. No other
advertisements, displays, or signs or other promotional materials shall be
visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks, walkways and vehicular areas.



      (7)   Maximum gross floor area of the principal building shall
be 5,000 square feet.



      (8)   Adult establishments shall not be allowed a variance
from the minimum separation requirements of this section.



   (H)   Paintball gaming facility, outdoor.



      (1)   Gaming areas shall be a minimum of 200 feet away from
any residential structure. Screening shall be required adjacent to all
residential structures.



      (2)   The use of tires as barriers is strictly prohibited. No
outdoor storage shall be allowed.



      (3)   No outdoor public address system shall be allowed.



      (4)   The use shall be limited to operation between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Night activities are prohibited.



   (I)   Indoor shooting ranges.



      (1)   The use shall be located at least 150 feet from any
existing dwelling or property holding valid building permits for a dwelling.
(Measure shall be from building to building, not property line to property
line.)



      (2)   The use shall not be located within 150 feet from the
property line of a school, daycare or place of worship.



      (3)   The application for a conditional use permit shall
include information which demonstrates what measures will be implemented so
that the use will not pose a hazard off site, including guarantees that the
walls will be lined with a sound absorbing material certified by an
acoustical professional.



      (4)   When allowed, the shooting range shall be the primary
use and not be an accessory use to a gun store. Shooting ranges may provide
repair and sales as an accessory activity.



      (5)   The use shall provide all parking on site. At least one
space shall be provided for each shooting lane and for each employee on the
shift of greatest employment.



      (6)   All measures shall be taken to recover any ammunition
that could pose a danger to the environment.



      (7)   The City Council may impose any additional standards or
safeguards it feels necessary to protect the general welfare of the citizens
as a part of the use permit process.



   (J)   Outdoor shooting ranges.



      (1)   The use shall be located at least 150 feet from any
existing dwelling or property holding valid building permits for a dwelling.
(Measurement shall be from building to building, not property line to
property line.)



      (2)   The use shall not be located within 150 feet from the
property line of a school, daycare or place of worship.



      (3)   The application for a conditional use permit shall
include information which demonstrates what measures will be implemented so
that the use will not pose a hazard off site.



      (4)   When allowed, that shooting range shall be the primary
use and not be an accessory use to a gun store. Shooting ranges may provide
repair and sales as an accessory activity.



      (5)   The use shall provide all parking on site. At least one
space shall be provided for each shooting lane and for each employee on the
shift of greatest employment.



      (6)   All measures shall be taken to recover any ammunition
that could pose a danger to the environment.



      (7)   The City Council may impose any additional standards or
safeguards it feels necessary to protect the general welfare of the citizens
as a part of the use permit process.



   (K)   Recycling station - construction and demolition material.



      (1)   Not only will the use meet the minimum screening
requirements of this chapter, but also additional screening will be
installed, as necessitated by the visual characteristics of the particular
use.



      (2)   All state and local environmental requirements must be
met.



      (3)   Any residual materials that cannot be reused must be
removed from the site within 30 days and placed in a permitted landfill.



      (4)   Days of operation shall be limited to Monday through
Saturday with specific hours determined by the City Council.



(Prior UDO, § 13.5)  (Ord. –, passed 4-4-2013; Ord. ZTA-3-2014, passed
11-13-2014; Ord. ZTA-4-2016, passed 7-7-2016)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.239  BINDING EFFECT.



   (A)   Any conditional use permit so authorized shall be perpetually
binding to the property included in the permit unless subsequently changed or
amended by the City Council.



   (B)   However, minor changes in the detail of the approved plan
which:



      (1)   Will not alter the basic relationship of the proposed
development to adjacent property;



      (2)   Will not alter the uses permitted or increase the
density or intensity of development; and



      (3)   Will not decrease the off-street parking ratio or reduce
the yards provided at the periphery of the site may be made with the approval
of the Administrator.



   (C)   The changes shall not be deemed to materially change the
conditional use permit.



   (D)   An increase in building size not to exceed 10% of the existing
floor area on the site or 1,000 square feet of gross floor area on the entire
site, whichever is less, and provided the expansion does not violate any of
the standards of this chapter, shall be deemed a minor change as described in
this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 13.6)



§ 153.240  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or land
use on a piece of property which has received a conditional use permit unless
the building is constructed or used, or the land is developed or used, in
conformity with the conditional use permit approved by the City Council. In
the event that only a segment of a proposed development has been approved,
the certificate of occupancy shall be issued only for that portion of the
development constructed or used as approved.



(Prior UDO, § 13.7)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.241  ONE-YEAR LIMITATION ON RE-APPLICATION.



   If a request for a conditional use permit is denied by the City
Council, a similar application for the same property or any portion thereof
shall not be filed until the expiration of a 12-month period from the date of
the most recent denial by the City Council. This waiting period shall not be
applicable where the application for a conditional use permit is
substantially different from the application that most previously had been
denied.



(Prior UDO, § 13.8)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.242  CHANGE IN CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   Any request to materially change (a change other than a minor change as
set forth in § 153.239) the conditional use permit once it has been issued
by the City Council shall first be reviewed by the Planning Board in
accordance with § 153.236 of this chapter. The City Council may thereafter
change or amend any previously approved conditional use permit, only after
having held a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be in
accordance with § 153.237 of this chapter. Amendment by the City Council of
a previously issued conditional use permit shall be subject to the same
considerations as provided for in § 153.237 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 13.9)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.243  IMPLEMENTATION OF CONDITION USE PERMIT.



   Unless the City Council issues a conditional use permit which either is
specifically exempted from any time constraints or has some other specified
time period for implementation, the applicant shall have a period of 24
months from date of issuance of the conditional use permit to secure a
building permit for the project. If the applicant shall fail to obtain a
building permit within the time allowed, the Administrator shall notify the
applicant of a finding, and within 60 days of the notification, the Planning
Board shall make a recommendation concerning the recession of the conditional
use permit to the City Council. The City Council, after having conducted a
public hearing to consider the recession, may then rescind the conditional
use permit, or extend the life of the conditional use permit for a specified
period of time. Due notice of the public hearing shall be given as prescribed
in § 153.237 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 13.10)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.244  CHANGES IN CONDITIONAL USES WITHIN SHOPPING CENTERS.



   When there is a change in use in a shopping center and the change is
for a use listed as a conditional use in the zoning district in which the
shopping center is located then a conditional use permit is required for the
change in use.



(Prior UDO, § 13.11)  Penalty, see § 153.999



ZONING ADMINISTRATION



§ 153.255  ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Generally.  The provisions of this subchapter shall be
administered by the Administrator and any other officials designated by the
City Council for the Administration of this chapter.



   (B)   Zoning inspection; duties specified.  If the Administrator
shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he
or she shall cause notification, in writing, to the owner of the property
upon which the violation is located, indicating the nature of the violation
and order that necessary actions be taken to correct the deficiency. He or
she shall order discontinuances of illegal uses of land, buildings or
structures, removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal
additions, alterations or structural changes, discontinuance of any illegal
work being done and shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to
ensure its compliance.



   (C)   Zoning permit.



      (1)   Generally.  No building, sign (except as otherwise
indicated) or other structure shall be erected, moved or extended or enlarged
or structurally altered; nor shall any building, sign or other structure be
repaired exceeding $1,000 of market value of the repairs, nor shall any
excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be
commenced until the Administrator has issued a zoning permit for the work or
change in use, in accordance with a fee schedule established by the City
Council.



      (2)   Exceptions.  Provided however, except in the
HO-Historic Overlay District, the following structures shall not require
zoning permits:



         (a)   Signs listed under § 153.166 of this chapter;



         (b)   Construction of public utility lines (gas,
electric, water, sewer, cable TV);



         (c)   Erection of a customary residential use television
or FM radio reception antenna; and



         (d)   Rural mail boxes or roadside newspaper boxes.



      (3)   Expiration of zoning permit.  Except as provided in
§§ 153.345 through 153.354 of this chapter, any zoning permit issued in
accordance with this chapter will lapse and become invalid unless the work
for which it was issued is started within six months of the date of issue, or
if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of at
least one year. Once a zoning permit has expired, construction work on the
lot(s) in question cannot proceed until a new zoning permit has been issued.



      (4)   Records.  The Zoning Officer shall maintain a record of
all zoning permits on file at his or her office, and copies shall be made
available on request to interested parties.



      (5)   Conditions for approval.



         (a)   Zoning permits issued on the basis of dimensional
plans approved by the Administrator authorize only the use, arrangement and
construction set forth in the approved plans and applications.



         (b)   Use, arrangement or construction that materially
differ from that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
shall be punishable as indicated under § 153.999 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 14.1)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.256  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   No structure hereafter erected, moved, structurally altered or changed
in use shall be used or occupied until a certificate of compliance has been
issued by the Administrator or his or her designee. Any certificate of
compliance issued shall state that the structure is in compliance with the
information stated on the zoning permit. A certificate of compliance shall
not be issued unless the proposed use of the structure conforms to the
applicable provisions of this chapter. If the certificate of compliance is
denied, the Administrator shall state in writing the reasons for refusal and
the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all certificates
of compliance shall be kept on file in the office of the Administrator and
copies shall be furnished, on request to all interested parties.



(Prior UDO, § 14.2)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.257  DESIGNATION OF CLASS A STATUS FOR PLACEMENT OF MANUFACTURED
HOMES ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS.



   Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for the placement of a Class A
manufactured home on an individual lot the applicant must request a
designation of Class A status from the Administrator. In determining whether
the proposed manufactured home, when placed on the lot, will meet the
requirements for Class A manufactured homes, the applicant shall furnish
information as the Administrator may request in order to make the
determination. The information may include, but shall not be limited to
manufacturer’s specifications and drawings, photographs, site plan and
elevation drawings. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the
County Building Inspections Department, the owner shall obtain a certificate
of compliance as issued by the Administrator who shall inspect the
manufactured home and determine that it meets all the requirements for a
Class A manufactured home.



(Prior UDO, § 14.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.258  SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  The purpose of these requirements is to
promote the orderly development of certain activities in the city and to
ensure that the activities are developed in a manner harmonious with
surrounding properties and in the interest of the general public welfare. To
achieve these ends and to assure compliance with all applicable requirements
of this chapter, site plans for certain uses of land shall be submitted to
and reviewed by the Administrator.



   (B)   Development and uses requiring a site plan.



      (1)   Site plan review shall be required for all uses and
development other than one- or two- family residential uses and the accessory
structures.



      (2)   Provided however, the Administrator may waive site plan
requirements in either of the following cases when it is determined that the
submission of a site plan would serve no useful purpose:



         (a)   Accessory structures;



         (b)   Any enlargement of a building by less than 33% of
the existing size provided the enlargement will not result in a requirement
for additional parking;



         (c)   A change in use where no changes are being made to
the building coverage area, off-street parking area or other external site
characteristics; and



         (d)   Review by the Staff Review Committee may not be
required for new construction with a gross floor area of less than 5,000
square feet when the Administrator feels that site plan review would serve no
useful purpose. Nevertheless, all site plans shall be reviewed by the
Administrator as required in divisions (C) and (D) below of this section
within five working days from the date of submittal.



   (C)   Procedure for preparation.



      (1)   Site plan or any portion thereof shall be prepared by an
engineer, architect, landscape architect or land surveyor who is authorized
by the state to practice as such;



      (2)   Site plans shall be prepared to a scale of one inch
equals 50 feet or larger;



      (3)   A site plan may be prepared in one or more sheets to
show clearly the information required by this section and to facilitate the
review and approval of the site plan;



      (4)   All horizontal dimensions shown on the site plan shall
be in feet;



      (5)   Decimal fractions of a foot shall be to the closest
one-hundredth of a foot and all bearings shall be indicated in degrees,
minutes and seconds;



      (6)   Every site plan shall show the name and address of the
owner or developer, the north arrow, the date, the scale of the drawing and
the number of sheets. In addition, it shall reserve a blank space three
inches wide by five inches long for city use; and



      (7)   Five copies of the site plan shall be submitted to the
Administrator for review. The Administrator may request additional copies for
outside agency review.



   (D)   Required information on site plans.  All site plans shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   Location of the tract on an inset map at a scale of not
less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet indicating the scale, the north-arrow
and information such as the names and numbers of adjoining roads, streams,
subdivisions or other landmarks, sufficient to clearly identify the location
of the property;



      (2)   A boundary survey of the tract by bearings and distances
certified by a licensed land surveyor or engineer;



      (3)   The location and dimensions of any sidewalks and curbs
and gutters to be installed along public street frontages;



      (4)   All existing property lines; existing streets and
easements, the names, numbers and widths; the location and size of existing
sanitary and storm sewers, gas lines, water mains, culverts and other
utilities and the easements; existing buildings; existing watercourses; and
any other prominent physical features on or adjoining the tract;



      (5)   Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries on the
tract and on adjoining properties;



      (6)   The present use of all adjoining properties;



      (7)   Existing topography with contours drawn at two-foot
intervals. This requirement for topography information may be waived by the
Administrator for developments smaller than one acre in size and where he or
she determines that there are insufficient topography changes to make the
information necessary;



      (8)   Proposed changes in zoning, if any;



      (9)   The proposed location, general use, number of floors,
height and floor area for each building, and, where applicable, the number,
size and type of dwelling units;



      (10)   All off-street loading spaces, parking and walkways
indicating the type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles and
a specific schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided;



      (11)   All proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities,
indicating all pipe sizes, types and grades and where connection is to be
made to city or other utility systems; all proposed gas lines and other
utilities and the easements;



      (12)   The location, dimensions and character of construction
of proposed streets, alleys, driveways and the location, type and size of
vehicular entrances to the site;



      (13)   Proposed finished grading at two-foot intervals and/or
by spot elevations. This requirement may be waived in the same manner as in
division (D)(7) above;



      (14)   Provisions for the adequate disposition of natural and
stormwater indicating location, and stormwater indicating location, sizes,
types and grades of ditches, catch basins, pipes, retention facilities and
connections to existing drainage systems or suitable outlet;



      (15)   Provisions for the adequate control of erosion and
sedimentation indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control
practices and measures that will be implemented during all phases of
clearing, grading and construction;



      (16)   Delineation of any flood hazard areas as shown on the
city’s FEMA maps;



      (17)   Location, type, size and height of fencing, retaining
walls and screen planting where required under the provisions of this or any
other city ordinance;



      (18)   The location of wooded areas on the property and the
location of trees and wooded areas that will be retained;



      (19)   The location and dimensions of proposed recreation
areas, open space and required amenities and improvements;



      (20)   The location, character, size, height and orientation
of proposed signs and outdoor lighting systems; and



      (21)   Manufacturing, refining, processing and assembly type
land uses shall provide the following additional information:



         (a)   Water usage information including estimated short
term and long term water usage projections, total gallons per day usage,
maximum gallons per minute and duration of maximum gallons per minute.



         (b)   Water pressure requirements to accommodate the
proposed use including the requested maximum and minimum pressure needs.



         (c)   Water pressure requirements to accommodate fire
suppression system, if applicable, including maximum and minimum pressure
requested and gallons per minute draw.



         (d)   Wastewater discharge information including
estimated short term and long term wastewater discharge projections, total
maximum discharge, time and duration of discharge and average daily and 30
minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal
variations if any.



         (e)   Traffic volumes generated by the existing and
proposed development, including the morning peak, afternoon or evening peak
and average daily traffic levels based on the latest edition of the ITE Trip
Generation Manual. In the event the projected traffic volumes are likely to
significantly impact the street network, a traffic impact analysis of the
proposed development may be required.



            1.   Generally, a traffic impact analysis may be
required whenever a development is expected to generate 100 or more new
inbound or outbound trips during the peak hours. Even if the development does
not generate the threshold level of trips, a traffic impact analysis may
still be necessary under the following conditions:



               a.   High traffic volumes on surrounding
roads that may affect movement to and from the proposed development;



               b.   High accident locations in the vicinity;



               c.   Lack of existing turn lanes on the
adjacent roadway at the proposed access drive(s);



               d.   Inadequate sight distance at access
points; or



               e.   The proximity of the proposed access
points to other existing drives or intersections.



            2.   The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared
under the direct charge of and sealed by a licensed North Carolina
professional engineer with expertise in traffic engineering; and



            3.   The traffic impact analysis shall conform
with the NCDOT Policy on Street and Driveway Access to North Carolina
Highways, Chapter 5 or as determined by city staff.



   (E)   Compliance with other requirements.  All features and
elements of the site plan shall in all respects conform to all applicable
provisions and standards of the General Statutes of the state; the ordinances
of the city; and the standards and requirements of the State Department of
Transportation and the State Department of Health and Environment.



   (F)   Procedure for processing.



      (1)   The Administrator shall review all site plans submitted
to him or her. The Administrator shall verify the completeness and compliance
of the site plan and circulate the site plan to the relevant city, county and
state agencies and officials for comments as to the proposed development’s
conformance to all applicable standards and requirements and whether approval
of the site plan is recommended.



      (2)   The reviewing agencies and officials may include, but
need not be limited to:



         (a)   City Director of Public Works and Utilities;



         (b)   City Engineer;



         (c)   City Fire Department;



         (d)   City Police Department;



         (e)   County Planner;



         (f)   Superintendent of County Schools;



         (g)   County Health and Environmental Health Departments;



         (h)   State Department of Transportation;



         (i)   State Department of Health and Environment; and



         (j)   U.S. Soil Conservation Services, District Office.



      (3)   Except under abnormal circumstances, within 21 days of
the receipt of the site plan the Administrator shall approve, approve subject
to conditions or disapprove the site plan and notify the applicant in writing
of the action taken. In cases when the site plan approval is subject to
conditions or when the site plan is denied approval, the Administrator shall
set forth in writing any conditions or changes that might make the site plan
acceptable.



      (4)   An applicant may appeal any decision of the
Administrator in accordance with § 153.276 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 14.4)  (Ord. ZTA-2-2014, passed 7-10-2014)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.259  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   If a request for a zoning permit is disapproved or if a ruling of the
Administrator is questioned, the aggrieved party may appeal the ruling to the
Board of Adjustment in accordance with § 153.276 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 14.5)



§ 153.260  REMEDIES.



   In case any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this chapter, the
Administrator, or any other appropriate city official, or any person who
would be damaged by the violation, in addition to other remedies, may
institute an action for injunction, or mandamus, or other appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent the violation.



(Prior UDO, § 14.6)



§ 153.261  COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.



   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. The complaint stating
fully the cause and basis thereof shall be filed with the Administrator who
shall properly record the complaint, immediately investigate, and take action
as provided by this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 14.7)



BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT



§ 153.275  POWERS, DUTIES AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Generally.  The Board of Adjustment shall have all the powers
and duties authorized by G.S. § 160A-388, and in the manner provided for in
this chapter. Generally, the powers and duties shall include, but not be
restricted to the following:



      (1)   Hearing and deciding all appeals from decisions made by
the Administrator or the Historic District Commission;



      (2)   Hearing and deciding all appeals for an interpretation
of these zoning regulations;



      (3)   Hearing and granting variances from the provisions of
this chapter;



      (4)   Hearing applications to replace, change the use of or
expand nonconformities; and



      (5)   Hearing and granting permits for certain temporary
structures and uses as set forth in § 153.053 of this chapter.



   (B)   Establishment of the Board of Adjustment.



      (1)   A Board of Adjustment is hereby established. The Board
shall consist of three regular members appointed by the City Council who
reside inside the corporate limits of the city and two  regular members
appointed to the Board by the County Board of Commissioners as
representatives of the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the extraterritorial
representatives being residents of the area. Appointments made by the Lincoln
County Board of Commissioners, shall be done only after holding a public
hearing on the matter of appointment. Any vacancy in the membership shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment.
Each member shall be paid at the rate as set forth in the fee schedule per
meeting attended and may be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while
representing the Board.



      (2)   Three alternate Board of Adjustment members shall be
appointed by the City Council. The members shall serve in the absence of
regular Board of Adjustment members. The alternate members shall be appointed
in the same manner as regular members. The alternate members, while attending
any regular meeting of the Board and serving in the absence of a regular
member, shall exercise all of the powers and duties of the regular member so
absent.



      (3)   The alternate members shall reside inside the city’s
corporate limits and shall be appointed by the City Council. Alternate
members shall be compensated in the same manner as regular members.



(Prior UDO, § 15.1)  (Ord. ZTA-3-2013, passed 10-3-2013)



§ 153.276  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from and
review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Administrator or the Historic District Commission and apply the
interpretation to particular fact situations. In addition, the Administrator
may ask the Board of Adjustment to make an interpretation of this chapter.



   (B)   The Board of Adjustment may, after having held a public
hearing on the matter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed or make an
interpretation or determination with reference to the appeal.



   (C)   Any person who has standing under G.S. § 160A-393(d) or the
city may appeal a decision to the Board of Adjustment. An appeal is taken by
filing a notice of appeal with the Administrator in accordance with §
153.280. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal.



   (D)   The Administrator shall give written notice to the owner of
the property that is the subject of the decision and to the party who sought
the decision, if different from the owner. The written notice shall be
delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail.



   (E)   The owner or other party shall have 30 days from receipt of
the written notice within which to file an appeal. Any other person with
standing to appeal shall have 30 days from receipt from any source of actual
or constructive notice of the decision within which to file an appeal.



   (F)   It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons with
standing to appeal have constructive notice of the decision from the date a
sign containing the words “Zoning Decision” or “Subdivision Decision”
in letters at least six inches high and identifying the means to contact an
official for information about the decision is prominently posted on the
property that is the subject of the decision, provided the sign remains on
the property for at least ten days. Posting of signs is not the only form of
constructive notice. Any such posting shall be the responsibility of the
landowner or applicant.  Verification of the posting shall be provided to
the Administrator. Posting of signs is not required.



   (G)   The Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment
all documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from is taken. The Administrator shall also provide a copy of the
record to the appellant and to the owner of the property that is the subject
of the appeal if the appellant is not the owner.



   (H)   An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order
stays enforcement of the action appealed from unless the Administrator
certifies to the Board of Adjustment after notice of appeal has been filed
that because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause imminent
peril to life or property or because the violation is transitory in nature, a
stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of this chapter. In that
case, enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining
order, which may be granted by a court. If enforcement proceedings are not
stayed, the appellant may file with the Administrator a request for an
expedited hearing of the appeal and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to
hear the appeal within 15 days after such a request is filed. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a permit or otherwise affirming
that a proposed use of property is consistent with this chapter shall not
stay the further review of an application for permits or permissions to use
such property; in these situations the appellant may request and the board
may grant a stay of a final decision of permit applications affected by the
issue being appealed.



   (I)   The Administrator shall be present at the hearing as a
witness. The appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated
in the notice of appeal. If any party or the city would be unduly prejudiced
by the presentation of matters not presented in the notice of appeal, the
Board shall continue the hearing.



   (J)   When hearing an appeal pursuant to G.S. § 160A-400.9(e) or
any other appeal in the nature of certiorari, the hearing shall be based on
the record and the scope of review shall be as provided in G.S. §
160A-393(k).



   (K)   The parties to an appeal that has been made under this section
may agree to mediation or other forms of alternative dispute resolution.



(Prior UDO, § 15.2)  (Ord. ZTA-3-2013, passed 10-3-2013)



§ 153.277  VARIANCES.



   (A)   When practical difficulties, special conditions or unnecessary
hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of this chapter,
the Board of Adjustment shall have the power to vary or modify any of the
regulations or provisions of this chapter relating to the construction or
alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land. Waivers and
modifications associated with the approval of a subdivision plat shall be
subject to the provisions of § 153.378, rather than this section.



   (B)   The request for a variance for a use expressly, or by
inference, prohibited in the district involved, shall not be granted.



   (C)   The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance only after having
first held a public hearing on the matter. When unnecessary hardships would
result from carrying out the strict letter of these zoning regulations, the
Board of Adjustment shall vary any of the provisions of the zoning
regulations upon a showing of all of the following:



      (1)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict
application of the zoning regulations. It shall not be necessary to
demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be
made of the property.



      (2)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar
to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting
from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions
that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the
basis for granting a variance.



      (3)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the
applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with
knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a
variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship.



      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit,
purpose, and intent of the zoning ordinance, such that public safety is
secured and substantial justice is achieved.



   (D)   The Board of Adjustment, in granting a variance, may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter
provided the conditions are reasonably related to the variance. Violation of
the conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which a
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be
punishable as prescribed in § 153.999 of this chapter.



   (E)   Unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Adjustment, any
order of the Board of Adjustment in granting a variance shall expire, if a
building permit or certificate of occupancy (for a use if a building permit
is not required) has not been obtained within one year from the date of the
Board of Adjustment’s decision.



(Prior UDO, § 15.3)  (Ord. ZTA-3-2013, passed 10-3-2013)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.278  RELIEF TO DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS FOR AUTHENTIC RESTORATION OR
RECONSTRUCTION OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS IN AN HO HISTORIC OVERLAY
DISTRICT.



   See §§ 153.122(E) and 153.122(F) of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 15.4)  (Ord. ZTA-3-2013, passed 10-3-2013)



§ 153.279  NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from any
land owner:



      (1)   To make a change in use of a nonconforming use;



      (2)   To replace a nonconforming use or structure which has
been destroyed;



      (3)   To make a change in location of a nonconforming use of
land; or



      (4)   For a special exception to allow an expansion of a
nonconforming use.



   (B)   The Board of Adjustment may only grant a change in
nonconforming use, replacement of a nonconforming use which has been
destroyed, or change in location of a nonconforming use of land after having
first held a public hearing and having determined that:



      (1)   (a)   The change will be more suitable and
appropriate for the lot(s) on which it is located than the existing situation;



         (b)   The proposed change will have a less harmful
effect than the existing situation on the properties surrounding the lot(s)
in question; and



      (2)   The decision to grant the change will be in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to
the neighborhood or otherwise be detrimental to the public welfare.



   (C)   The Board of Adjustment, in granting the changes, may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
chapter in order to conform with divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above. Violation
of the conditions and safeguards when made a part of the terms upon which the
change was granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be
punishable as prescribed in § 153.999 of this chapter.



   (D)   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for the
expansion of a nonresidential nonconforming use or enlargement of a structure
housing the nonconforming use only after having first held a public hearing
and having determined each of the following in the affirmative:



      (1)   The nonconforming use will not occupy any additional
lands beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the nonconforming use was
located as of the date the use became nonconforming. The lot boundaries used
to determine this were those existing at the time the use became
nonconforming;



      (2)   The enlargement of any structure(s) or construction of
additional structure(s) housing the nonconforming use will not result in a
cumulative increase in total square footage of the building(s) greater than
50% of the total building square footage involved with the nonconforming use
at the time of the first application for expansion pursuant to this section,
or, a cumulative total increase of 1,000 square feet greater than that
existing at the time of first application for the expansion, whichever is
greater;



      (3)   If a change in use is involved, findings in the
affirmative have been made pursuant to division (B) above of this chapter;



      (4)   The application does not involve any increase of size or
height of any signage;



      (5)   There will be no odors, light emission (other than that
equivalent to street lighting and/or lighting from any signage normally
allowed in the N-B District), noises, vibrations or interference in radio or
television detectable from the property boundary without instruments;



      (6)   In consort with the expansion, the entire nonconforming
use will be screened on all sides in accordance with § 153.046(C) of this
chapter. Walls or fences will be permitted only as necessary to reach the
required height or opacity and where the structures are used they shall be
accompanied by as much planted materials as feasible. Where the nature of the
nonconforming use requires substantial street exposure along a major street
part or the Board of Adjustment may waive all of the screening along the
street. If the screening is waived, four street trees per 100 linear feet of
street frontage shall be provided in lieu of the screening;



      (7)   Adequate provision and arrangement has been made or will
be made concerning the following, where applicable:



         (a)   Access roads or entrance or exit drives with
respect to matters such as automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience,
traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire and other emergency;



         (b)   Off-street parking and loading areas where
required and refuse and other service areas with respect to the impact upon
the consideration in division (D)(7)(a) immediately above and the economic,
noise, glare, odor and other impacts on adjoining properties and properties
in the general neighborhood; and



         (c)   Utilities, water, sewerage, schools, fire and
police protection, and other necessary public and private services and
facilities with respect to its location, availability and compatibility.



      (8)   The use has been and will remain to be maintained in a
manner that does not create a nuisance to neighboring properties;



      (9)   The use will not materially endanger the public health
or safety if allowed to expand as proposed and developed according to plan;



      (10)   The proposed expansion together with mitigation plans
(such as screening) would be at least equally suitable and appropriate for
the lot(s) on which it is located as the existing situation;



      (11)   The proposed expansion, together with the mitigating
measures would have a no more harmful effect than the existing situation on
the properties surrounding the lot(s) in questions;



      (12)   The use is not a nonconforming use subject to removal
after a given period of time (i.e., amortization); and



      (13)   These uses include certain manufactured home parks,
certain junkyards and certain signs.



   (E)   The Board of Adjustment, in granting an expansion pursuant to
division (D) above may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this chapter in order to conform to division (D) above.
Violation of the conditions and safeguards when made a part of the terms upon
which the expansion was granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter
and shall be punishable as prescribed in § 153.999 of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 15.5)  (Ord. ZTA-3-2013, passed 10-3-2013)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.280  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   The following regulations apply to all applications submitted to the
Board of Adjustment.



   (A)   Before a petition for an administrative appeal,
interpretation, variance, relief under § 153.278 or for any permissions
under §§ 153.053 or 153.279 shall be heard and a public hearing conducted
by the Board of Adjustment, a completed application shall be submitted to the
Administrator along with a fee in accordance with fee schedule established by
the City Council. The fee shall be waived for any petition initiated by the
Administrator or other official of the city who initiates a request on behalf
of the city. A map clearly identifying the subject property and all
contiguous pieces of properties shall accompany the application. In addition,
the applicant shall provide a list of names and addresses of the owners of
the properties, obtained from the most recent official tax records.



   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on an
application no later than 60 days after the completed application has been
filed with the Administrator. The Board of Adjustment shall decide on the
matter that was presented at the public hearing within 31 days of the close
of the public hearing. The decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be in
writing and signed by the chair or other duly authorized member of the Board.
The decision is effective upon filing the written decision with the clerk to
the Board. The decision shall be sent by first class mail to the applicant,
property owner and to any person who has submitted written request for a
copy, prior to the date the decision becomes effective by the Administrator
within five working days after the Board of Adjustment has made a
determination on the application. The Administrator shall certify that proper
notice has been made.



   (C)   The city shall give notice of all public hearings. The notice
shall become a part of the record of the proceedings of the Board of
Adjustment. Notice shall be given in the following manner.



      (1)   The city shall send notices by first class mail to the
applicant, to the owner of the property that is the subject of the hearing if
the owner did not initiate the hearing; and to owners of all contiguous
pieces of property at least ten working days, but not more than 25 days,
prior to the public hearing. The notice shall indicate the nature of the
public hearing and the date, time and place at which it is to occur. In the
absence of evidence to the contrary, the city may rely on the county tax
listing to determine owners of property entitled to mailed notice.



      (2)   Notice shall also be posted by the Administrator in a
conspicuous location in the City Hall at least ten working days prior to the
public hearing. The notice shall indicate the nature of the public hearing
and the date, time and place at which it is to occur.



      (3)   A conspicuous sign shall also be placed by the city in a
conspicuous location on the subject property(ies) indicating the nature of
the public hearing and date, time and place at which it is to occur. The sign
shall be placed on the property(ies) at least ten working days but not more
than 25 days, prior to the hearing.



   (D)   The concurring vote of four-fifths of the Board of Adjustment
shall be necessary to grant a variance. A majority of the members shall be
required to decide any other quasi-judicial matter or to determine an appeal
made in the nature of certiorari. For the purposes of this provision, vacant
positions on the Board and members who are disqualified from voting on a
quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the Board for
calculation of the requisite majority if there are no qualified alternates
available to take the place of such members. In all matters coming before the
Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall have the burden of providing clear,
competent and material evidence in support of the application.



(Prior UDO, § 15.6)  (Ord. ZTA-3-2013, passed 10-3-2013)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.281  APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   (1)   An application for a rehearing shall be made in the
same manner as provided for in the original hearing within a period of 15
days after the date of the Board of Adjustment’s decision. In addition,
specific information to enable the Board of Adjustment to determine whether
or not there has been a substantial change in facts, evidence, or conditions
in the case, shall be presented in writing or graphically. The Board of
Adjustment shall deny a rehearing, if, in its judgment, the change in facts,
evidence or conditions has not been proven. A public hearing shall not be
required to be held by the Board of Adjustment to consider holding a
rehearing. Approval of the consideration shall, however, require an
affirmative vote of at least four voting members. In the event that the Board
of Adjustment finds that a rehearing is warranted, it shall thereupon proceed
as in the original hearing except that the application fee shall be waived.



      (2)   Upon the denial of an original application, or upon the
denial of an application from which a rehearing has been conducted, a similar
application shall not be accepted for hearing for a period of one year after
the date of denial of the original application.



   (B)   Every quasi-judicial decision shall be subject to review by
the superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari pursuant to
G.S. § 160A-393. A petition for review shall be filed with the clerk of
superior court by the later of 30 days after the decision is effective or
after a written copy thereof is given in accordance with § 153.280(B). When
first class mail is used to deliver notice, three days shall be added to the
time to file the petition.



(Prior UDO, § 15.7)  (Ord. ZTA-3-2013, passed 10-3-2013)



HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION



§ 153.295  CREATION.



   (A)   There is hereby established the city’s Historic District
Commission, hereafter referred to as the Historic District Commission or
Commission, to consist of five regular members and two alternate members.
Members are appointed by the City Council. The Commission shall serve without
compensation.



   (B)   Alternate members shall serve in the absence of regular
Commission members. The alternate members, while attending any regular or
special meeting of the Commission and serving in the absence of any regular
member, shall exercise all of the powers and duties of the regular member so
absent. No member or alternate member of the Historic District Commission
shall vote on any matter concerning an application for a certificate of
appropriateness unless that member or alternate shall have been present
during the hearing and deliberation concerning the application.



(Prior UDO, § 16.1)



§ 153.296  TENURE.



   (A)   Members of the Historic District Commission shall serve
overlapping terms of two alternate members. Members are appointed by the City
Council. The Commission shall serve without compensation.



   (B)   Alternate members shall serve in the absence of regular
Commission members. The alternate members, while attending any regular or
special meeting of the Commission and serving in the absence of any regular
member, shall have exercised all of the powers and duties of the regular
member so absent. No member or alternate member of the Historic District
Commission shall vote on any matter concerning an application for a
certificate of appropriateness unless that member or alternate shall have
been present during the hearing and deliberation concerning the application.



(Prior UDO, § 16.2)



§ 153.297  QUALIFICATIONS.



   All members of the Historic District Commission shall be residents of
the territorial zoning jurisdiction of the city and a majority of the regular
members and both of the alternate members shall have demonstrated special
interest, experience or education in history, architecture, archaeology or
related fields.



(Prior UDO, § 16.3)



§ 153.298  MEETINGS.



   The Historic District Commission shall establish a meeting time, and
shall meet at least quarterly and more often as it shall determine and
require. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and
reasonable notice of the time and place thereof shall be given to the public.
All meetings shall conform to the State Open Meetings Law (G.S. Chapter 143,
Article 33C).



(Prior UDO, § 16.4)



§ 153.299  ATTENDANCE OF MEETINGS.



   Any member of the Historic District Commission who misses more than
three consecutive regular meetings or more than half the regular meetings in
a calendar year shall lose his or her status as a member of the Commission
and shall be replaced or re-appointed by the City Council. Absence due to
sickness, death or other emergencies of like nature shall be recognized as
approved absences and shall not affect the member’s status on the
Commission except that in the event of a long illness or other  cause for
prolonged absence, the member shall be replaced.



(Prior UDO, § 16.5)



§ 153.300  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   The Historic District Commission shall adopt and make available to the
public rules of procedure for the conduct of its business.



(Prior UDO, § 16.6)



§ 153.301  ANNUAL REPORT, REQUIRED.



   An annual report shall be prepared and submitted by March 1 of each
year to the City Council. The report shall include a comprehensive and
detailed review of the activities, problems and actions of the Commission, as
well as any budget requests and/or recommendations.



(Prior UDO, § 16.7)



§ 153.302  MEETING MINUTES.



   (A)   The Commission shall keep permanent minutes of all its
meetings. The minutes shall record attendance of its members, its
resolutions, findings, recommendations and actions.



   (B)   The minutes of the Commission shall be a public record.



(Prior UDO, § 16.8)



§ 153.303  COMMISSION POWERS.



   (A)   General responsibilities of the Commission.  The Commission
shall seek to promote, enhance and preserve the character of the Historic
District provided the Commission shall not require the reconstruction of
individual or original buildings or structures or portions thereof.



   (B)   Specific authority and powers.  The Historic District
Commission is authorized and empowered to undertake actions reasonably
necessary to the discharge and conduct of its duties and responsibilities as
outlined in this chapter and G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 3C,
including but not limited to the following:



      (1)   To recommend to the Planning Board districts or areas to
be designated by ordinance as  “Historic District” and individual
structures, buildings, sites, areas or objects to be designated by ordinance
as “landmarks;”



      (2)   To recommend to the Planning Board that designation of
any district or area as a Historic District be revoked or removed;



      (3)   To consider and grant or deny applications for
certificates of appropriateness in accordance with § 153.122 of this chapter;



      (4)   To give advice to property owners concerning the
treatment of the historical and visual characteristics of the properties
located within the District, such as color schemes, gardens and landscape
features and minor decorative elements;



      (5)   To propose to the City Council changes to this or any
related ordinance and to propose new ordinances or laws relating to the
Historic District or relating to the total program for the development of the
historical resources of the city and its environs;



      (6)   To cooperate with other city boards or commissions or
with agencies of the city or other governmental units; to offer or request
assistance, aid, guidance or advice concerning matters under its purview or
of mutual interest;



      (7)   To publish information about, or otherwise inform the
owners of property within the District, of any matters pertinent to its
duties, organization, procedures, responsibilities, functions or requirements;



      (8)   To undertake programs of information, research or
analysis relating to any matters under its purview;



      (9)   To report violations of this chapter or related
ordinances to the local official responsible for enforcement;



      (10)   To assist the city staff in obtaining the services of
consultants to aid in carrying out programs of research or analysis;



      (11)   To accept funds granted to the Commission from private
or nonprofit organizations;



      (12)   To contract, with the approval of the City Council, for
services or funds from the state and agencies or departments of the United
States government;



      (13)   To recommend to the City Council and the state
structures, sites, objects or districts worthy of national, state or local
recognition;



      (14)   To initiate and participate in negotiations with owners
and other parties in an effort to find means of preserving buildings
scheduled for demolition;



      (15)   To establish guidelines under which the Administrator
or his or her designee may approve minor modifications on behalf of the
Commission. No application shall be denied without first being considered by
the Commission;



      (16)   To conduct public hearings on applications for
certificates of appropriateness where the Commission deems that a hearing is
necessary;



      (17)   To organize itself and conduct its business by whatever
legal means it deems proper and in accordance with its Rules of Procedure;



      (18)   Undertake an inventory of properties of historical,
pre-historical, architectural and/or archaeological significance;



      (19)   Recommend to the City Council that designation of any
area as a historic district or part thereof or designation of any building,
structure site, area or object as a landmark, be revoked or removed for cause;



      (20)   Conduct an educational program with respect to historic
districts and properties within its jurisdiction;



      (21)   Prepare and recommend the official adoption of a
preservation element as part of the city’s comprehensive land use plan; and



      (22)   To exercise other powers and perform other duties as
are required or allowed elsewhere by this chapter, the General Statutes of
the state or by the City Council.



(Prior UDO, § 16.9)



AMENDMENTS



§ 153.315  AMENDMENTS TO TEXT AND MAP.



   Land use regulations, as contained in this chapter, including zoning
district boundaries, may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed in the following manner.



   (A)   Applications for a change in the chapter text or zoning map
may be instituted by the Planning Board, City Council or any person.



   (B)   The application for a change in a zoning district shall be
made on a form provided by the city.



      (1)   Each non-contiguous parcel of land for which a rezoning
is requested shall be considered as a separate application, and a fee (in
accordance with a fee schedule established by the City Council) shall
accompany each application. There shall be no fee for applications instituted
by the Administrator or any city official acting on behalf of the city.



      (2)   Each application shall be signed and contain the
following information:



         (a)   Applicant’s full name, address and telephone
number; the property owner’s full name, address and telephone number, if
different from applicant;



         (b)   Applicant’s interest in the property; and



         (c)   If the proposed change would require a change in
the zoning map, the current zoning of the property and the type of zoning
requested. In addition, the application shall be accompanied by an accurate
and scaled diagram showing:



            1.   All property lines with dimensions, distances
of lot from the nearest street intersection and north arrow;



            2.   Adjoining street rights-of-way and paving
widths;



            3.   Zoning classification of all contiguous lots;



            4.   The names and addresses of all contiguous
property owners as shown on the most current records of the County Tax
Supervisor’s office; and



            5.   Except for rezonings involving a conditional
use permit, neither the Planning Board nor the City Council shall evaluate a
rezoning petition based on any specific proposal for the use or development
of the property. The petitioner shall refrain from using any graphic
materials or descriptions before either body except for those that would
apply to any use permitted in the requested zoning district.



   (C)   The application for a change in the text shall be on a form
provided by the city and shall be accompanied by a fee (in accordance with a
fee schedule established by the City Council). The application shall contain
a reference to the specific section, subsection, paragraph or item proposed
for change, as well as the wording of the proposed change.



   (D)   (1)   No application shall be considered by the Planning
Board unless it has been properly completed and submitted to the
Administrator or his or her designee at least 15 days prior to the meeting at
which it is to be reviewed. This requirement may be waived by a unanimous
vote of the Planning Board membership present at a meeting of the Planning
Board occurring less than 15 days prior to the date of submission.



      (2)   In no case shall the meeting at which the Planning Board
initially reviewed the application occur greater than 60 days after the
completed application was submitted to the Administrator. The Planning Board
shall have 30 days from the date of referral to comment and submit its
recommendation to the City Council. If a recommendation is not made during
the 30-day period, the application shall be forwarded to the City Council
without a recommendation. During the process of reviewing an amendment, the
Planning Board must advise the governing board in writing whether the
amendment is consistent with the adopted city’s land use plan. This can be
done as part of the recommendation to the City Council in the staff report or
by other means.



   (E)   If a petition for rezoning is proposed, the Planning Board
shall consider the matter. If a recommendation is made to the City Council,
it shall be as follows:



      (1)   Grant the rezoning as requested;



      (2)   Grant the rezoning with a reduction of the area
requested;



      (3)   Grant the rezoning to more restricted general zoning
district or classification(s) (but less restrictive than the existing zoning
classification) as shown in division (G) below of this chapter;



      (4)   Grant the rezoning with a combination of divisions
(E)(1), (E)(2) and (E)(3) above; or



      (5)   Denial of the application request.



   (F)   If a petition to amend the text of this chapter is proposed,
the Planning Board shall consider the matter. If a recommendation is made to
the City Council, it shall be as follows:



      (1)   Adoption of the amendment(s) as written;



      (2)   Adoption of the amendment as revised by the Planning
Board; or



      (3)   Rejection of the amendment.



   (G)   The list of all general zoning districts in descending degrees
of restrictiveness as follows:



 


Zoning Districts - Most Restrictive to Least Restrictive






R-25 (most restrictive)




R-15




R-10




R-8




RMF




RO




ROS




OI




NB




PB




CBT




CB




GB




GMC





 



   (H)   The Administrator shall transmit any decision of the Planning
Board to the City Council. Once action has been taken by the Planning Board
or the time for action by the Planning Board has expired, the City Council
may call a public hearing on the proposed action. Notification of the public
hearing shall be made in the following manner.



      (1)   A notice shall be published in a newspaper having
general circulation in the city area once a week for two successive weeks,
the first notice to be published not less than ten days nor more than 25 days
prior to the date established for the public hearing. In computing the time,
the date of publication is not be included, but the date of the hearing shall
be included.



      (2)   A notice shall be conspicuously placed by the city in
the City Hall not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the date
established for the public hearing.



      (3)   A conspicuous notice shall be posted by the city in at
least one conspicuous place on the subject property or on the street
right-of-way near the site at least ten days prior to the public hearing. For
map amendments that contain multiple parcels, sufficient notice must be
posted around the site.



      (4)   At least ten days, but not more than 25 days prior to
the public hearing, a notice of the proposed zoning change shall be sent by
the city by first class mail to the owners of property subject to the
proposed rezoning action and to all contiguous property owners.



      (5)   The first class mail notice cited in division (H)(4)
above may not be required if the proposed zoning action involves a zoning map
amendment that directly affects more than 50 properties, owned by a total of
at least 50 different property owners. In lieu of sending first class mail
notice to all the affected and contiguous property owners, the city may elect
to publish in a newspaper of local circulation a notice of the public hearing
that includes one or maps showing the boundaries of the area affected by the
proposed map amendment. The newspaper notice shall be not less than one-half
of a newspaper page in size and shall be published once a week for at least
two consecutive weeks. The notice shall satisfy the two advertisements
published to satisfy the requirements of division (H)(1) above.
Notwithstanding, affected and contiguous property owners who reside outside
the circulation area of the newspaper shall be sent first class mail notice
of the public hearing per division (H)(4) above.



   (I)   If any resident or property owner in the city submits a
written statement regarding a proposed amendment, modification, or repeal to
a zoning ordinance to the clerk to the board at least two business days prior
to the proposed vote on such change, the clerk to the board shall deliver
such written statement to the city council. If the proposed change is the
subject of a quasi-judicial proceeding, the clerk shall provide only the
names and addresses of the individuals providing written comment, and the
provision of such names and addresses to all members of the board shall not
disqualify any member of the board from voting.



   (J)   (1)   After the public hearing has been conducted and
officially closed, the City Council shall render a decision concerning the
proposal not later than the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
The decision of the City Council shall be limited to one of the various
alternatives listed in divisions (E) and (F) of this chapter. A copy of the
City Council’s decision shall be sent to the applicant by the Administrator
by first class mail within five working days after the City Council’s
decision.



      (2)   Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment,
City Council shall adopt one of the following statements which shall not be
subject to judicial review;



         (a)   A statement approving the zoning amendment and
describing its consistency with an adopted comprehensive plan and why the
action taken is reasonable and in the public interest.



         (b)   A statement rejecting the zoning amendment and
describing its inconsistency with an adopted comprehensive plan and
explaining why the action taken is reasonable and in the public interest.



         (c)   A statement approving the zoning amendment and
containing at least all of the following:



            1.   A declaration that the approval is also
deemed an amendment to the comprehensive plan.



            2.   An explanation of the change in conditions
the City Council took into account in amending the zoning ordinance to meet
the development needs of the community.



            3.   Why the action was reasonable and in the
public interest.



   (K)   (1)   If the City Council has denied an application for the
change of any zoning district or change in zoning text, it shall not,
thereafter, accept any application for the same or substantively similar
change of zoning districts affecting the same property or any portion thereof
or for a similar change in the zoning text until the expiration of one year
from the date of the previous denial.



      (2)   When a petition for a change in classification zoning is
withdrawn prior to it being considered by the City Council, no new petition
for any change in zoning classification of the same property or any part
thereof may be filed by the petitioner within a period of 90 days immediately
following the withdrawal of the petition.



(Prior UDO, § 20.1) (Ord. ZTA-2-2016, passed 6-2-2016; Ord. O-16-17, passed
11-2-2017)  Penalty, see § 153.999



Editor’s note:



   Supplementary requirements for rezoning petitions to a parallel
conditional use zoning district are found in § 153.316.



§ 153.316  ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO PARALLEL CONDITIONAL USE
ZONING AMENDMENTS.



   The procedures in this section exist to supplement the procedures set
forth in § 153.315 of this chapter, to clarify special requirements for
parallel conditional use rezonings and to relate the issuance of the
conditional use permit to the zoning map amendment process.



   (A)   Purpose.  The conditional rezoning process allows particular
uses to be established, but only in accordance with a specific development
project. Some land uses are of a nature or scale that they have significant
impacts on both the immediate surrounding area and/or on the entire community
that cannot be predetermined and controlled by general district standards or
the criteria governing planned developments. There are also circumstances in
which a general district designation allowing a use by right would not be
appropriate for a particular property even though the use itself could, if
properly planned, be appropriate for the property and be consistent with the
objectives of these regulations, the adopted land use plan, and other plans
for the physical development of the city as adopted by the City Council. The
review process established herein provides for the accommodation of the uses
by a reclassification of property into a parallel conditional use district
approval process is also established to address those situations when a
particular use may be acceptable but the general zoning districts which would
allow that use would not be acceptable.



   (B)   Reclassification and conditional use permit required prior to
development.



      (1)   In order for a property owner to secure privileges for
developing property under the parallel conditional use process, the property
must first be rezoned by the City Council to a parallel conditional use
district, and secondly the owner must secure a conditional use permit in
accordance with §§ 153.235 through 153.244 of this chapter from the City
Council. The conditional use permit that may contain fair and unreasonable
conditions to assure conformance with this chapter and other plans adopted by
the City Council and to obtain sufficient compatibility with surrounding
properties. Any use permitted under this process must also conform to the
development regulations for the corresponding general zoning district.



      (2)   Thus, if a property were rezoned to a CU-NB District and
conditional use permit authorized the development of a particular use, that
use must:



         (a)   Be a use allowed in the NB District; and



         (b)   Meet all dimensional, screening and related
requirements of the NB District.



      (3)   Rezoning of property to a parallel conditional use
district is a voluntary procedure on the part of the property owner and is
intended for firm development proposals.  It is not intended or suited for
securing early zoning for tentative proposals that may not be undertaken for
some time. No parallel conditional use district shall be established until
the owner(s) of the property(ies) in question (or his or her authorized
agent) proposing the district has submitted an application for the rezoning
of the property and issuance of a conditional use permit and the City Council
has approved the application in accordance with the procedures stated herein.



   (C)   Plans and other information to accompany petition.  Every
application for the rezoning of property to a parallel conditional use
district and issuance of a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a
site plan, drawn to scale, and any necessary supporting information together
which conform to all the requirements set forth in § 153.236(A) of this
chapter and when requested, the additional information that may be required
pursuant to § 153.236(F) of this chapter.



   (D)   Submittal to the Administrator.



      (1)   Submittal to the Administrator of an application for a
parallel conditional use rezoning shall be in accordance with the schedule
set forth in § 153.315(D) of this chapter. Normally, an application for a
conditional use permit is submitted at the same time and is reviewed by the
Administrator, Planning Board and City Council, and is approved by the City
Council at the same time with review and approval of the rezoning
application. However, when the application is for a conditional permit in
conformance with the parallel permit in conformance with the parallel
conditional use rezoning application (approved or under review), it may be
submitted at a later date or may be approved by the City Council at a date
following approval of the parallel conditional use rezoning.



      (2)   The application for a parallel conditional use zoning
amendment can only be initiated by the property owner/owners.



   (E)   City Council decision.



      (1)   A rezoning, under the parallel conditional use rezoning
process, does not confer upon the applicant any privileges for development
under that zoning district unless and until a conditional use permit is
approved for the property in question by the City Council.



      (2)   Prior to issuance of a conditional use permit the
application shall be subject to all of the procedures, hearing and findings
as set forth in § 153.237 (and § 153.238 if applicable) of this chapter.



   (F)   Effect of approval.



      (1)   If a petition for a parallel conditional district
rezoning and conditional use permit are both approved under this subchapter,
the district that is established, the approved conditional use permit, and
all conditions which may have been attached to the approval are binding on
the property as an amendment to these regulations and to the zoning map. All
subsequent development and use of the property shall be in accordance with
the standards for the approved conditional use district, the conditional use
permit, and all conditions attached to the approval. The City Council or
applicant may propose conditions: only conditions that are mutually agreed
upon can be adopted by the City Council and incorporated into the permit
requirements.



      (2)   If a petition is approved subject to conditions, the
Administrator shall record with the Register of Deeds a notice that
development of the subject property is subject to conditions and that the
conditions are on file at the Administrator’s office.



      (3)   Following the approval of the petition for a parallel
conditional use district, the subject property shall be identified on the
zoning map by the appropriate district designation. A parallel conditional
use district shall be identified by the same designation as the underlying
general zoning district preceded by the letters CU (For example, “CU-NB”).



      (4)   Any conditional use permit issued in relation to a
parallel conditional use rezoning shall be subject to the same requirements
as any other conditional use permit as set forth in §§ 153.235 through
153.244 of this chapter.



   (G)   Alterations to approval.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (G)(2) below, changes to
the approved petition or to the conditions attached to the approval shall be
treated the same as amendments to these regulations or to the zoning map and
shall be processed in accordance with the procedures in this subchapter.



      (2)   Minor changes in the detail of the approved application
that are in accordance with § 153.239 of this chapter may be made with the
approval of the Administrator.



   (H)   Change in parallel conditional use zoning.  Once a petition
for rezoning to a parallel conditional use district and issuance of a
conditional use permit has been approved by the City Council, any request to
materially change (any change not authorized by division (G)(2) of this
chapter) the parallel conditional use district or conditional use permit for
a property may only be made by the property owner or his or her authorized
agent only after a public hearing has been duly advertised and held in
accordance with § 153.215(H) above of this chapter. Any amendment to the
conditional use permit shall also be subject to the same considerations as
set forth in § 153.237 (and § 153.238 if applicable) of this chapter.



   (I)   Revocation of approval of a parallel conditional use district.



      (1)   It is intended that property shall be reclassified to a
parallel conditional use district and conditional use permit issued only in
light of firm plans to develop the property. Therefore, after the date of
approval of the conditional use permit, the Administrator shall periodically
examine the progress made toward developing the property in accordance with
the approved petition and any conditions attached to the approval.



      (2)   If the Administrator determines that a building permit
has not been secured within one  year (unless a greater time period was
listed as one of the conditions contained in the City Council’s approval)
following the date of the approval of the conditional use permit, the
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the finding, and within 60 days
of the notification, the Planning Board shall make a recommendation to the
City Council concerning the recession of the conditional use permit and
rezoning of the property to a general zoning district classification.



      (3)   The Planning Board shall recommend to extend the life of
the conditional use permit or have it rescinded. If the conditional use
permit is rescinded, the City Council may then vote to rezone the property to
a general zoning district.



      (4)   Notice of the public hearing shall be per § 153.315(H)
of this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 20.2)  Penalty, see § 153.999



LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS



§ 153.330  CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.



   (A)   It is not intended that this chapter repeal, abrogate, annul,
impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed
restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or
issued pursuant to law. Notwithstanding, whenever the regulations of this
chapter require a greater width or size of yards, or other open space, or
require a lower height of buildings or fewer number of stories or require a
greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other more
restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or
agreement, the regulations and requirements of this chapter shall govern.



   (B)   Whenever the provisions of any other statute or agreement
require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the
provisions of the statute or agreement shall govern except that §
153.315(H)(4) of this chapter shall be construed as written.



   (C)   This chapter is in part carried forward by re-enactment of
some of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the city (adopted by the
City Council on November 1, 1990, as amended) and it is not the intention to
repeal but rather to re-enact and continue in force the existing provisions
so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are preserved
and may be enforced. All provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the city
enacted on November 1, 1990, as amended, which are not re-enacted herein are
hereby repealed. All suits at law or in equity and/or all prosecutions
resulting from the violation of any zoning ordinance heretofore in effect,
which are now pending in any of the courts of this state or of the United
States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of this
chapter but shall be prosecuted to its finality, the same as if this chapter
had not been adopted, and any and all violations of the existing zoning
ordinance, prosecutions for which have not yet been initiated, may be
hereafter filed and prosecuted. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
to abandon, abate or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending,
and/or which may heretofore have been instituted or prosecuted.



(Prior UDO, § 21.1)



§ 153.331  SEPARABILITY.



   Should any section or provisions of this chapter be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, the declaration shall not affect
the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the
part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Prior UDO, § 21.2)



§ 153.332  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall take effect and be enforced as of October 7, 2004.



(Prior UDO, § 21.3)



IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STATUTORY VESTED RIGHT PROVISIONS OF G.S. § 160A-385.1



§ 153.345  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to implement the provisions of G.S.
§ 160A-385.1 pursuant to which a statutory zoning vested right is
established upon the approval of a site specific development plan.



(Prior UDO, § 22.1)



§ 153.346  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
The terms of all other words used in this chapter are found in § 153.031.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Lincolnton City Council.



   SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



      (1)   A plan of land development submitted to the city for
purposes of obtaining a zoning permit.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a variance, a
sketch plan nor any other document that fails to describe with reasonable
certainty the type and intensity of use for a specified parcel or parcels of
property shall constitute a SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   ZONING VESTED RIGHT.  A right pursuant to G.S. § 160A-385.1 to
undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms
and conditions of an approved site specific development plan.



(Prior UDO, § 22.2)



§ 153.347  ESTABLISHMENT OF A ZONING VESTED RIGHT.



   (A)   Zoning vested right shall be deemed established upon the valid
approval, or conditional approval, by the City Council as applicable of a
site-specific development plan, following notice and public hearing.



   (B)   The City Council may approve a site specific development plan
upon terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.



   (C)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) above, approval of a
site specific development plan with the condition that a variance be obtained
shall not confer a zoning vested right unless and until the necessary
variance is obtained.



   (D)   A site-specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon
the effective date of the approval authority’s action or ordinance relating
thereto.



   (E)   The establishment of a zoning vested right shall not preclude
the application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but
does not affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or ordinances or
regulations that are general in nature and are applicable to all property
subject to land-use regulation by the city, including, but not limited to,
Building, Fire, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes. Otherwise,
applicable new or amended regulations shall become effective with respect to
property that is subject to a site-specific development plan upon the
expiration or termination of the vested right in accordance with this
subchapter.



   (F)   A zoning vested right is not a personal right, but shall
attach to and run with the applicable property. After approval of a site
specific development plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be
entitled to exercise the right while applicable.



(Prior UDO, § 22.3)



§ 153.348  APPROVAL; PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, an application
for site specific development plan approval shall be processed in accordance
with the procedures established by ordinance and shall be considered by the
City Council for the specific type of zoning or land use permit or approval
for which application is made.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the
applicant must request in writing at the time of application that the
application be considered and acted on by the City Council following notice
and a public hearing as provided in G.S. § 160A-364.



   (C)   In order for a zoning vested right to be established upon
approval of a site specific development plan, the applicant must indicate at
the time of application, on a form to be provided by the city, that a zoning
vested right is being sought.



   (D)   Each map, plat, site plan or other document evidencing a site
specific development plan shall contain the following notation:



      Approval of this plan establishes a zoning vested right under §
G.S. 160A-385.1. Unless terminated at an earlier date, the zoning vested
right shall be valid until (date).



   (E)   Following approval or conditional approval of a site specific
development plan, nothing in this subchapter shall exempt the plan from
subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and
conditions of the original approval, provided that the reviews and approvals
are not inconsistent with the original approval.



   (F)   Nothing in this part shall prohibit the revocation of the
original approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable
terms and conditions of the approval or the zoning ordinance.



(Prior UDO, § 22.4)



§ 153.349  DURATION.



   (A)   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this
subchapter shall remain vested for a period of two years unless specifically
and unambiguously provided otherwise pursuant to division (B) below. This
vesting shall not be extended by any amendments or modifications to a
site-specific development plan unless expressly provided by the approval
authority at the time the amendment or modification is approved.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the
approval authority may provide that rights shall be vested for a period
exceeding two years but not exceeding five years where warranted in light of
all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the size of the
development, the level of investment, the need for or desirability of the
development, economic cycles and market conditions. These determinations
shall be in the sound discretion of the approval authority at the time the
site specific development plan is approved.



   (C)   Upon issuance of a building permit, the expiration provisions
of G.S. § 160A-422 shall apply, except that a building permit shall not
expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a zoning vested
right under this section is outstanding.



(Prior UDO, § 22.5)



§ 153.350  TERMINATION.



   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this chapter shall
terminate:



   (A)   At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to
buildings and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been
filed;



   (B)   With the written consent of the affected landowner;



   (C)   Upon findings by the City Council, by ordinance after notice
and a public hearing, that natural or manmade hazards on or in the immediate
vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare if the project were to proceed as
contemplated in the site specific development plan;



   (D)   Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for all
costs, expenses and other losses incurred by the landowner, including, but
not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all
architectural, planning, marketing, legal and other consultant’s fees
incurred after approval by the city, together with interest thereon at the
legal rate until paid. Compensation shall not include any diminution in the
value of the property which is caused by the action;



   (E)   Upon findings by the City Council, by ordinance after notice
and a hearing, that the landowner or his or her representative intentionally
supplied inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which
made a difference in the approval by the approval authority of the site
specific development plan; or



   (F)   Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law
or regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site specific
development plan, in which case the approval authority may modify the
affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or federal law
has fundamental effect on the plan, by ordinance after notice and a hearing.



(Prior UDO, § 22.6)



§ 153.351  VOLUNTARY ANNEXATION.



   A petition for annexation filed with the city under G.S. § 160A-31 or
G.S. § 160A-58.1 shall contain a signed statement declaring whether or not
any zoning vested right with respect to the properties subject to the
petition has been established under G.S. § 160A-385.1 or G.S. § 153A-344.1.
A statement that declares that no zoning vested right has been established
under G.S. § 160A-385.1 or G.S. § 153A-344.1, or the failure to sign a
statement declaring whether or not a zoning vested right has been
established, shall be binding on the landowner and any zoning vested right
shall be terminated.



(Prior UDO, § 22.7)



§ 153.352  LIMITATIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be deemed to create any
vested right other than those established pursuant to G.S. § 160A-385.1



(Prior UDO, § 22.8)



§ 153.353  REPEALER.



   In the event that G.S. § 160A-385.1 is repealed, this chapter shall be
deemed repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective.



(Prior UDO, § 22.9)



§ 153.354  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be effective October 3, 1991 and shall only apply to
site-specific development plans approved on or after October 3, 1991.



(Prior UDO, § 22.10)



SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



§ 153.370  AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.



   (A)   Authority.  Subdivision provisions enacted herein are under
the authority of G.S. § 160A-372.



(Prior UDO, § 1)



   (B)   Purpose.  The purpose of the chapter’s subdivision
regulations is to establish procedures and standards for the development and
subdivision of land within the planning jurisdiction area of the city. It is
further designed to provide for the orderly growth and development of the
city and its planning jurisdiction; for the coordination of streets and
highways within proposed subdivisions with existing or planned streets and
highways and with other public facilities; for the dedication or reservation
of rights-of-way or easements for street and utility purposes; and for the
distribution of population and traffic in a manner that will avoid congestion
and overcrowding and will create conditions essential to the public’s
health, safety and general welfare. This chapter is designed to further
facilitate adequate provision of water, sewerage, parks, schools, and
playgrounds, and also to facilitate the further re-subdivision of larger
tracts into smaller parcels of land.



(Prior UDO, § 3.2)



   (C)   Conflict with other laws.  This chapter is in part carried
forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the subdivision
ordinance of the city (adopted by the City Council on January 10, 1991, as
amended) and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue in force the existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities
that have accrued thereunder are preserved and may be enforced. All
provisions of the subdivision ordinance of the city enacted in January 10,
1991, as amended, which are not re-enacted herein are hereby repealed. All
suits at law or in equity and/or all prosecutions resulting from the
violation of any subdivision ordinance heretofore in effect, which are now
pending in any of the courts of this state or of the United States, shall not
be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of this chapter but shall be
prosecuted to their finality, the same as if this chapter had not been
adopted, and any and all violations of the existing subdivision ordinance,
prosecutions for which have not yet been initiated, may be hereafter filed
and prosecuted. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to abandon,
abate or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending, and/or which may
heretofore have been instituted or prosecuted.



(Prior UDO, § 21.1)



§ 153.371  PLATS TO BE APPROVED.



   After the effective date of these regulations, no subdivision plat of
land within the city’s planning jurisdiction shall be filed or recorded
until it has been submitted and approved in accordance with all applicable
regulations contained in this chapter.



(Prior UDO, § 17.1)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.372  THOROUGHFARE PLAN.



   Where a proposed subdivision includes any part of a thoroughfare, which
has been designated as that upon the officially adopted thoroughfare plan of
either the city or the county, the part of the thoroughfare, shall be platted
by the subdivider in the location and manner shown on the thoroughfare plan.
In cases where it is unclear as to the actual location of a proposed
thoroughfare shown on the thoroughfare plan, the city shall have the
authority to assign the location on a case-by-case basis.



(Prior UDO, § 17.2)



§ 153.373  SCHOOL SITES ON LAND USE PLAN.



   (A)   If the City Council and County Board of Education have jointly
determined the specific location and size of any school sites to be reserved
and if this information appears in an adopted plan of the city, the
Administrator shall immediately notify the Board of Education in writing
whenever a sketch plan for a subdivision is submitted which includes all or
part of a school site to be reserved. The Board of Education shall promptly
decide whether it still wishes the site to be reserved. If the Board of
Education does not wish to reserve the site, it shall so notify the
Administrator in writing. If the Board of Education does wish to reserve the
site, the subdivision shall not be approved without the reservation.



   (B)   The Board of Education shall then have 18 months beginning on
the date of final approval of the subdivision within which to acquire the
site by purchase or by exercise of the power of eminent domain. If the Board
of Education has not purchased or begun proceedings to condemn the site
within 18 months, the subdivider may treat the land as freed of the
reservation.



(Prior UDO, § 17.3)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.374  ZONING AND OTHER PLANS.



   Proposed subdivisions must comply in all respects with the requirements
of all applicable zoning regulations in effect in the area to be subdivided,
and any other pertinent plans or ordinances officially adopted by the City
Council. If any provision in the adopted ordinance is more restrictive than
the provisions provided in these regulations, the provisions of the more
restrictive ordinance shall apply.



(Prior UDO, § 17.4)



§ 153.375  GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL.



   (A)   After the effective date of these regulations, no subdivision
plat of land within the city’s planning jurisdiction shall be filed or
recorded unless it has first been submitted to the Administrator and approved
by the proper body as set forth in these regulations, and until this approval
is entered in writing on the face of the plat by the Administrator.



   (B)   The Deeds Office shall not file or record a plat of a
subdivision of land located within the planning jurisdiction of the city that
has not been first approved in accordance with these provisions, nor shall
the Clerk of Superior Court order or direct the recording of a plat if the
recording would be in conflict with these provisions.



(Prior UDO, § 17.5)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.376  STATEMENT BY OWNER.



   The owner of land shown on a subdivision plat submitted for recording,
or his or her authorized agent, shall sign a statement on the plat stating
whether or not any land shown thereon is within the planning jurisdiction of
the city.



(Prior UDO, § 17.6)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.377  ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS ON SUBDIVISION LOTS.



   No zoning permit shall be issued for the erection of any building on
any lot within a proposed subdivision until a final plat of the subdivision
has been approved in a manner as prescribed by these regulations and recorded
at the Deeds Office and where applicable, an improvements permit has been
issued by the County Health Department.



(Prior UDO, § 17.7)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.378  WAIVERS AND MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Planning Board or City Council shall have the authority to
waive or modify the terms of this chapter as the terms apply to the plat
approval process on a case-by-case basis after having first held a public
hearing and having found in the affirmative each of the following findings:



      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting
the property so that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the subdivider of the reasonable use of his or her land;



      (2)   The modification is necessary for the preservation of a
substantial property right of the petitioner;



      (3)   The circumstances giving rise to the need for the
modification are peculiar to the subdivision and are not generally
characteristic of other subdivisions; and



      (4)   The granting of the modification will not be detrimental
to the public’s health, safety and welfare or injurious to other properties
in close proximity to the subdivision site.



   (B)   Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in the
following manner:



      (1)   The city shall send notice by first class mail to the
applicant and to owners of all contiguous pieces of property at least ten
working days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall indicate the
nature of the public hearing and the date, time and place where it is to
occur;



      (2)   Notice shall also be posted by the city in a conspicuous
location in the City Hall at least ten working days prior to the public
hearing. The notice shall indicate the nature of the public hearing and the
date, time and place where it is to occur; and



      (3)   A conspicuous sign shall also be posted by the city in a
conspicuous location on the subject property at least ten working days prior
to the public hearing. The notice shall indicate the nature of the public
hearing and the date, time and place where it is to occur.



   (C)   The public hearings can be held at the same time as the
meeting at which the Planning Board or City Council holds to consider plat
approval. The decision to issue a waiver or modification on a plat may only
be made by that body given the authority to approve the plat. If the Planning
Board makes the decision, the City Council shall have no authority to
override or modify the Planning Board’s decision.



   (D)   Waivers and modifications, as called for in § 153.386, shall
not be subject the requirements of this section.



(Prior UDO, § 17.8)



§ 153.379  PLAT SHALL BE REQUIRED ON ANY SUBDIVISION OF LAND.



   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-373, a final plat shall be prepared, approved
and recorded pursuant to the provisions of these regulations whenever any
subdivision of land takes place, except as herein provided.



(Prior UDO, § 17.9)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.380  APPROVAL PREREQUISITE TO PLAT RECORDATION.



   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-373, no final plat of a subdivision within the
planning jurisdiction of the city as established in § 153.015 of these
regulations shall be recorded by the County Deeds Office until it has been
approved as provided herein.



(Prior UDO, § 17.10)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.381  APPEALS.



   Any decision of the Administrator may be appealed to the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with § 153.281.



(Prior UDO, § 17.11)



§ 153.382  PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Sketch plan for minor subdivisions.



      (1)   This section shall apply to minor subdivisions only. For
all minor subdivisions, a preliminary plat shall not be required. All
subdivisions, however, shall require the submittal, approval and recordation
in the Deeds Office of a final plat. Prior to submission of a final plat, the
subdivider may submit to the Administrator two copies of a sketch plan of the
proposed subdivision. The purpose of the sketch plan is to familiarize the
Administrator with the proposed development and to ensure that it is in
compliance with all applicable regulations. While the submittal of a sketch
plan is optional, it is suggested that the subdivider submit a plan in order
to familiarize the Administrator of the proposed development and, upon
review, notify the subdivider of any likely problems with the proposed
development.



      (2)   The sketch plan should contain the following information:



         (a)   A sketch vicinity map including north arrow
showing the location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts,
subdivisions, roads and waterways;



         (b)   The boundaries of the lot(s) to be subdivided;



         (c)   The tax map number(s) of the lots(s) to be
subdivided;



         (d)   The total acreage to be subdivided;



         (e)   The existing street layout and right-of-way width;



         (f)   The name of the proposed subdivision; and



         (g)   The zoning classification of the property to be
subdivided and of adjacent properties, if applicable.



      (3)   The Administrator shall review the sketch plan for
general compliance with the requirements of these regulations and any
applicable zoning regulations. The Administrator shall advise the subdivider
of the regulations pertaining to the proposed subdivision and the procedures
to be followed in the preparation and submission of the final plat.



   (B)   Final plat for minor subdivisions.



      (1)   A registered land surveyor currently licensed and
registered in the state by the State Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers and Land Surveyors shall prepare the final plat. The final plat
shall conform to the provisions for plats, subdivisions and mapping
requirements set forth in G.S. § 47-30 and the Standards of Practice for
Land Surveying in North Carolina, where applicable, and the requirements of
the County Register of Deeds.



      (2)   At least eight complete copies of the final plat shall
be submitted to the Administrator with one of these copies being on
reproducible material. The remaining copies shall be black or blue line paper
prints. The copies shall be considered complete if they contain all of the
information as required by § 153.387 of these regulations. Material and
drawing medium for the original shall be in accordance with the Standards of
Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, where applicable, and the
requirements of the County Register of Deeds.



      (3)   The final plat shall be 18 inches by 24 inches in size
and shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, unless
each lot in the proposed subdivision is more than three acres. In that case,
the scale shall not be less than one inch equals 200 feet. Maps may be placed
on more than one sheet with appropriate match lines.



      (4)   Submission of the final plat shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable filing fee in accordance with a fee schedule most recently
adopted by the City Council. The fee and the required number of final plats
must be submitted to the Administrator.



      (5)   The following signed certificates shall appear on all
copies of the final plat submitted to the Administrator.



         (a)   Certificate of Ownership and Dedication.




Certificate of Ownership And Dedication




      I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and
described hereon, which is located in the planning jurisdiction of the City
of Lincolnton and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free
consent and establish minimum lot size and building setback lines as noted.



            _________________________   ________________________
__



                  Owner                   
     Date



         (b)   Certificate of Survey and Accuracy.



   Certificate of Survey and Accuracy



      On the face of each map prepared for recordation there shall
appear a certificate acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgments and executed by the person making the survey or map including
deeds and any recorded date shown thereon. The certificate shall include a
statement or error of closure calculated by latitudes and departures. Any
lines on the map that were not actually surveyed must be clearly indicated on
the map and a statement included in the certificate revealing the source of
information.



         (c)   Certificate.  The certificate shall take the
following general form:



   STATE OF NORTH
CAROLINA                        LINCOLN COUNTY



I,_______________________certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under
my supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) an actual survey made
under my supervision (deed description recorded in Book______, Page______,
etc.) (Other); that the ratio of precision as calculated by latitudes and
departures is 1:______, (that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken
lines plotted from information found in Book______, Page_______); that this
map was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 47-30, as amended.



Witness my hand and seal this_______day of__________, A.D. 20_______.



                                       �
�     ______________________



                                       �
�     Registered Land Surveyor



OFFICIAL SEAL



                                       �
�     ______________________



                                       �
�     Registration Number



I (officer authorized to take acknowledgments) do hereby certify that (name
of registered surveyor) personally appeared before me this day and
acknowledged the due execution of this certificate. Witness my hand and
(where an official seal is required by law) official seal this
the___________day of_________, 20_____.



   OFFICIAL SEAL



                                       �
�     ________________________



                                       �
�     Signature of Officer



   (C)   Approval of final plat.



      (1)   (a)   Once the Administrator has received the
required number of copies of the final plat, he or she shall either:



            1.   Review the plat; or



            2.   At his or her discretion, submit the plat to
the Planning Board for its review and decision.



         (b)   The Administrator shall have 21 days from the date
of submittal to act upon a plat. Otherwise, the plat shall automatically be
forwarded to the Planning Board.



         (c)   The Planning Board shall have 31 days from the
meeting date at which it reviewed the plat to:



            1.   Approve the plat;



            2.   Approve the plat with conditions;



            3.   Approve the plat with modifications per §
153.378; or



            4.   Disapprove the plat.



         (d)   If the Planning Board does not take action within
the 31-day period, the plat shall then automatically be transferred to the
City Council for its review and decision.



      (2)   If the final plat is not approved, the Administrator
shall instruct the subdivider concerning resubmission of a revised plat and
the subdivider may make changes as will bring the plat into compliance with
the provision of these regulations and resubmit the same for reconsideration.
The subdivider shall have 21 days to resubmit the final plat to the
Administrator without having to pay an additional filing fee. If a revised
plat is not submitted within the period, any future submittal will require
the payment of an additional filing fee.



      (3)   If the final plat is approved, the approval shall be
shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate.



   Certificate of Approval For Recording



      I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been
found to comply with the subdivision regulations of the City of Lincolnton,
North Carolina and that this plat has been approved
by_____________________on____________for recordation in the Lincoln County
Deeds Office.



            _____________________                 
    ___________



            Administrator                     
      Date



            City of Lincolnton, North Carolina



      (4)   If the final plat is disapproved, the reasons for the
disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of these
regulations with which the final plat does not comply. One copy of the
reasons and one print of the plat shall be retained by the Administrator as
part of the city’s official records; a copy of the reasons and the
remaining copies of the plat shall be transmitted to the subdivider.



      (5)   If the final plat is approved, the subdivider shall be
responsible for filing the approved final plat with the Deeds Office within
21 days of approval; otherwise, the approval shall be null and void.



(Prior UDO, § 17.12)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.383  SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS SKETCH
PLAN.



   (A)   Prior to the preliminary plat submission, the subdivider shall
submit to the Administrator two or more copies of a sketch plan of the
proposed subdivision containing the following information:



      (1)   A sketch vicinity map including north arrow showing the
location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions,
roads and waterways;



      (2)   The boundaries of the lot(s) to be subdivided;



      (3)   The total acreage to be subdivided;



      (4)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the
subdivision and the existing uses of land adjoining it;



      (5)   The proposed street layout with approximate pavement and
right-of-way widths, lot layout and size of lots;



      (6)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner(s)
of the tract to be subdivided;



      (7)   The name of the proposed subdivision;



      (8)   The zoning classification of the lot(s) to be subdivided
and of adjacent properties, if applicable; and



      (9)   Parcel identification number (PIN) of the lot(s) to be
subdivided.



   (B)   The Administrator shall review the sketch plan for general
compliance with the requirements of these regulations and any applicable
zoning requirements. The Administrator shall advise the subdivider or his or
her authorized agent of the regulations pertaining to the proposed
subdivision and the procedures to be followed in the preparation and
submission of the preliminary and final plats.



   (C)   One copy of the sketch plan shall be retained as a part of the
city’s record by the Administrator with the other copy(ies) being returned
to the subdivider or his or her authorized agent along with any comments made
by the Administrator concerning the proposed plat.



   (D)   The Administrator shall have 21 days from the receipt of
sketch plan to review and make comments. If comments are not forwarded during
the period, the subdivider may submit his or her preliminary plat for review
having not received comments from the Administrator on the sketch plan.



(Prior UDO, § 17.13)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.384  PRELIMINARY MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLAT SUBMISSION AND REVIEW.



   (A)   Preliminary and final plat approval shall be required for all
major subdivisions. Preliminary plat approval of all major subdivisions
containing 250 lots or less may be made by the Planning Board. Final approval
of all preliminary plats containing over 250 lots or subdivisions that
require the placement of oversized utility lines may only be made by the City
Council. Any subdivision in excess of 35 lots and located in the
Residential-25 (R-25) zoning district shall automatically be reviewed as a
planned residential development (PRD) as outlined in §§ 153.215 through
153.220 of this chapter. (Procedures for accommodating PRDs in the
subdivision process are also outlined in § 153.386)



   (B)   Regardless of the number of proposed lots, all preliminary
plats shall first be reviewed by the Subdivision Technical Review Committee
(TRC) prior to submittal to the Planning Board, and, where necessary, to the
City Council.



   (C)   All preliminary plats submitted for review shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable submittal fee in accordance with the most City
Council’s most recently adopted fee schedule.



   (D)   Preliminary plats shall meet the specifications of § 153.387
of these regulations.



   (E)   At least eight complete copies of the preliminary plat shall
be submitted to the Administrator with one of these copies being on
reproducible material. The remaining copies shall be considered complete if
they contain all of the information required by § 153.387 of these
regulations and if the required submittal fee has been paid.



   (F)   Twenty-one days prior to the TRC meeting at which the plat is
to be discussed and reviewed, the TRC shall use this 21-day period to review
the plat and submit its recommendations to the Planning Board. If this period
elapses with no comments from the TRC, the plat shall then be automatically
transferred to the Planning Board for their review.



   (G)   (1)   The Planning Board shall have 31 days from the
meeting date at which the plat was reviewed to:



         (a)   Approve the plat;



         (b)   Approve the plat with conditions;



         (c)   Approve the plat with modifications per § 153.378;



         (d)   Disapprove the plat; and/or



         (e)   Make a recommendation to the City Council on a
plat containing over 250 lots.



      (2)   If no recommendation or decision is made during the
31-day period, the plat shall automatically be submitted to the City Council
for their final decision.



   (H)   If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the Administrator
shall instruct the subdivider concerning the resubmission of a revised plat
and the subdivider may make the changes as will bring the plat into
compliance with these regulations. The subdivider shall have 60 days from the
date of the denial to resubmit the plat for approval. If a revised plat is
not submitted within the period, any future resubmittal will require the
payment of an additional filing fee. If the revised plat is resubmitted
within the 60-day period, a submission fee shall not again have to be repaid.
The resubmitted revised plat shall be reviewed by the TRC, Planning Board
and, if necessary, City Council, in the same manner as any other preliminary
plat. The Administrator shall retain at least one copy of any disapproved
plat along with the reasons for disapproval as part of the city’s official
records. A copy of the reasons and any remaining copies of the plat shall
also be transmitted to the subdivider.



   (I)   If the preliminary plat is approved, it shall be indicated on
the reproducible copy of the plat and the copy shall be retained by the
Administrator as part of the city’s official records. Any remaining copies
of the approved plat shall be transmitted to the subdivider. If the
preliminary plat is approved with conditions, the conditions shall be noted
on or attached to the reproducible copy of the plat and shall be retained by
the Administrator as part of the city’s official records. A copy of the
conditions shall also be transmitted to the subdivider. Once these conditions
are met, the plat shall be noted as approved on the reproducible copy. A copy
of the approved plat shall then be transmitted to the subdivider. Unless
otherwise specified in the terms of approval, the conditions shall have been
complied with by the subdivider within 12 months of the date of the
conditional approval; otherwise, approval of the preliminary plat shall be
null and void.



(Prior UDO, § 17.14)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.385  FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT SUBMISSION AND REVIEW.



   (A)   Application.  This section shall apply to both major and
minor subdivisions.



   (B)   Preparation of final plat and installation of improvements.



      (1)   Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider
may proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and the installation of
or arrangement for required improvements in accordance with the approved
preliminary plat and the requirements of these regulations. Prior to approval
of a final plat, the subdivider shall have installed the improvements
specified in these regulations or guaranteed their installation as provided
herein. The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the preliminary
plat that the subdivider proposes to record and develop at that time. The
portion shall conform to all requirements of these regulations and shall
depict the subdivision, or portion thereof, in substantially the same form
and layout as that approved in the preliminary plat. Otherwise, the final
plat may not be approved. Only that portion of the subdivision proposed for
final plat approval and recordation in the Deeds Office shall be shown on the
final plat.



      (2)   The subdivider shall submit the final plat to the
Administrator no later than 24 months after the approval of the preliminary
plat, unless a greater time period was stipulated originally in the
preliminary plat approval. Otherwise, approval of the preliminary plat shall
expire and become null and void. A nonrefundable fee, in accordance with a
fee schedule most recently adopted by the City Council, shall accompany each
final plat submitted.



      (3)   Notwithstanding, the subdivider may submit a request to
the Administrator for a time extension for up to 12 months for the
preliminary plat. The request must be submitted to the Administrator prior to
the original plat expiration date. No more than one extension may be granted
by the Administrator. The subdivider may submit a final plat for only a
portion of the subdivision given preliminary plat approval. Any submission
shall be accompanied by the applicable final plat submittal fee. The
submission shall extend the expiration date for the remaining portion(s) of
the subdivision for an additional 24 months past the date of the final plat
approval.



   (C)   Improvements guarantees.



      (1)   Agreement and security required.  In lieu of requiring
the completion, installation and dedication of all improvements prior to
final plat approval, the city may enter into an agreement with the subdivider
whereby the subdivider shall agree to complete all required improvements.
Once the agreement is signed by both parties and the security required herein
is provided, the final plat may be approved by the City Council, if all other
requirements of these regulations are met. To secure this agreement, the
subdivider shall provide to the City Council either one, or a combination of
the following guarantees. The amount of the guarantee shall be equal to one
and twenty-five one-hundredths times the cost of installing all required
improvements. All guarantees shall be subject to the approval of the City
Council (based on recommendations from the city’s Director of Public Works
and Utilities) and shall be made payable to the city.



         (a)   Surety performance bond(s).  The subdivider shall
obtain a performance bond(s) from a surety bonding company authorized to do
business in the state. The duration of the bond(s) shall be until a time as
the improvements are accepted by the City Council.



         (b)   Cash or equivalent security.



            1.   The subdivider shall deposit cash, an
irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument readily convertible into
cash at face value, either with the city or in escrow with a financial
institution designated as an official depository of the city.



            2.   If cash or other instrument is deposited in
escrow with a financial institution as herein provided, the subdivider shall
then file with the City Council an agreement between the financial
institution and himself or herself guaranteeing the following:



               a.   The escrow account shall be held in
trust until released by the City Council and may not be used or pledged by
the subdivider in any other matter during the term of the escrow; and



               b.   In case of a failure on the part of the
subdivider to complete the improvements, the financial institution of an
engineer’s estimate of the amount needed to complete the improvements,
immediately either pay to the city the funds estimated to complete the
improvements, up to the full balance of the escrow account, or deliver to the
city any other instruments fully endorsed or otherwise made payable in full
to the city.



      (2)   Default.  Upon default, meaning failure on the part of
the subdivider to complete the required improvements in a timely manner as
spelled out in the performance bond or escrow agreement, then the surety, or
the financial institution holding the escrow account, shall, if requested by
the City Council, pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow fund to the
city up to the amount needed to complete the improvements based on the
estimate by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. Upon payment, the
City Council, in its discretion, may expend a portion of the funds, as it
deems necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements.
The city shall return to the bonding firm any finds not spent in completing
the improvements. Should the amount of funds needed to complete the
installation of all required improvements exceed the amount in the bond or
escrow account, the subdivider shall nonetheless be responsible for providing
the funds to cover the costs. The subdivider shall at all times bear the
financial burden for the installation of all required improvements.



      (3)   Release of guarantee security.  The City Council may
authorize the City Manager to release a portion of any security posted as the
improvements are completed and approved by the city. The funds shall then be
released within ten days after the corresponding improvements have been so
approved.



   (D)   Submission procedure.



      (1)   At least eight complete copies of the final plat shall
be submitted to the Administrator.



      (2)   One of these copies shall be on reproducible material;
the remaining copies shall be black or blue line paper prints. The copies
shall only be considered complete if they contain all of the information
required by § 153.387 of these regulations.



      (3)   The Administrator shall have the authority to review and
approve any final plat except one that involves improvement guarantees as
outlined in division (C) above of these regulations. The Administrator, at
his or her discretion, may receive comment from the TRC and/or transmit a
final plat to the Planning Board for their review and approval. The Planning
Board shall have the authority to approve any final plat except one that
involves improvement guarantees as outlined in division (C) above of these
regulations. The Planning Board and City Council shall have the authority to
approve a plat with modifications per § 153.378.



      (4)   Material and drawing medium for the reproducible copy
shall be in accordance with the Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in
North Carolina, where applicable, and the requirements of the County Register
of Deeds.



      (5)   The final plat shall be 18 inches by 24 inches in size
and shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, unless
each lot in the proposed subdivision is more than three acres. In that case,
the scale shall not be less than one inch equals 200 feet. Maps may be placed
on more than one sheet with appropriate match lines.



      (6)   (a)   The Administrator shall have 21 days from the
date at which the plat was submitted to:



            1.   Approve the plat;



            2.   Disapprove the plat; or



            3.   Submit the final plat to the Planning Board
for their review and decision.



         (b)   If the Administrator takes none of these actions
during the 21-day period, the plat shall automatically be submitted to the
Planning Board for its review and decision.



      (7)   If the final plat is disapproved, the Administrator
shall instruct the subdivider concerning the resubmission of a revised plat
and the subdivider may make changes as will bring the plat into compliance
with these regulations. The subdivider shall have 21 days from the date of
denial to resubmit his or her plat for approval.



      (8)   If a revised plat is not submitted within the period,
any future resubmittal of the plat will require the payment of an additional
filing fee. The resubmitted revised plat shall be reviewed in the same manner
as any other final major subdivision plat. The Administrator shall retain at
least one copy of any disapproved plat along with the reasons for disapproval
as part of the city’s official records. A copy of the reasons and any
remaining copies of the plat shall also be transmitted to the subdivider.



      (9)   If the final plat is approved, the Administrator shall
send a certified notice of the approval to the subdivider. The subdivider
shall have 21 days from the date of final approval to have the plat recorded
in the Deeds Office. Otherwise, the approved final plat shall be null and
void.



      (10)   If the final plat is approved, the approval shall be
shown on the reproducible copy of the plat by the following signed
certificate:



         (a)   Certificate of Approval for Recording.



   Certificate of Approval for Recording



   I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found
to comply with the subdivision regulations of the City of Lincolnton, North
Carolina and that this plat has been approved by ____________ on_________for
recording in the Lincoln County Deeds Office.



         ________________________________         ___________
_______



         Administrator                        
   Date



         City of Lincolnton, North Carolina



         (b)   Certificate of Ownership and Dedication.



   Certificate of Ownership and Dedication



   I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and
described hereon, which is located in the planning jurisdiction of the City
of Lincolnton and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free
consent, establish minimum building setback lines, and dedicate all streets,
walks, parks, and other sites and easements to public or private use as
noted. Furthermore, I hereby dedicate all sanitary sewers to_____________,
all storm sewer systems to_____________and all water lines to_____________.



         __________________________         _________________
_________



         Date
                           Owner



         (c)   Certificate of Survey and Accuracy.



            1.   In accordance with the Standards of Practice
for Land Surveying in North Carolina.



            2.   On the face of each map prepared for
recordation for there shall appear a certificate acknowledged before an
officer authorized to take acknowledgments and executed by the person making
the survey or map including deeds and any recorded data shown thereon. The
certificate shall include a statement of error of closure calculated by
latitudes and departures. Any lines on the map that were not actually
surveyed must be clearly indicated on the map and a statement included in the
certificate revealing the source of information.



            3.   The certificate shall take the following
general form.



   Certificate of Survey and Accuracy



      I,_________________certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn
under my supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey
made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book________,
Page________, etc.) (Other); that the ratio of precision as calculated by
latitudes and departure is 1:______, (that the boundaries not surveyed are
shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book_____, Page_____;
that this accordance with G.S. § 47-30, as amended. Witness my hand and seal
this_______day of___________A.D. 20____.



                                    _______
__________________



                                    Registe
red Land Surveyor



            OFFICIAL
SEAL            _________________________



                                    Registr
ation Number



      I, (officer authorized to take acknowledgments) do hereby certify
that (name of registered surveyor) personally appeared before me this day and
acknowledged the due execution of this certificate. Witness my hand and
(where an official seal is required by law) official seal this
the_________day of_______, 20_____.



            ___________________________



            Signature of
Officer                  OFFICIAL SEAL



         (d)   Certificate of Approval of the Design and
Installation of Streets, Utilities and Other Required Improvements.




Certificate of Approval of the Design and Installation of Streets, Utilities
and Other Required Improvements




      I hereby certify that all streets, public utilities and other
required improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and
according to North Carolina Department of Transportation specifications and
standards in the______________Subdivision or as otherwise provided for in
these regulations, or that guarantees of the installation of the required
improvements in an amount and manner satisfactory to the City of Lincolnton
has been received, and that the filing fee for this plat, in the amount of
$________has been paid.



            ____________________________         _________
_________



            Administrator                     
Date



(Prior UDO, § 17.15)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.386  PLANNING UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUDs) AND PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS (PRDs).



   (A)   To accommodate the difference between traditional lot-by-lot
subdivisions and PUDs/PRDs, the city may waive or modify the design standards
of these regulations and incorporate design standards applicable only to
planned developments as set forth in §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of this
chapter. The waivers or modifications shall not be subject to the approval
procedures outlined in § 153.378 of these regulations. To be reviewed under
the PRD/PUD procedures a development must meet the criteria set forth in §§
153.215 or 153.216 of this chapter. Any subdivision in excess of 35 lots and
located in the Residential-25 (R-25) zoning district shall automatically be
reviewed as a planned residential development (PRD).



   (B)   The subdivision design standards may be waived or modified for
PRDs provided that the intent of these regulations is not mollified or
lessened and provided that sufficient proof is given substantiating the
adequacy of the attentive design. Planned unit developments and planned
residential development shall follow the review procedures and development
standards as set forth in §§ 153.215 through 153.220 of this chapter.



   (C)   All PRDs/PUDs shall be considered major subdivisions and shall
follow all applicable procedures set forth for the approval of the
subdivisions. The subdivision approval process may occur at the same time
with the PRD/PUD approval process.



   (D)   The Planning Board, Committee and Administrator shall
coordinate their review and advisory efforts wherever feasible in order to
limit any unnecessary delays.



(Prior UDO, § 17.16)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.387  INFORMATION TO BE CONTAINED IN OR DEPICTED ON PRELIMINARY AND
FINAL PLATS.



   (A)   This section shall apply to minor subdivisions, major
subdivisions and PRDs/PUDs.



   (B)   The preliminary and final plats shall depict, contain or be
accompanied by the information indicated in the following table. A “Yes”
indicates that the information is required; where a “No” appears, the
information shall not be required. Preliminary plat information shall only be
required for major subdivisions.



 


Information

 

Preliminary Plat

 

Final Plat





Title block containing:
 



 





   Subdivision name
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Name of subdivider
 

Yes

 

Yes



Location (including township, block numbers as shown on the county index map,
county and state)
 





Yes

 





Yes



Date or dates survey was conducted and plat prepared
 

Yes

 

Yes



A bar graph, scale and north arrow
 

Yes

 

Yes



Name, address, registration number and seal of the registered land surveyor
and/or professional engineer who drew the plat
 

Yes

 

Yes



A sketch vicinity map with north arrow showing the relationship between the
proposed subdivision and the surrounding area
 

Yes

 

Yes







Corporate limits and city extraterritorial jurisdictional lines if on the
subdivision tract
 

Yes

 

Yes



The boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to be subdivided, distinctly
and accurately represented with all bearing and distances shown
 

Yes

 

No



The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings and the location of existing boundary lines of adjoining
lands
 

No

 

Yes



The names of owners of adjoining properties
 

Yes

 

Yes



The names of any adjoining subdivisions of record or proposed and under review
 

Yes

 

Yes



Minimum required setback lines
 

Yes

 

Yes



The zoning classifications, if any, of the tract to be subdivided and
adjoining properties
 

Yes

 

Yes



Existing buildings or other structures, watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, storm drains, cemetery plots, both on the land to be subdivided and
land immediately adjoining
 

Yes

 

Yes



Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers and appropriate dimensions of each
lot
 

Yes

 

Yes



The lots numbered consecutively throughout the subdivision with exact
dimensions and areas given
 

No

 

Yes



Marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes, streams or streambeds and any
other natural features affecting the site
 

Yes

 

Yes



The exact location of any flood hazard area, floodway and floodway fringe
areas from the city or county FEMA maps, if applicable
 

Yes

 

Yes



The following data concerning streets:
 



 





   Proposed streets
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Existing and platted streets on adjoining properties and in the
proposed subdivision
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Street rights-of-way, locations and dimensions
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Pavement widths
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Approximate grades
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Design engineering data for all corners and curves
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Typical road cross-sections
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Street names
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Type of streets dedication; all streets must be designated either
“public” or “private.” Where public streets are involved which will
not be dedicated to the city, the subdivider following documents to the North
Carolina Department of Transportation District Highway Office (NCDOT) for
review:  a complete site layout, including any future expansion anticipated;
horizontal alignment indicating general curve data on site layout plan;
vertical alignment indicated by percent grade, PI station and vertical curve
length on site plan layout (NCDOT may require the plotting of the ground
profile and grade line for roads where special conditions or problems exist);
typical section indicating the pavement design and width and the slopes,
widths and details for either the curb and gutter or the shoulder and ditch
proposed; drainage facilities and drainage areas
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Subdivision street disclosure statement indicating (i) if streets are
public or private and (ii) if private, who will maintain private streets in
subdivision and also that all lots will have right of access to any private
street in the subdivision
 

No

 

Yes



   Where streets are dedicated to the public, but not accepted into the
state system before lots are sold, a statement explaining the status of the
street in accordance with § 153.26 of these regulations
 

No

 

Yes



   If any road is proposed to intersect with a state maintained road, the
subdivider shall apply for driveway approval as required by NCDOT’s Manual
on Driveway Regulations; evidence that the subdivider has obtained approval
 

No

 

Yes



The location and dimensions of all:
 



 





   Utilities and other easements
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Parks and recreation areas with specific type indicated
 

Yes

 

Yes



   School sites (both existing and proposed)
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Dedicated water access lots
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Areas and/or lots to be used for purposes other than residential with
the purpose of each stated
 

Yes

 

Yes



   The future ownership (dedication or reservation for public use to
governmental body, for owners to duly constituted homeowners’ association
or for tenants remaining in subdivider’s ownership) of recreation and open
space lands
 

Yes

 

Yes



Site calculations including:
 



 





   Acreage in total tract to be subdivided and area in each lot
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Acreage in parks and recreation areas and other nonresidential uses
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Total number of lots created
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Linear feet in streets in subdivision
 

Yes

 

Yes



   The name and location of any property or buildings within the proposed
subdivision or within any contiguous property that is located on the U.S.
Department of Interior’s National Register of Historic Places
 

Yes

 

Yes



   Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce on the
ground every straight or curved line, street line, lot line, right-of-way
line, easement line and setback line, including dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles, radii, central angles and tangent distance for the
centerline of curved property lines that are not the boundary lines of curved
streets; all dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one-hundredth of a
foot and all angles to the nearest minute.
 

No

 

Yes



   The accurate locations and descriptions of all survey monuments,
markers and control points
 

No

 

Yes



   A copy of the erosion control plan submitted to the North Carolina
Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources for approval, where
applicable
 

Yes

 

No



   A topographic map with contour intervals of no greater than five feet
at a scale of no less than one inch equals 200 feet may be required
 

Yes

 

No



   A copy of the Lincoln County Health Department’s Soil Site Evaluation
of the subdivision, where applicable
 

Yes

 

No



   A copy of the Soils Map for the subdivision obtained from the County
Soil and Water Conservation District
 

Yes

 

No



   Any additional information required as a result of changes in federal,
state or local ordinances
 

Yes

 

Yes



In addition to all other information herein required, additional information
shall be required for PUDs/PRDs which is set forth in §§ 153.217 of this
chapter.




 



(Prior UDO, § 17.17)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.388  RECOMBINATION OF LAND.



   (A)   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner
at any time before the sale of any lot in the subdivision by gaining approval
of and filing a plat inconsistent with the originally approved plat or by
filing a plat showing the tract without the lots as if no lots have been sold.



   (B)   The replatting of any previously platted property shall not
abridge or destroy any public rights.



   (C)   The filing and recording of an amended plat as described in
division (A) above of these regulations shall serve to destroy the force and
effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public
rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds and all dedications laid out
or described in the plat.



   (D)   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated or amended
by all owners of the lots in the plat joining in the execution of the writing.



   (E)   Streets which have not been used within 15 years of dedication
may be deemed abandoned. The withdrawal of dedication shall be consistent
with G.S. § 136-96.



(Prior UDO, § 17.18)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.389  RESUBDIVISION PROCEDURES.



   For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedures, rules
and regulations shall apply as prescribed herein for an original subdivision.



(Prior UDO, § 17.19)



§ 153.390  GENERAL.



   Prior to final plat approval, each subdivision shall contain the
improvements specified in these regulations, which shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of these regulations and paid for by the
subdivider, unless other means of financing are specifically proposed. Land
shall be dedicated and reserved in each subdivision as herein specified. Each
subdivision shall adhere to the minimum standards of design as provided for
in these regulations.



(Prior UDO, § 17.20)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.391  SUITABILITY OF LAND.



   The Planning Board and City Council reserve the right to deny approval
of a subdivision plat, notwithstanding all other provisions contained in
these regulations where it has reasonable evidence to suspect (based on
engineering or other expert surveys) that the proposed subdivision, and the
development allowed for under the subdivision, will pose an ascertainable
danger to life or property. The burden of proof for determining that the
danger in a subdivision does not exist shall rest entirely with the
subdivider.



(Prior UDO, § 17.21)



§ 153.392  NAME DUPLICATION.



   The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate
the name of an existing subdivision within the county.



(Prior UDO, § 17.22)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.393  SUBDIVISION DESIGN.



   (A)   Blocks.



      (1)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be
determined with due regard to:



         (a)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to
the special needs of the type of use contemplated;



         (b)   Zoning requirements;



         (c)   Needs for vehicular and pedestrian circulation;



         (d)   Control and safety of street traffic;



         (e)   Limitations and opportunities of topography; and



         (f)   Convenient access to water areas.



      (2)   Where deemed necessary, by the Planning Board or City
Council as part of the plat approval process, a pedestrian crosswalk may be
required to provide convenient public access to a public area such as a park
or school, to a water area, or to areas such as shopping centers, religious
or transportation facilities.



   (B)   Lot dimensions.  All new residential lots in subdivisions
shall conform to the following requirements.



      (1)   Residential lot area.



         (a)   All lots in new subdivisions shall conform to the
zoning requirements of the zoning district in which the subdivision is
located. Conformance to zoning requirements means, among other things, that
the smallest lot in the subdivision must meet all dimensional requirements of
this chapter. The city may require larger lot sizes in cases where the County
Health Department has recommended that based upon the assessment of soil
applicator rates and subsoil conditions and other factors limiting the
placement of well and septic systems.



         (b)   In determining lot areas, all rights-of-way or
areas deeded or reserved for public roads shall be excluded when determining
lot areas.



         (c)   In calculating lot area, the following shall not
be included:



            1.   Any dedicated road right-of-way;



            2.   Any road right-of-way to be dedicated;



            3.   Any road right-of-way claimed by the State
Department of Transportation or the city; and/or



            4.   Any railroad right-of-way.



      (2)   Lot width and road frontage requirements.  Minimum lot
width and road frontage requirements shall be as required in the underlying
zoning district.



      (3)   Orientation of residential lot lines.  Side lot lines
shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
Double-frontage lots shall be avoided wherever possible.



      (4)   Panhandle lots.  Panhandle lots will be allowed in
subdivisions provided that they meet the following requirements:



         (a)   In no case shall an entire subdivision or the
majority of lots within a subdivision consist of panhandle lots;



         (b)   All panhandle lots shall have a minimum road
frontage of 35 feet;



         (c)   The length of the panhandle strip in the lot shall
not exceed 100 feet; and



         (d)   The strip shall not be used to determine lot area,
lot width or required building setback lines.



      (5)   Minimum lot dimensions.  All minimum lot dimensions may
be increased over those required in the zoning regulations in order to meet
any applicable requirements of the County Health Department.



(Prior UDO, § 17.23)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.394  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Easements shall be provided for storm and sanitary sewers,
water lines and other utilities in those widths, and at those locations as
may be required by the city’s Public Works Director; in order to properly
serve the lot and adjoining realty; but in no event shall an easement of less
than ten feet in width along all rear lines and exterior side lot lines, and
five feet in width along each side of all interior side lot lines.
Notwithstanding, in no case may the width of an easement upon a lot be less
than the minimum required side or rear yard setback for that lot per the
requirements of the underlying zoning district.



   (B)   No principal or accessory structure may be placed within a
utility easement.



(Prior UDO, § 17.24)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.395  STREET STANDARDS.



   (A)   Public streets.



      (1)   All subdivision streets shall abut on a public road
except where allowed in division (B) below of these regulations. All public
streets shall be paved and built to all applicable standards of these
regulations and all other applicable standards of the North Carolina
Department of Transportation (NCDOT) including the most up-to-date version of
NCDOT’s Subdivision Roads, Minimum Construction Standards. All public
streets inside the city limits shall be dedicated to the city.



      (2)   Streets, outside the city limits, which are not eligible
to be put on the NCDOT system because there are too few lots or residences
shall, nevertheless, be dedicated for public use and shall be built in
accordance with the standards necessary to be put on the NCDOT system so as
to be eligible to be put on the system at a later date. A written maintenance
agreement with provisions for maintenance of the street until it is put on
the state system shall be included with the final plat and recorded with the
County Deeds Office.



   (B)   Private streets.



      (1)   Private streets that are neither maintained by NCDOT or
the city are permitted. The streets shall meet all right-of-way and
construction standards of NCDOT with the following exceptions:



         (a)   Streets that provide access to five or fewer lots
may be unpaved and graveled; the unpaved streets shall have a minimum road
surface of 16 feet. In no instance may a subdivision be approved containing
both paved and unpaved streets. In no instance shall one unpaved private
street be allowed to intersect with another unpaved private road;



         (b)   All private streets shall be local streets; and



         (c)   No two private streets accessing the same public
street shall be less than 500 feet apart as measured at their access points
on the public street. All private streets shall be marked as that on the
preliminary and final plat and a written maintenance agreement shall be
provided and recorded with the Deeds Office once the final plat has been
approved.



      (2)   The maintenance agreement shall include, but not be
limited to, the following items:



         (a)   A homeowner’s association shall be established
as a legal entity for the property owners within the entire subdivision;



         (b)   All property owners within the subdivision shall
be members of the homeowner’s association;



         (c)   The subdivider shall convey all private streets in
fee simple ownership within the subdivision to the homeowner’s association;
and



         (d)   The responsibility for maintenance of private
streets shall rest with the homeowner’s association.



      (3)   Passage of the responsibility for maintenance of private
streets from the developer to the homeowner’s association shall be noted in
the deed of each purchaser of property within the subdivision.



      (4)   At the time of the preparation of the sales agreement
the developer shall include a disclosure statement to the prospective buyer
as herein outlined. The developer and seller shall include in the disclosure
statement an explanation of the consequences and responsibility as to
maintenance of a private street, and shall fully and accurately disclose the
party or parties upon whom responsibility for construction and maintenance of
the street or streets shall rest.



   (C)   Subdivision street disclosure statement.  Where streets are
dedicated to the public but not accepted into the city or NCDOT system before
lots are sold, a statement explaining the status of the street shall be
included with the final plat. Prior to entering into any agreement or any
conveyance with any prospective buyer, the developer and seller shall prepare
and sign, and the buyer of the subject real estate shall receive and sign an
acknowledgment of receipt of a subdivision streets disclosure statement
(hereinafter referred to as “disclosure statement”). The disclosure
statement shall fully and completely disclose the status (whether public or
private) of the street upon which the lot fronts.



   (D)   Marginal access street.



      (1)   Where a tract of land to be subdivided adjoins a major
or minor thoroughfare as designated on the thoroughfare plan of the city or
county, the subdivider shall be required to provide a marginal access street
parallel to the major thoroughfare or reverse frontage on a minor street for
the lots to be developed adjacent to the major thoroughfare. Where reverse
frontage is established, private driveways shall be prevented from having
direct access to the thoroughfare. The Planning Board or the City Council, in
their plat approving capacity, shall have the authority to decide which of
these alternatives would best serve the general public’s safety and welfare.



      (2)   In cases where it is not feasible or practical for the
subdivider to provide a marginal access street or when the Planning Board or
City Council determines that the installation of a marginal access road would
result in a less desirable subdivision design, the Planning Board or City
Council may grant an exception to the requirement for a marginal access
street. In granting the exception the Planning Board or City Council shall
find that the spirit and intent of these regulations are preserved and that
circumstances particular to the subject property, such as topography or shape
of the tract exist to warrant the exception. The exemption shall not be
subject to the requirements of § 153.378.



   (E)   Street connectivity requirements.



      (1)   The City Council hereby finds and determines that an
interconnected street system is necessary in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare in order to ensure that streets will function in
an interdependent manner, to provide adequate access for emergency and
service vehicles, to enhance nonvehicular travel such as pedestrians and
bicycles, and to provide continuous and comprehensible traffic routes.



      (2)   All proposed streets shall be continuous and connect to
existing or platted streets without offset with the exception of cul-de-sacs
as permitted and except as provided below. Whenever practicable, provisions
shall be made for the continuation of planned streets into adjoining areas.



      (3)   The street network for any subdivision shall achieve a
connectivity ratio of not less than 1.40. See example in Figure A below.




Figure A










 



      (4)   The phrase “connectivity ratio” means the number of
street links divided by the number of nodes or link ends, including
cul-de-sac heads. (See § 153.031 for definitions of “node” and
“link.”)



      (5)   Residential streets shall be designed so as to minimize
the block length of local streets, to provide safe access to residences with
minimal need for steep driveways and to maintain connectivity between and
through residential neighborhoods for autos and pedestrians.



      (6)   Where necessary to provide access or to permit the
reasonable future subdivision of adjacent land, rights-of-way and
improvements shall be extended to the boundary of the development. A
temporary turnaround may be required where the dead end exceeds 500 feet in
length. The platting of partial width rights-of-way shall be prohibited
except where the remainder of the necessary right-of-way has already been
platted, dedicated or established by other means.



      (7)   Exemption. New subdivisions that intend to provide one
new cul-de-sac street shall be exempt from the connectivity ratio standard as
set forth in this section, provided the Administrator determines that there
is no option for providing stub streets due to topographic conditions,
adjacent developed sites or other limiting factors; and interconnectivity
(use of a looped road) within the development cannot be achieved or is
unreasonable based on the constraints of the property to be developed.



   (F)   Road entrance requirements.  The Planning Board or City
Council shall require conformity with NCDOT standards for public road
entrances.



   (G)   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the
street in all major subdivisions. The sidewalks shall be constructed to a
minimum width of four feet and a minimum thickness of four inches of concrete
or must be ADA compliant, whichever is more stringent. All sidewalks shall be
placed in the street right-of-way and shall be a minimum distance of six feet
off of the back of the curb in order to accommodate a planting strip that may
be used for the placement of street trees. Sidewalks shall contain a minimum
of six inches of concrete at driveway crossings.



   (H)   Street names.  Proposed streets that are obviously in
alignment with existing streets shall be given the same name. In assigning
new names, duplication of existing names shall be avoided and in no case
shall the proposed name be phonetically similar to existing names in the
county irrespective of the use of a suffix such as street, road, drive,
place, court or the like. All new streets shall be named in accordance with
§ 153.392 of these regulations.



   (I)   Street name signs.  The subdivider shall either be required
to provide and erect street name signs at all street intersections within the
subdivision in accordance with all city standards or be required to reimburse
the city for providing the street name signs. Any fee, in accordance with the
most recently adopted fee schedule adopted by the City Council, shall be paid
to the Administrator prior to final plat approval.



   (J)   Permits for connection to state roads.  An approved NCDOT
permit is required for connection to any existing state system road. This
permit is required prior to any construction on the street or road.



   (K)   Wheelchair ramps.  In accordance with G.S. § 136-44.14, all
street curbs in the state being constructed or reconstructed for maintenance
procedures, traffic operations, repairs, correction of utilities, or altered
for any reason after September 1, 1973, shall provide wheelchair ramps for
the physically handicapped at all intersections where both curb and gutter
and sidewalks are provided and at other major points of pedestrian flow.



   (L)   Street trees.  In order to provide a unifying element along
street frontages and soften the transition of the public street to the
private yard, street trees shall be required along all collector streets.
Small trees shall be spaced 20 feet on-center, and large trees shall be
spaced 40 feet on-center. Trees shall be planted parallel to the street
within a well-defined planting strip a minimum of six-feet wide.



(Prior UDO, § 17.25)



§ 153.396  WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Water and sewer systems.



      (1)   All lots in subdivisions shall have a suitable source of
water supply and sanitary sewage disposal that complies with the regulations
of all appropriate agencies.



      (2)   All lots within the city limits shall be served by city
water and sewer at the subdivider’s expense. Outside the city limits, the
following criteria shall be used to determine whether or not a subdivision
shall be connected with public water and sewer.



      (3)   If the tract in question is proposed to be subdivided
with the number of dwelling units indicated in the left hand column of the
following table or with a nonresidential use that places a comparable demand
on the water or sewer system, then the distance (as measured using the
straight line distance between the closest portion of the subdivision to the
existing water or sewer line) within which the tract must be connected is
indicated in the right-hand column of that table.



 


Dwelling Units

 

Distance




0 - 10

 

200 feet




11 - 20

 

300 feet




21 - 50

 

600 feet




51 - 100

 

1,000 feet




101+

 

1,500 feet




 



      (4)   In determining the number of dwelling units proposed for
a tract, this relates to the number proposed for all phases of the
subdivision.



      (5)   Connection to a water or sewer line shall not be deemed
legally impossible if, after diligent effort by the subdivider, the easement
necessary to run the connection line across property(ies) not owned by the
subdivider, cannot be obtained. The subdivider shall document to the City
Council the efforts that have been to secure the easement. The City Council
shall make its decision as whether to relieve the subdivider of making the
connection upon the documentation. Procedures called for in § 153.378 shall
not be required to issue relief.



      (6)   In addition to the regulations contained in these
regulations, all applicable city water and sewer extension policies shall be
followed.



   (B)   Sewer system alternatives.



      (1)   In cases where connections to a public sewer system is
not deemed necessary by the City Council, alternative sewer disposal systems
may be considered.



      (2)   Sewer disposal systems using package treatment plants as
the main treatment facility shall be designed to accommodate the eventual
connection to a municipal or county owned public sewer system at the time the
connection becomes feasible.



      (3)   The subdivider of a subdivision containing a package
sewage treatment plant shall adequately demonstrate to the city that the
plant, where located, shall satisfactorily serve as a means of waste
treatment in a manner which is compatible with the environment and which will
not adversely impact upon any public water supply system.



      (4)   Septic tanks (i.e., private sewage disposal systems) may
also be allowed as a means of sewage disposal in cases where connection to a
public sewer system is not feasible. However, the following statement shall
appear on all final plats containing lots that are proposed to be served by
septic tanks.



   In approving this plat, the City of Lincolnton or Lincoln County does
not guarantee the suitability of any lot for the placement of a septic tank
system.



   (C)   Water.



      (1)   In cases where connections to a public water system are
approved by the City Council, alternative water supply systems may be
considered. In no instance shall any intermediate water system having two to
14 service connections be allowed. Potable water shall be provided by either
an intermediate water system having 15 or more service connections, a private
water supply system or a public water system.



      (2)   The following table indicates the types of water systems
allowed under these regulations.



 

Water System Ownership


Service Connections
 
Public Entity
 
Private Entity



2 to 14

 

Yes

 

No




15+

 

Yes

 

Yes




 



(Prior UDO, § 17.26)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.397  STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.



   The subdivider shall provide a surface water drainage system
constructed to the standards of the North Carolina Department of
Transportation, as reflected in Handbook for the Design of Highway Surface
Drainage Structures, 1975, as amended or revised, subject to review by the
city.



(Prior UDO, § 17.27)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.398  OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Placement of monuments.  The Standards of Practice for Land
Surveying as adopted by the State Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers and Land Surveyors, under the provisions of Title 21 of the North
Carolina Administrative Code, Chapter 56 (21 NCAC 56), shall apply when
conducting surveys for subdivisions; to determine the accuracy for surveys
and placement of monuments, control corners, markers and property corner
ties; to determine the location, design and material of markers, control
corners and property corner ties; and to determine other standards and
procedures governing the practice of land surveying for subdivisions.



   (B)   Construction procedures.



      (1)   No construction or installation of improvements shall
commence in a proposed subdivision until the preliminary plat has been
approved, and the appropriate authorities have approved all plans and
specifications.



      (2)   No building, zoning or other permits shall be issued for
erection of a structure on any lot not of record at the time of adoption of
these regulations until all the requirements of these regulations have been
met. The subdivider, prior to commencing any work on any public improvements
within the subdivision, shall make arrangements with the Administrator to
provide for adequate inspection. The approving authorities having
jurisdiction or their representatives shall inspect and approve all completed
work prior to release of any sureties.



   (C)   Oversized improvements.  The City Council may require
installation of certain oversized utilities or the extension of utilities to
adjacent property(ies) when it is in the interest of future development.
Thus, irrespective of all other regulations contained in these regulations,
any plat that calls for the installation of oversized utilities may only be
approved by the City Council. If the City Council requires the installation
of improvements in excess of the standards required in these regulations,
including all standards adopted by reference, the city shall bear the cost
differential between the oversized improvement required and the standards
which would otherwise apply to the proposed subdivision. In this manner, the
subdivider shall not bear the costs of providing oversized improvements
required by the city.



   (D)   Dedication of land for and/or fees in lieu of park, recreation
and open space purposes.



      (1)   Dedication of land.



         (a)   General provisions.  Every subdivider, except a
major subdivision developed completely within a public golf course, who
proposes a major subdivision of land for residential purposes shall dedicate
a portion of land or pay a fee in lieu thereof, in accordance with this
section, for public park, greenway, recreation and open space sites to serve
the recreational needs of the residents of the subdivision or development.



         (b)   Amount of land to be dedicated.



            1.   At least one-thirty-fifth of an acre shall be
dedicated for each dwelling unit planned or proposed in the subdivision plat
or development.



            2.   The minimum amount of land that shall be
dedicated for a public park, recreation or open space site shall be no less
than two acres in size. When the area to be provided is less than two acres,
the subdivider shall be required to make payment in lieu of the dedication to
be used for the acquisition or development of recreation, park or open space
sites which would serve the needs of the residents of the subdivision.



         (c)   Nature of land to be dedicated.  Except as
otherwise required by the City Council at the time of preliminary plat
approval, all dedications of land shall meet the following criteria.



            1.   Unity.  The dedicated land shall form a
single parcel of land, except where the City Council determines that two or
more parcels would be in the best interest of the public, given the type and
distribution of open spaces needed to adequately serve the proposed
development. In these cases, the City Council may require that the parcels be
connected by a dedicated strip of land at least 30 feet in width.



            2.   Usability.  Two-thirds of the dedicated land
shall be useable for active recreation. Furthermore, lakes and other bodies
of water may not be included in computing any of the dedicated land area.



            3.   Shape.  The shape of the portion of
dedicated land that is deemed suitable for active recreation shall be
sufficiently square or round to be usable for any or all recreational
facilities and activities, such as athletic fields and tennis courts, when a
sufficient amount of land is dedicated to accommodate the facilities. Land
dedicated only for greenways need not follow the requirements of this
division.



            4.   Location.  The dedicated land shall be
located so as to reasonably serve the recreation and open space needs of
residents of the subdivision.



            5.   Access.  Public access to the dedicated land
shall be provided either by adjoining public street frontage or by a
dedicated public easement, at least 30 feet wide, which connects the
dedicated land to a public street or right-of-way. Gradients adjacent to
existing and proposed streets shall allow for reasonable access to the
dedicated land. Where the dedicated land is located adjacent to a street, the
developer or subdivider shall remain responsible for the installation of
utilities, sidewalks and other improvements required along that street
segment. Public access or dedicated walkways to greenway dedications only
shall be at least 20-feet wide.



            6.   Topography.  The average slope of the
portion of dedicated land deemed usable for active recreation shall not
exceed the average slope of the entire subdivision to be developed. In no
case shall a slope on the usable portion of dedicated land exceed 15%.



            7.   Landscaping.  Dedicated parks, recreation
and open space areas shall have a sufficient natural or manmade buffer or
screen to minimize any negative impacts on adjacent residents.



      (2)   Payments of fees in lieu of land dedication.



         (a)   General.  The payment of fees, in lieu of the
dedication of land under division (D)(1) above, may occur at the request of
the subdivider or developer. However, the decision to require the dedication
of land for recreational purposes or a payment of a fee in lieu, shall be
made by the City Council after having received a recommendation from the
Planning Board and having evaluated the proposed dedication and the
relationship the dedication would have with the city’s overall recreational
needs.



         (b)   Time of payment.  The fees in lieu of dedication
shall be paid prior to final plat approval by the City Council.



         (c)   Amount of payment.



            1.   The amount of the payment shall be the
product of:



               a.   The number of acres to be dedicated, as
required above; and



               b.   The assessed value for property tax
purposed of the land being subdivided, adjusted to reflect its current fair
market value at the time the payment is due to be paid.



            2.   Procedures for determining the amount is as
follows:



               a.   An appraisal of the land in the
development shall be performed by a professional land appraiser selected by
the developer from an approved list maintained by the City Council. The
appraisal shall not be done prior to submission of the preliminary plat. The
cost of the appraisal shall be borne by the developer.



               b.   Professional land appraiser refers to a
land appraiser who, in the opinion of the City Council, has the expertise
and/or certification to perform an adequate appraisal.



      (3)   Procedures.



         (a)   At the time of filing a preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall designate thereon the area or areas to be dedicated. If the
subdivider desires to make a payment in lieu of the dedication of land, a
letter to that effect shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. The City
Council reserves the right to refuse to accept dedication of parcels for
public park, recreation or open space.



         (b)   Where a dedication of land is required, the
dedication shall be shown on the final plat when submitted, and the plat
shall be accompanied by an executed general warranty deed conveying the
dedicated land to the city. Where a payment in lieu of dedication is approved
by the City Council, the payment will be made before the final plat is signed
and recorded.



         (c)   The city encourages neighborhood or homeowner
associations or management to construct, operate and maintain private parks
and recreation. The construction, operation or maintenance of private
facilities shall not, however, diminish or eliminate the responsibility and
obligations of the subdivider under this section.



         (d)   Greenways may be credited against the requirements
of this section provided that the greenways are part of the city’s greenway
plan and dedicated to public use.



(Prior UDO, § 17.28)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined an amount as set forth in the fee schedule and/or
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day of violation shall be
deemed a separate offense, provided that the violation of this chapter is not
corrected within ten days after notice of the violation is given.



   (B)   After the effective date of this chapter, any person who,
being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the planning
jurisdiction of the city, thereafter subdivides his or her land in violation
of this chapter or transfer or sells land by reference to, exhibition of, or
any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat has
been properly approved under the terms of this chapter and recorded in the
County Deeds Office, shall be in violation of this chapter. Any person, firm
or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined an
amount as set forth in the fee schedule and/or imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense,
provided that the violation of this chapter is not corrected within ten days
after notice of the violation is given.



   (C)   The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of
transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring
land shall not exempt this transaction from the violation. The city through
its attorney or other official designated by the City Council may enjoin an
illegal subdivision, transfer or sale of land by action for injunction.
Further, violators of this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to fine
and/or imprisonment as provided by G.S. § 14-4.



   (D)   In addition to the other remedies cited in this chapter for
the enforcement of its provisions, and pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-175,
160A-365, 160A-375 and 160A-389, the regulations and standards in this
chapter may be enforced through the issuance of civil penalties by the
Administrator. Additionally, and pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. §
160A-175 (b), the city declares that the violation of the aforementioned
civil penalty provisions shall not be a misdemeanor or infraction as provided
in G.S. § 14-4.



   (E)   Subsequent citations for the same violation may be issued by
the Administrator if the offender does not correct the violation within three
days (except as otherwise provided in a warning situation) after it has been
issued unless the offender has sought an appeal to the actions of the
Administrator through the Board of Adjustment.



   (F)   The following penalties are hereby established.



 

Warning citation
 
Correct violation within ten days


First citation
 
as set forth in the fee schedule


Second citation for same offense
 
as set forth in the fee schedule


Third and subsequent citations for same offense
 
as set forth in the fee schedule



 



   (G)   If the offender fails to pay penalties that have been cited
within five days after the offender has been cited, the city may recover the
penalties in a civil action in the nature of debt.



   (H)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-389, if a building or structure is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or
maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this
chapter or other regulation made under authority conferred thereby, the city
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or
abate the violation, to prevent occupancy of the building, structure or land,
or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the
premises.



   (I)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175, the city may seek a mandatory or
prohibitory injunction and an order of abatement commanding the offender to
correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the subject
premises. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules
governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in
general and Rule 65 in particular.



   (J)   The above remedies are cumulative, and the city may pursue any
or all of the same at its discretion. Each day that the violation exists
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Prior UDO, § 14.8)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   ANNEXATIONS



      II.   AGREEMENTS



      III.   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS



TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




O-07-02
 
10-3-2002
 
Annexation of two parcels of land identified as ANX-03-02 - Cinco Investors,
becoming a part of Ward II.


O-03-03
 
- -2003
 
Annexation of three parcels of land identified as ANX-1-03 - T. Bragg McCloud
and William L. Heafner.


O-08-03
 
8-14-2003
 
Annexation of 1.383 acres of land identified as ANX-2-03 - BDI Development,
Inc., becoming a part of Ward I.


O-01-04
 
2-5-2004
 
Annexation of 23.908 acres of land identified as ANX-1-2004 - J-Bo LLC,
becoming a part of Ward I.


O-01-06
 
4-6-2006
 
Consideration of adoption of satellite annexation ordinance to annex 56.28
acres of land located on the northwest side of the intersection of Startown
Road and Waters Road to house a school, becoming a part of Ward I.


O-02-09
 
8-1-2009
 
Annexation of 29.695 acres of land identified as ANX-3-09 - Larry Griffin
(Highway321 Investments, LLC), becoming a part of Ward I.


O-03-10
 
5-6-2010
 
Annexation of 15.038 acres of land identified as ANX-1-10 - Wal-Mart Real
Estate Business Trust, becoming a part of Ward I.


 
 




 



TABLE II:  AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


O-01-05
 
5-5-2005
 
Amending Agreement No. 2 with the North Carolina Municipal Power Agency.


 
 



 



TABLE III:  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


O-04-02
 
7-11-2002
 
Development of Highland Park Drive.


-
 
1-15-2004
 
Upgrade and expansion to the City Hall and fire station.


 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to North Carolina General Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Prior Unified Development Ordinance





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES



 

G.S. Section
 
Code Section




1-593
 
10.05


7A
 
152.29


7A-227
 
150.114


7A-228
 
150.114


14-4
 
10.19, 130.06, 150.088, 150.115, 150.118, 153.999


14-4(a)
 
10.99


14-27A
 
96.02


14-135 et seq.
 
132.03


14-151
 
Ch. 51 , 51.07


14-202.10
 
153.031


14-269
 
130.01


14-288.4
 
130.01


14-360
 
Ch. 90


14-362.1
 
Ch. 90


14-399
 
93.047


14-414
 
151.007, 151.043


15-27.2
 
150.106


18A, Article 2
 
Charter § 6.2


18A-17
 
Charter § 6.2


18A-20
 
Charter § 6.3


18B, Article 8
 
Charter § 6.2


18B-501
 
Charter § 6.3


18B-701
 
Charter § 6.2


19A-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 90


20-4.01(12b)
 
70.32


20-7
 
70.36


20-122
 
71.03


20-129
 
70.33


20-162
 
72.04


20-162.1
 
72.04


20-169
 
Ch. 70


20-171.1
 
70.02


20-172
 
73.01


20-173
 
73.02


20-174
 
73.03, 73.04


20-175
 
73.05


20-309
 
70.38


Ch. 29
 
153.031


40A
 
Charter § 7.2


42
 
151.081


42, Article 5
 
151.081


42-29
 
150.114


42-30
 
150.114


42-42
 
Ch. 151, App. B


42-42(a)(5)
 
151.081, Ch. 151, App. B


42-42(a)(5a)
 
Ch. 151, App. B


42-43
 
Ch. 151, App. B


42-43(a)(7)
 
151.081, Ch. 151, App. B


42-44
 
Ch. 151, App. B


42-44(a)
 
151.081, Ch. 151, App. B


42-44(a1)
 
151.081, Ch. 151, App. B


42-44(a2)
 
151.081, Ch. 151, App. B


47-30
 
153.382, 153.385


Chapter 53, Article 22
 
153.031


55-420(8)
 
115.02


62-3(17)
 
112.01


65-37 et seq.
 
90.35


Chapter 66, Article 45
 
115.02


66-387(2)
 
115.02


66-387(4)
 
115.02


66-391
 
115.03


66-392
 
115.04


66-406(1)
 
115.02


66-410
 
115.05


66-421
 
115.06


66-422
 
115.06


89A
 
153.121


95-173 through 95-218
 
151.077


105-236
 
35.99


130A, Article 9
 
152.05, 153.121


130A-19
 
93.065


130A-185
 
90.35


130A-290(a)(6)
 
152.05


130A-290(a)(35)
 
152.05


130A-290(a)(36)
 
152.05


130A-336
 
93.003


131E-76
 
153.031


136, Article 9
 
Charter § 7.2


136-44.14
 
153.395


136-66.3(c)
 
Charter § 7.2


136-96
 
153.388


143, Article 21
 
153.121


143, Article 21, Part 6
 
152.01


143, Article 33C
 
96.02, 153.298


143-140
 
151.007, 151.023, Ch. 151, App.B


143-141
 
151.007, 151.023, Ch. 151, App.B


143-141(b)
 
Ch. 151, App. B


143-143.15
 
152.41


143-213(18)
 
52.002, 54.002


143-215.1
 
52.002, 52.056, 54.002, 54.041


143-215.1(b)
 
52.056


143-215.1(d)
 
52.002


143-215.1(g)
 
52.056


143-215.1(h)
 
54.041


143-215.3(a)(14)
 
52.002, 54.002


143-215.6A
 
52.186


143-215.6B
 
52.126, 54.999


143-318.9 et seq.
 
31.01


143-318.12
 
31.02


143B-437.09
 
Ch. 151, App. B


150B
 
153.121


153A-127
 
90.35


153A-275
 
52.001


153A-344.1
 
153.351


153A-365
 
151.132, Ch. 151, App. B


153A-365 through 153A-371
 
151.132, Ch. 151, App. B


153A-366
 
151.132, Ch. 151, App. B


153A-367
 
151.132, Ch. 151, App. B


153A-368
 
151.132, Ch. 151, App. B


153A-369
 
151.132, Ch. 151, App. B


153A-370
 
151.132, Ch. 151, App. B


153A-371
 
151.132, Ch. 151, App. B


159B
 
55.09


160, § 400.5 et seq.
 
153.031


160A, Article 7, Part 2
 
Charter §§ 4.1, 4.2


160A, Article 8
 
152.01


160A, Article 10
 
Charter § 7.1, 53.05, 150.057, 150.087, 150.113


160A, Article 19, Part 3
 
152.01


160A, Article 19, Part 3C
 
153.092, 153.303


160A, Article 19, Part 5
 
152.01


160A, Article 19, Part 6
 
150.071


160A, Article 19, Part 8
 
152.01


160A-31
 
153.351


160A-58.1
 
153.351


160A-63
 
30.02


160A-64
 
30.01


160A-71
 
31.01


160A-71(c)
 
31.03


160A-75
 
31.04


160A-163
 
Charter § 5.1


160A-175
 
10.19, 10.99, 51.99, 153.999


160A-175(b)
 
93.068, 150.999, 153.999


160A-176
 
10.21


160A-179
 
131.02


160A-182
 
Ch. 90


160A-184
 
93.015


160A-189
 
133.02


160A-193
 
10.19, 93.065, 93.069


160A-194
 
Ch. 110


160A-205.3
 
116.01


160A-209(c)(8)
 
90.35


160A-209(c)(9)
 
Ch. 33, 33.03


160A-215
 
35.02


160A-216 et seq.
 
150.057


160A-243(c)
 
Charter § 7.2


160A-300
 
Ch. 70


160A-301
 
Ch. 70


160A-302
 
Ch. 70


160A-303.1
 
93.049


160A-304
 
Ch. 112


160A-312
 
52.001


160A-341 et seq.
 
90.35


160A-361
 
32.01


160A-364
 
153.348


160A-365
 
153.999


160A-372
 
153.370


160A-373
 
153.379, 153.380


160A-375
 
153.999


160A-381
 
Ch. 153, 153.001


160A-382
 
153.001


160A-385.1
 
153.075, 153.121, 153.345, 153.346, 153.348, 153.351—153.353


160A-388
 
153.275


160A-389
 
153.999


160A-393
 
153.281


160A-393(d)
 
153.276


160A-393(k)
 
153.276


160A-400.1 through 160A-400.14
 
153.031


160A-400.9(e)
 
153.276


160A-422
 
153.349


160A-435
 
150.002


160A-439
 
150.101


160A-439(f)
 
150.112


160A-439(i)
 
150.113


160A-441
 
150.050, 150.071


160A-443
 
150.054, 150.084


160A-443(5)
 
150.056, 150.086


160A-443(6)
 
150.057, 150.087


160A-444
 
150.071


160A-446(f)
 
150.054, 150.084


160A-446(g)
 
150.054, 150.084


160A-493(f)
 
150.114


160A-503(10)
 
Ch. 151, App. B


163-279 et seq.
 
Charter § 3.1


164-7
 
10.14


166A-7
 
Ch. 33, 33.03


168-21(2)
 
153.031


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
2010 Code Section




1-1
 
10.01


1-2
 
10.05


1-3
 
10.04


1-4
 
10.07


1-5
 
10.16


1-6
 
10.16


1-7
 
10.19


1-8
 
10.99


1-9
 
10.99


1-10
 
10.20


1-11
 
10.21


1-12
 
10.14


1-13
 
10.22


1-14
 
10.23


1-15
 
10.24


2-1
 
30.01


2-2
 
30.02


2-3
 
30.03


2-20
 
31.01


2-21
 
31.02


2-22
 
31.03


2-23
 
31.04


2-30
 
32.01


2-31
 
32.02


2-32
 
32.03


2-33
 
32.04


2-34
 
32.05


2-35
 
32.06


2-36
 
32.07


2-37
 
32.08


2-38
 
32.09


2-39
 
32.10


2-40
 
32.11


2-50
 
33.01


2-51
 
33.02


2-52
 
33.03


2-53
 
33.04


2-54
 
33.05


2-55
 
33.06


2-56
 
33.07


2-57
 
33.08


2-58
 
33.09


2-59
 
33.10


3-1
 
90.01


3-2
 
90.02


3-3
 
90.03


3-4
 
90.04


3-5
 
90.05


3-20
 
90.20


3-21
 
90.21


3-22
 
90.22


3-23
 
90.35


4-1
 
150.015


4-2
 
150.016


4-3
 
150.017


4-4
 
150.001


4-5
 
150.002


4-6
 
150.003


4-20
 
150.030


4-21
 
150.031


4-22
 
150.032


4-23
 
150.033


4-24
 
150.034


4-25
 
150.035


4-30
 
150.050


4-31
 
150.051


4-32
 
150.052


4-33
 
150.053


4-34
 
150.054, 150.999


4-35
 
150.055


4-36
 
150.056


4-37
 
150.057


4-38
 
150.058


4-50
 
150.070


4-51
 
150.071


4-52
 
150.072


4-53
 
150.073


4-54
 
150.074


4-55
 
150.075


4-56
 
150.076


4-57
 
150.077


4-58
 
150.078


4-59
 
150.079


4-60
 
150.080


4-61
 
150.081


4-62
 
150.082


4-63
 
150.083


4-64
 
150.084, 150.999


4-65
 
150.085


4-66
 
150.086


4-67
 
150.087


4-68
 
150.088


4-69
 
150.089


4-70
 
150.090


4-71
 
150.999


4-76
 
152.01


4-77
 
152.02


4-78
 
152.03


4-79
 
152.04


4-80
 
152.05


4-81
 
152.06


4-82
 
152.07


4-83
 
152.08


4-84
 
152.09


4-85
 
152.10


4-86
 
152.11


4-87
 
152.12


4-88
 
152.99


4-96
 
152.25


4-97
 
152.26


4-98
 
152.27


4-99
 
152.28


4-100
 
152.29


4-111
 
152.40


4-112
 
152.41


4-113
 
152.42


4.5-21
 
113.01


5-1
 
91.01


5-2
 
91.02


5-20
 
91.15


5-21
 
91.16


5-22
 
91.17


5-23
 
91.18


5-24
 
91.19


5-25
 
91.20


5-26
 
91.21


5-27
 
91.22


5-28
 
91.23


5-29
 
91.24


5-30
 
91.25


5-31
 
91.26


5-32
 
91.29


7-1
 
93.001


7-2
 
93.002


7-3
 
93.003


7-4
 
93.015


7-5
 
93.016


7-6
 
93.017


7-20
 
93.045


7-21
 
93.046


7-22
 
93.047


7-23
 
93.048


7-24
 
93.049


7-25
 
93.050


7-26
 
93.051


7-27
 
93.065


7-29
 
93.068, 93.999


7-30
 
93.069


7-31
 
93.070


8-20
 
51.01


8-21
 
51.02


8-22
 
51.03


8-23
 
51.04


8-24
 
51.05


8-25
 
51.06


8-26
 
51.07


8-27
 
51.08


8-28
 
51.09


8-29
 
51.10


8-30
 
51.11


8-36
 
51.25


8-37
 
51.26


8-38
 
51.27


8-39
 
51.28


8-40
 
51.29


8-41
 
51.30


8-42
 
51.99


8-43
 
51.31


8-44
 
51.32


8-50
 
52.001


8-52
 
52.002


8-60
 
52.015


8-61
 
52.016


8-62
 
52.017


8-63
 
52.018


8-64
 
52.019


8-65
 
52.020


8-66
 
52.021


8-67
 
52.022


8-68
 
52.023


8-69
 
52.024


8-70
 
52.025


8-71
 
52.040


8-72
 
52.041


8-73
 
52.042


8-74
 
52.043


8-81
 
52.055


8-82
 
52.056


8-86
 
52.070


8-87
 
52.071


8-88
 
52.072


8-89
 
52.073


8-90
 
52.074


8-91
 
52.075


8-92
 
52.076


8-93
 
52.077


8-94
 
52.078


8-95
 
52.079


8-96
 
52.080


8-97
 
52.081


8-98
 
52.082


8-101
 
52.095


8-102
 
52.096


8-103
 
52.097


8-107
 
52.110


8-108
 
52.111


8-109
 
52.112


8-111
 
52.125


8-112
 
52.999


8-113
 
52.126


8-114
 
52.127


8-119
 
52.140


8-121
 
52.155


8-122
 
52.156


8-123
 
52.157


8-130
 
55.01


8-131
 
55.02


8-132
 
55.03


8-133
 
55.04


8-134
 
55.05


8-135
 
55.06


8-136
 
55.07


8-137
 
55.08


8-138
 
55.09


8-150
 
50.01


8-151
 
50.02


8-152
 
50.03


8-153
 
50.04


8-154
 
50.05


8-155
 
50.06


8-156
 
50.07


8-157
 
50.08


8-158
 
50.09


8-159
 
50.10


8-200
 
53.01


8-201
 
53.02


8-202
 
53.03


8-203
 
53.04


8-204
 
53.05


8-205
 
53.06


8-206
 
53.07


8-207
 
53.08


8-221
 
54.001


8-222
 
54.002


8-223
 
54.003


8-224
 
54.004


8-225
 
54.005


8-226
 
54.006


8-227
 
54.007


8-228
 
54.008


8-229
 
54.009


8-230
 
54.010


8-231
 
54.011


8-241
 
54.025


8-242
 
54.026


8-243
 
54.027


8-244
 
54.028


8-251
 
54.040


8-252
 
54.041


8-261
 
54.055


8-262
 
54.056


8-263
 
54.057


8-264
 
54.058


8-265
 
54.059


8-266
 
54.060


8-267
 
54.061


8-268
 
54.062


8-269
 
54.063


8-270
 
54.064


8-271
 
54.065


8-272
 
54.066


8-273
 
54.067


8-274
 
54.068


8-275
 
54.069


8-276
 
54.070


8-277
 
54.071


8-281
 
54.999


8-282
 
54.999


8-283
 
54.999


8-284
 
54.999


8-285
 
54.999


8-291
 
54.085


8-292
 
54.086


8-293
 
54.087


9-40
 
110.01


9-50
 
111.01


9-51
 
111.02


9-52
 
111.03


9-53
 
111.04


9-54
 
111.05


9-55
 
111.06


9-56
 
111.07


9-57
 
111.08


9-58
 
111.09


9-59
 
111.10


9-60
 
111.11


9-61
 
111.12


9-70
 
112.01


9-79
 
112.02


9-71
 
112.15


9-72
 
112.16


9-73
 
112.17


9-74
 
112.18


9-75
 
112.19


9-76
 
112.30


9-77
 
112.31


9-78
 
112.32


9-80
 
112.45


9-81
 
112.46


10-1
 
130.01


10-2
 
131.01


10-3
 
131.02


10-4
 
133.01


10-5
 
133.02


10-6
 
133.03


10-7
 
133.04


10-8
 
133.05


10-9
 
130.02


10-10
 
132.01


10-11
 
132.02


10-12
 
130.03


10-13
 
131.03


10-14
 
132.03


10-15
 
132.04


10-16
 
132.05


10-17
 
132.06


10-18
 
132.07


10-19
 
132.08


10-20
 
132.20


10-21
 
132.21


10-22
 
132.22


10-23
 
130.04


10-24
 
130.05


10-25
 
133.06, 133.99


10-26
 
130.06


10-27
 
131.04


10-30
 
94.01


10-31
 
94.15


10-32
 
94.16


10-33
 
94.17


10-34
 
94.18


10-35
 
94.30


10-36
 
94.31


10-37
 
92.01


10-38
 
92.02


10-39
 
92.03


10-40
 
92.04


10-41
 
92.05


10-42
 
92.06


10-43
 
92.07, 92.99


10-44
 
92.08


10-45
 
92.09


10-46
 
92.10, 92.99


10-47
 
92.11


11-1
 
34.01


11-2
 
34.02


11-3
 
34.03


11-4
 
34.04


12-1
 
95.01


12-2
 
95.02


12-3
 
95.03


12-4
 
95.04


12-5
 
95.05


12-6
 
95.06


12-7
 
95.07


12-8
 
95.08


12-9
 
95.09


12-10
 
95.10


12-11
 
95.11


12-12
 
95.25


12-13
 
95.26


12-14
 
95.27


12-15
 
95.40


12-16
 
95.41


13-1
 
71.01


13-2
 
71.02


13-3
 
70.01


13-4
 
71.03


13-5
 
71.04


13-6
 
71.05


13-7
 
72.01


13-8
 
72.02


13-10
 
72.15


13-11
 
72.16


13-12
 
70.99


13-13
 
70.03


13-14
 
70.15


13-15
 
70.16


13-20
 
73.01


13-21
 
73.02


13-22
 
73.03


13-23
 
73.04


13-24
 
73.05


13-30
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


13-31
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II


13-32
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


13-34
 
Ch. 75, Sch. IV


13-35
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


13-36
 
Ch. 75, Sch. VI


13-37
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


13-38
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


13-39
 
Ch. 74, Sch. III


13-40
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


13-41
 
Ch. 74, Sch. V


13-42
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VI


13-43
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


13-44
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VI


13-45
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


13-53
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


13-54
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VI


13-58
 
71.06, Ch. 74, Sch. VIII


13-59
 
72.03


13-60
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IX


13-61
 
Ch. 74, Sch. X


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE



 

Prior UDO Section
 
2010 Code Section




1
 
153.001, 153.370


2
 
153.002


3.1
 
153.015


3.2
 
153.016, 153.370


4.1
 
153.030


4.2
 
153.031


5.1
 
153.045


5.2
 
153.046


5.3
 
153.047


5.4
 
153.048


5.5
 
153.049


5.6
 
153.050


5.7
 
153.051


5.8
 
153.052


5.9
 
153.053


5.10
 
153.054


5.11
 
153.055


5.12
 
153.056


5.13
 
153.057


5.14
 
153.058


5.15
 
153.059


5.16
 
153.060


5.17
 
153.061


5.18
 
153.062


5.19
 
153.063


5.20
 
153.064


5.21
 
153.065


5.22
 
153.066


5.23
 
153.067


5.24
 
153.068


5.25
 
153.069


5.26
 
153.070


5.27
 
153.071


5.28
 
153.072


5.29
 
153.073


5.30
 
153.074


5.31
 
153.075


6.1
 
153.090


6.2
 
153.091


6.3
 
153.092


6.5
 
153.093


7.1
 
153.105


7.2
 
153.106


7.3
 
153.107


7.4
 
153.108


7.5
 
153.109


7.6
 
153.110


7.7
 
153.111


7.8
 
153.112


7.9
 
153.113


7.9A
 
153.114


7.10
 
153.115


7.11
 
153.116


7.12
 
153.117


7.13
 
153.118


7.18
 
153.119


7.19
 
153.120


7.20
 
153.121


7.23
 
153.122


8.1
 
153.135


8.2
 
153.136


8.3
 
153.137


8.4
 
153.138


8.5
 
153.139


8.6
 
153.140


8.7
 
153.141


8.8
 
153.142


8.9
 
153.143


8.10
 
153.144


8.11
 
153.145


9.1
 
153.160


9.2
 
153.161


9.3
 
153.162


9.4
 
153.163


9.5
 
153.164


9.6
 
153.165


9.7
 
153.166


9.8
 
153.167


9.9
 
153.168


9.10
 
153.169


9.11
 
153.170


9.12
 
153.171


9.13
 
153.172


10.1
 
153.185


10.2
 
153.186


10.3
 
153.187


10.4
 
153.188


11.1
 
153.200


11.2
 
153.201


11.3
 
153.202


12.1
 
153.215


12.2
 
153.216


12.3
 
153.217


12.4
 
153.218


12.5
 
153.219


12.6
 
153.220


13.1
 
153.235


13.3
 
153.236


13.4
 
153.237


13.5
 
153.238


13.6
 
153.239


13.7
 
153.240


13.8
 
153.241


13.9
 
153.242


13.10
 
153.243


13.11
 
153.244


14.1
 
153.255


14.2
 
153.256


14.3
 
153.257


14.4
 
153.258


14.5
 
153.259


14.6
 
153.260


14.7
 
153.261


14.8
 
153.999


15.1
 
153.275


15.2
 
153.276


15.3
 
153.277


15.4
 
153.278


15.5
 
153.279


15.6
 
153.280


15.7
 
153.281


16.1
 
153.295


16.2
 
153.296


16.3
 
153.297


16.4
 
153.298


16.5
 
153.299


16.6
 
153.300


16.7
 
153.301


16.8
 
153.302


16.9
 
153.303


17.1
 
153.371


17.2
 
153.372


17.3
 
153.373


17.4
 
153.374


17.5
 
153.375


17.6
 
153.376


17.7
 
153.377


17.8
 
153.378


17.9
 
153.379


17.10
 
153.380


17.11
 
153.381


17.12
 
153.382


17.13
 
153.383


17.14
 
153.384


17.15
 
153.385


17.16
 
153.386


17.17
 
153.387


17.18
 
153.388


17.19
 
153.389


17.20
 
153.390


17.21
 
153.391


17.22
 
153.392


17.23
 
153.393


17.24
 
153.394


17.25
 
153.395


17.26
 
153.396


17.27
 
153.397


17.28
 
153.398


20.1
 
153.315


20.2
 
153.316


21.1
 
153.330, 153.370


21.2
 
153.331


21.3
 
153.332


22.1
 
153.345


22.2
 
153.346


22.3
 
153.347


22.4
 
153.348


22.5
 
153.349


22.6
 
153.350


22.7
 
153.351


22.8
 
153.352


22.9
 
153.353


22.10
 
153.354


 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


-
 
10-7-1993
 
71.06


-
 
10-7-1993
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VIII


 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
11-6-1980
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


-
 
8-9-1983
 
71.04, Ch. 75, Sch. I


-
 
9-1-1983
 
130.01


-
 
2-15-1984
 
72.01


-
 
11-15-1984
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


-
 
3-7-1985
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


-
 
8-25-1985
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


-
 
7-10-1986
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


-
 
10-9-1986
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


-
 
11-6-1986
 
51.25—51.29, 51.31, 51.32, 51.99


O-04-86
 
11-6-1986
 
32.01—32.11


O-05-86
 
12-11-1986
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


-
 
2-11-1988
 
Ch. 75, Sch. IV


-
 
6-9-1988
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VI


O-13-88
 
9-8-1988
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VI


O-25-89
 
9-7-1989
 
Ch. 74, Sch. III


O-28-89
 
12-7-1989
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


O-29-89
 
12-7-1989
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


-
 
5-3-1990
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-34-90
 
5-3-1990
 
30.01


-
 
10-4-1990
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-06-91
 
1-10-1991
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


-
 
3-5-1991
 
152.01—152.12, 152.25—152.29, 152.40—152.42, 152.99


CCTA-01-91
 
8-8-1991
 
93.068, 150.054, 150.084


O-9-91
 
12-12-1991
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VI


O-11-91
 
12-12-1991
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-12-92
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-13-92
 
1-9-1992
 
Ch. 74, Sch. III


O-19-92
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-22-93
 
6-3-1993
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-24-93
 
9-2-1993
 
Ch. 74, Sch. III


O-25-93
 
9-2-1993
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-26-93
 
9-2-1993
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-27-93
 
10-7-1993
 
71.06, Ch. 74, Sch. VIII


O-28-93
 
11-4-1993
 
Ch. 75, Sch. IV


O-30-94
 
2-3-1994
 
133.04


O-31-94
 
3-3-1994
 
90.04


O-32-94
 
3-3-1994
 
54.001—54.011, 54.025—54.028, 54.040, 54.041, 54.055—54.071,
54.085—54.087, 54.999


O-35-94
 
7-14-1994
 
113.01


O-38-95
 
12-7-1995
 
Ch. 74, Sch. III


O-44-96
 
8-1-1996
 
130.04


O-47-96
 
- -
 
72.03


O-48-96
 
12-5-1996
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-49-97
 
4-10-1997
 
70.99


O-50-97
 
4-10-1997
 
Ch. 74, Sch. III


O-54-97
 
8-14-1997
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-55-97
 
8-14-1997
 
130.05


O-56-97
 
9-4-1997
 
150.055


O-57-97
 
10-9-1997
 
133.06


O-58-97
 
11-6-1997
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-59-98
 
3-5-1998
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-61-98
 
6-4-1998
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-64-98
 
10-1-1998
 
54.001—54.011, 54.025—54.028, 54.040, 54.041, 54.055, 54.056,
54.058—54.071, 54.085—54.087, 54.999


O-65-98
 
12-10-1998
 
130.06


O-66-98
 
12-10-1998
 
90.05


O-68-98
 
12-10-1998
 
70.15, 70.16


O-69-99
 
5-6-1999
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IX


O-72-99
 
7-1-1999
 
53.01—53.08


O-73-99
 
8-5-1999
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-74-99
 
8-5-1999
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-01-00
 
3-2-2000
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-05-00
 
8-3-2000
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


O-07-01
 
6-1-2001
 
Ch. 74, Sch. X


O-10-01
 
8-2-2001
 
131.04


O-11-01
 
9-6-2001
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-12-01
 
9-6-2001
 
52.001, 52.002, 52.015—52.025, 52.040—52.043, 52.055, 52.056,
52.070—52.082, 52.095—52.097, 52.110—52.112, 52.125—52.127, 52.140,
52.155—52.157


O-01-02
 
4-4-2002
 
131.01


O-02-02
 
5-2-2002
 
35.01—35.05, 35.99


O-04-02
 
7-11-2002
 
TSO Table III


O-05-02
 
7-11-2002
 
Ch. 74, Sch. X


O-06-02
 
9-5-2002
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-07-02
 
10-3-2002
 
TSO Table I


O-08-02
 
10-3-2002
 
111.01, 111.05, 111.09


O-11-02
 
1-9-2003
 
92.01—92.11, 92.99


O-01-03
 
2-13-2003
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-02-03
 
2-13-2003
 
111.09


O-03-03
 
- -2003
 
TSO Table I


O-05-03
 
6-5-2003
 
35.01, 35.05


O-07-03
 
7-17-2003
 
91.20


O-08-03
 
8-14-2003
 
TSO Table I


-
 
1-15-2004
 
TSO Table III


O-01-04
 
2-5-2004
 
TSO Table I


O-03-04
 
4-1-2004
 
91.17


O-05-04
 
6-3-2004
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


-
 
8-5-2004
 
91.20


O-06-04
 
10-7-2004
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-07-04
 
12-9-2004
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II, III, IV


O-01-05
 
5-5-2005
 
TSO Table II


O-02-05
 
6-2-2005
 
50.01, 50.05, 50.09, 50.10


O-05-05
 
7-7-2005
 
93.068, 93.999, 150.999


O-06-05
 
9-1-2005
 
Ch. 75, Sch. IV


O-07-05
 
10-6-2005
 
93.068, 93.999, 150.999


O-01-06
 
4-6-2006
 
TSO Table I


O-02-06
 
4-6-2006
 
114.01—114.09


O-04-06
 
9-7-2006
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-05-06
 
12-14-2006
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-02-07
 
7-12-2007
 
152.01—152.12, 152.25—152.29, 152.40—152.44, 152.55—152.57


O-03-07
 
9-13-2007
 
52.001, 52.002, 52.015—52.025, 52.040—52.043, 52.055, 52.056,
52.070—52.083, 52.095—52.097, 52.110—52.112, 52.125—52.127, 52.140,
52.155—52.157, 52.170—52.172, 52.999


O-04-07
 
9-13-2007
 
133.04


O-05-07
 
10-4-2007
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VI


O-06-07
 
11-1-2007
 
90.06


O-07-07
 
11-1-2007
 
91.29


O-01-08
 
3-6-2008
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-02-08
 
6-5-2008
 
151.001—151.007, 151.020—151.026, 151.040—151.047, 151.060,
151.075—151.081, 151.095—151.099, 151.110, 151.125—151.133,
151.145—151.149, 151.160—151.163, 151.999, Ch. 151, Apps. A, B


-
 
7-29-2008
 
52.185—52.189


-
 
9-1-2008
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


O-05-08
 
9-11-2008
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


O-04-08
 
10-2-2008
 
131.02


ZTA-3-08
 
11-18-2008
 
153.053


O-06-08
 
12-4-2008
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


ZTA-1-2009
 
4-2-2009
 
153.117


ZTA-2-2009
 
4-2-2009
 
153.075


O-02-09
 
8-1-2009
 
TSO Table I


ZTA-4-2009
 
8-6-2009
 
153.075


ZTA-5-2009
 
11-5-2009
 
153.031, 153.110, 153.185


ZTA-6-2009
 
1-7-2010
 
153.031, 153.110


ZTA-1-2010
 
5-6-2010
 
153.169, 153.173


O-03-10
 
5-6-2010
 
TSO Table I


ZTA-2-2010
 
6-3-2010
 
153.112


ZTA-3-2010
 
7-1-2010
 
153.117


-
 
- -
 
96.01, 96.02, 96.99


-
 
- -
 
70.30—70.40


-
 
- -
 
51.45—51.47


O-05-10
 
12-2-2010
 
70.99


O-06-10
 
12-2-2010
 
72.04


O-07-10
 
12-2-2010
 
30.15


O-01-11
 
1-6-2011
 
Adopting Ordinance


O-02-11
 
5-5-2011
 
150.059


ZTA-1-2011
 
5-5-2011
 
153.053


ZTA-2-2011
 
7-11-2011
 
153.112, 153.115, 153.116


O-05-12
 
9-13-2012
 
95.12


ZTA-1-2013
 
2-7-2013
 
153.031, 153.113


–
 
4-4-2013
 
153.238


O-01-13
 
5-2-2013
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-04-13
 
7-11-2013
 
50.11


–
 
9-12-2013
 
93.047


ZTA-3-2013
 
10-3-2013
 
153.275—153.281


–
 
1-9-2014
 
97.01—97.14


O-01-14
 
2-6-2014
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-02-14
 
2-6-2014
 
114.01 —114.09


O-02-14
 
6-5-2014
 
115.01 —115.06


ZTA-2-2014
 
7-10-2014
 
153.117 , 153.258


  (O-04-14)
 
7-10-2014
 
153.117 , 153.258


O-05-14
 
7-10-2014
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


O-06-14
 
7-10-2014
 
52.001 , 52.002 , 52.015 —52.025 , 52.040 —52.043 , 52.055 , 52.056 ,
52.070 —52.083 , 52.095 —52.097 , 52.110 —52.112 , 52.125 —52.127 ,
52.140 , 52.155 —52.157 , 52.170 , 52.171 , 52.999


O-08-14
 
9-4-2014
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VI


O-09-14
 
11-6-2014
 
70.31 —70.37 , 70.40


O-10-14
 
11-6-2014
 
90.06


ZTA-3-2014
 
11-13-2014
 
153.031, 153.117, 153.238


O-11-14
 
12-5-2014
 
50.05 —50.07 , 50.99


ZTA-4-2014
 
1-7-2015
 
153.215


–
 
8-13-2015
 
72.05


–
 
10-1-2015
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


ZTA-1-2016
 
2-4-2016
 
153.170, 153.172


–
 
4-6-2016
 
153.031, 153.106


O-03-16
 
6-2-2016
 
35.15


O-04-16
 
6-2-2016
 
90.02


ZTA-2-2016
 
6-2-2016
 
153.315


ZTA-3-2016
 
6-2-2016
 
153.108


ZTA-4-2016
 
7-7-2016
 
153.031, 153.112, 153.113, 153.115, 153.117, 153.238


ZTA-5-2016
 
9-1-2016
 
153.120


ZTA-7-2016
 
1-5-2017
 
153.074, 153.113, 153.114


–
 
3-2-2017
 
150.100—150.118


O-02-17
 
3-2-2017
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-04-17
 
4-6-2017
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I—IV, VI


O-03-2017
 
6-1-2017
 
153.116


O-04-2017
 
6-1-2017
 
153.174


O-06-2017
 
6-1-2017
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III, V, VI, VII


O-07-2017
 
6-29-2017
 
50.01, 50.05, 50.07


O-13-2017
 
8-3-2017
 
116.01


O-15-17
 
10-5-2017
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


O-16-17
 
11-2-2017
 
153.315


O-17-17
 
11-2-2017
 
153.031


O-18-2017
 
12-7-2017
 
93.016, 130.05


O-19-2017
 
12-7-2017
 
111.09, 111.12


O-1-2018
 
3-1-2018
 
153.116


O-02-18
 
4-5-2018
 
153.053


O-03-18
 
4-5-2018
 
153.121


O-04-2018
 
4-5-2018
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I, II, VII, Ch. 75, Sch. IV


- -
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I, II, VII


- -
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


O-07-2018
 
6-28-2018
 
93.066—93.068


O-09-18
 
9-4-2018
 
90.06—90.09, 90.20—90.23, 90.35, 93.049, 94.30, 130.05


O-08-18
 
10-4-2018
 
130.07


O-11-18
 
10-4-2018
 
93.015, 93.016


O-12-18
 
10-4-2018
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


O-01-2019
 
4-4-2019
 
Ch. 74, Schs. VII, X


O-03-2019
 
6-6-2019
 
153.185


O-04-19
 
6-6-2019
 
153.170


O-05-19
 
6-6-2019
 
72.03


 
 
 
 
 




 


