CODE OF ORDINANCES MOREHEAD CITY, NORTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 
Adopted: October 10, 2017 
Effective: October 10, 2017 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
MOREHEAD CITY, NORTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Gerald A. "Jerry" Jones, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
George W. Ballou 
Keri V. McCann 
William F. Taylor 
Harvey N. Walker, Jr. 
Diane C. Warrender 
City Council 
____________ 
Ryan T. Eggleston 
City Manager 
____________ 
Derek Taylor 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Cathy Campbell 
City Clerk ;oh1\MOREHEAD CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Gerald A. "Jerry" Jones, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
George W. Ballou 
William F. Taylor 
Demus L. Thompson 
Harvey N. Walker, Jr. 
Diane C. Warrender 
City Council 
____________ 
David S. Whitlow 
City Manager 
____________ 
Derek Taylor 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jeanne Giblin 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1993 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1993 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SESSION LAWS SL:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SESSION LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE SLCT:1 CODE CD1:1 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE UDO:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel Walker, Code Attorney, and Amy Norton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Jeanne Giblin, former City Clerk, and Mr. David Whitlow, City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina. 2017. 
TOWN OF MOREHEAD CITY
ORDINANCE 2017-O-32 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF MOREHEAD CITY, NORTH CAROLINA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Morehead City, North Carolina," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 32 and the Unified Development Ordinance, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 12, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished according to code Section 1-7. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the town council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 12, 2017 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
Passed and adopted by the Town Council this 10 th day of October, 2017. 
/s/   
      Gerald A. Jones, Jr., Mayor   Attest: 
/s/   
      Cathy Campbell City Clerk   September 12, 2017: Call for Public Hearing 
October 10, 2017: Public Hearing 
Council Action: Commissioner(s) Ballou, Taylor, Thompson, Walker and Warrender voting for; Commissioner(s) None voting against; and Commissioner(s) None absent. 
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Town Council, held on the 10 th day of October, 2017. 
/s/  Cathy Campbell 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Legislation Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 1 Ord. No. 2017-O-29  9-12-2017 Include Ord. No. 2017-O-32 10-10-2017 Include Ord. No. 2017-O-33 10-10-2017 Include Ord. No. 2017-O-34 10-10-2017 Include Ord. No. 2017-O-37  1-10-2018 Include Supp. No. 2 Ord. No. 2018-O-01  3-13-2018 Include Ord. No. 2018-O-02  3-13-2018 Include Ord. No. 2018-O-03  3-13-2018 Include Supp. No. 3 Ord. No. 2018-O-09  6-18-2018 Include Ord. No. 2018-O-10  6-18-2018 Include Supp. No. 4 Ord. No. 2018-O-12  8-14-2018 Include Ord. No. 2018-O-13  8-14-2018 Include Ord. No. 2018-O-15  8-14-2018 Include Ord. No. 2018-O-17 11-13-2018 Include Supp. No. 5 Ord. No. 2018-O-22 12-11-2018 Include Ord. No. 2018-O-23 12-11-2018 Include Supp. No. 6 Ord. No. 2019-O-01  2-12-2019 Include Ord. No. 2019-O-07  4- 9-2019 Include Ord. No. 2019-O-08  4- 9-2019 Include Ord. No. 2019-O-09  4- 9-2019 Include  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
1969 SESSION 
RATIFIED BILL 
CHAPTER 879; HOUSE BILL 1102 
AN ACT TO REVISE AND CONSOLIDATE THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MOREHEAD CITY AND TO REPEAL PRIOR CHARTER ACTS 
    The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The town charter is derived from Ch. 879 of the 1969 session of the General Assembly of North Carolina, as amended. The effective date was July 1, 1969. A uniform system of capitalization has been used. Amendments are indicated by history notes following the sections affected. 
Ordinance No. 1982-27, adopted on September 14, 1982, provided that the form of government of the Town of Morehead City be changed to the council-manager form. The title of its governing body was changed to "council," but members of the council are called "commissioners." The council is authorized to appoint a city manager to be the administrative head of the town government. Pursuant to § 6(1) of Ordinance No. 1982-27, wherever the terms "board of commissioners" and "board" appear in the charter, they have been changed to "council." 
Because of local practice, the word "city" is used in the codified ordinances. 
State Constitution reference- Limitation on local, private and special legislation, Art. II, § 24. 
State Law reference- Municipal charters, G.S. 160A-1 et seq. 

SECTION 1. - [CHARTER REVISED AND CONSOLIDATED.] 
    The charter of the Town of Morehead City is hereby revised and consolidated to read as follows: 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND CORPORATE POWERS 

Sec. 1.1. - Incorporation and general powers. 
    The Town of Morehead City shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the "Town of Morehead City," and shall continue to be vested with all property and rights which now belong to the town; shall have perpetual succession; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at pleasure; may sue and be sued; may contract, may acquire and hold all such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to it, or otherwise acquired by it, and may from time to time hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; and shall have and may exercise in conformity with this charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature. 
State Law reference- Corporate powers, G.S. 160A-11 et seq. 
Sec. 1.2. - Exercise of powers. 
    All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the town, its officers, agencies, or employees, shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter, or, if this charter makes no provision, as provided by ordinance or resolution of the council and as provided by the general laws of North Carolina pertaining to municipal corporations. 
State Law reference- Cities and towns, G.S. Ch. 160A; delegation and exercise of the general police power, G.S. 160A-174 et seq. 
Sec. 1.3. - Enumerated powers not exclusive. 
    The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or those appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the Town of Morehead City shall have and may exercise all powers which are granted to municipal corporations by the general laws of North Carolina and all powers which, under the constitution of North Carolina, it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate. 
State Law reference- Exercise of corporate power, G.S. 160A-12. 
ARTICLE II. - CORPORATE BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 2.1. - Existing corporate boundaries. 
    The corporate boundaries of the Town of Morehead City, until changed in accordance with law, shall include the following territory: All of the land and water area as shown on the "Official Map of the Town of Morehead City," made by Philip K. Ball, February, 1955, and recorded in Map Book 3, page 100, Carteret County registry, as amended by subsequent annexations as follows: 
    All that certain land and water area being former Cecil L. Nelson and Viola J. Nelson property as shown on map of Philip K. Ball, March, 1958, recorded [in] Map Book 4, page 51, Carteret County registry; 
    All of that certain land and water area abutting the Intercoastal [Intracoastal] Waterway, and including the port facilities, as shown on map of Philip K. Ball, August, 1965, Map Book 6, page 71, Carteret County registry; 
    The R.E.A. property as described in annexation ordinance, Book 154, page 103, Carteret County registry, and as defined by metes and bounds in map of J.G. Hassell and recorded in Map Book 2, page 187, Carteret County registry; 
    The former Gertrude W. Laughton property as defined in final judgment Town of Morehead City versus Gertrude et als. [sic], property on north side of Calico Creek and defined by metes and bounds, final judgment recorded in Book 251, page 289, Carteret County registry; 
    Former Gertrude W. Laughton property of eleven and forty-five hundredths (11.45) acres on the Crab Point Loop Road as described by metes and bounds in deed dated February 1, 1967, from Gertrude Laughton to the Town of Morehead City, as recorded in Book 285, page 35, Carteret County registry; 
    The W.C. Flowers property on Old U.S. Highway 70 and known and designated as all of lots thirty-two (32) and thirty-three (33) of the Rex K. Burton [Rex K. Bruton] Subdivision as recorded in Map Book 1, page 289, Carteret County registry. 
State Law reference- Corporate limits, G.S. 160A-21 et seq. 
Sec. 2.2. - Extension of corporate boundaries. 
    All extensions of the corporate boundaries shall be governed by the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
Editor's note- Ordinances extending corporate boundaries that were previously found in unofficial Section 2.1.1 of this Charter are now set out in appendix VII to this volume, along with subsequently adopted annexation ordinances. 
State Law reference- Extension of corporate limits, G.S. 160A-29 et seq. 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 

Sec. 3.1. - Composition of council. 
    The council shall consist of five (5) members to be elected by the qualified voters of the town voting at large in the manner provided in Article IV. 
Sec. 3.2. - Mayor and mayor pro tempore. 
    The mayor shall be elected by and from the qualified voters of the town voting at large in the manner provided in Article IV. The mayor shall be the official head of the town government and shall preside at all meetings of the council. Where there is an equal division upon a question, or the appointment of officers, the mayor shall determine the matter by his vote, but he shall vote in no other case. The mayor shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are or may be conferred upon him by the general laws of North Carolina, by this charter, and by the ordinances of the town. The council shall choose one (1) of its number to act as mayor pro tempore, and he shall perform the duties of the mayor in the mayor's absence or disability. The mayor pro tempore as such shall have no fixed term of office, but shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the remaining members of the council. 
State Law reference- Mayor to preside over council, G.S. 160A-69; mayor pro tempore, disability of mayor, G.S. 160A-70. 
Sec. 3.3. - Terms; qualifications; vacancies. 
(a)  The members of the council shall serve for terms of four (4) years, except as provided in Article IV, and the mayor shall serve for a term of four (4) years, beginning the day and hour of the organizational meeting following their election; provided they shall serve until their successors are elected and qualify. 
(b)  No person shall be eligible to be a candidate or be elected as mayor or as a member of the council or to serve in such capacity unless he is a resident and a qualified voter of the town. 
(c)  In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor or council, the council shall by majority vote appoint some qualified person to fill the same for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, §§ 1-3, 3-10-2015) 
State Law reference- Vacancies in elective municipal offices, G.S. 160A-63. 
Sec. 3.4. - Compensation of mayor and commissioners. 
    The mayor shall receive for his services such salary as the council shall determine, but no reduction in his salary shall be made to take effect during the term for which it is voted. The council may establish a salary for its members which may be increased or reduced. 
Sec. 3.5. - Organization of council; oaths of office. 
    The council shall meet and organize for the transaction of business at the first regular meeting following each biennial election. Before entering upon their offices, the mayor and each commissioner shall take, subscribe, and have entered upon the minutes of the council the following oath of office: 
"I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution and laws of North Carolina not inconsistent therewith, and that I will faithfully perform the duties of the office of ___________, on which I am about to enter, according to my best skill and ability; so help me, God." 
Editor's note- The oath in N.C. Const. Art. VI, § 7, reads as follows: "I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and maintain the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the Constitution and laws of North Carolina not inconsistent therewith, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of my office as ___________, so help me God." 
State Law reference- Oath of office is to be taken by elected and appointed officers, G.S. 160A-61; general laws supplementary to charters, G.S. 160A-3. 
Sec. 3.6. - Meetings of council. 
(a)  The council shall fix suitable times for its regular meetings, which shall be as often as once monthly. Special meetings may be held on the call of the mayor or a majority of the council, and those not joining in the call shall be notified in writing. Any business may be transacted at a special meeting that might be transacted at a regular meeting. 
(b)  All meetings of the council shall be open to the public. The council shall not by executive session or otherwise formally consider or vote upon any question in private session. 
State Law reference- Special meetings called by mayor, mayor pro tempore or two (2) members of council, G.S. 160A-71; meetings of public bodies, G.S. 143-318.9 et seq. 
Sec. 3.7. - Quorum; votes. 
(a)  A majority of the members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Three (3) affirmative votes, which may include the vote of the mayor in the event of equal division among the commissioners[,] shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance, or any resolution or motion having the effect of an ordinance. All other matters to be voted upon shall be decided by a majority vote of those present and voting. 
State Law reference- Quorum, G.S. 160A-74. 
Sec. 3.8. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
    The adoption, amendment, repeal, pleading, or proving of ordinances shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the general laws of North Carolina not inconsistent with this charter. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the minutes of the council. The enacting clauses of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the council of the Town of Morehead City." All ordinances and resolutions shall take effect upon adoption unless otherwise provided therein. 
State Law reference- Ordinances generally, G.S. 160A-75 et seq., 160A-174 et seq. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTION PROCEDURE 

Sec. 4.1. - Regular municipal elections. 
    Regular municipal elections shall be held at the time provided in G.S. section 163-279. In each election year, there shall be elected a mayor to serve for a term of four (4) years commencing with the 2017 mayoral election. In the regular election in 1971, there shall be elected five (5) commissioners, and the three (3) candidates for commissioner who receive the largest numbers of votes shall be declared elected for terms of four (4) years, and the two (2) candidates for commissioner who receive the next largest numbers of votes shall be declared elected for terms of two (2) years. In the regular election in 1973, and quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected two (2) commissioners to serve for terms of four (4) years. In the regular election in 1975, and quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected three (3) commissioners to serve for terms of four (4) years. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 3, 3-10-2015) 
Editor's note- G.S. 163-279 requires that the election be held in November. 
Sec. 4.2. - Voting. 
    Each voter shall be entitled to vote for one (1) candidate for mayor and for five (5) candidates for commissioner. The candidate for mayor who receives the largest number of votes cast for mayor shall be declared elected. The five (5) candidates for commissioner who receive the largest numbers of votes cast for commissioner shall be declared elected. 
State Law reference- Determination of election results, tie votes, G.S. 163-292. 
Sec. 4.3. - Filing of candidates. 
    Each qualified person who would offer himself as a candidate for the office of mayor or commissioner shall file with the Carteret County Board of Elections a statement giving notice of his candidacy in substantially the following form: 
    "I, ___________, hereby file notice that I am a candidate for election to the office of ___________ in the [Year] Municipal Elections to be held in Morehead City, North Carolina on [Date], and I request that my name appear on the official ballot for such office. I also certify that I am a resident and qualified voter of the Town of Morehead City, residing at ___________. 
Date: ________." 
(Signature) 
(Ord. No. 2007-55, 11-7-2007) 
Sec. 4.4. - Ballots. 
    No names other than those of candidates who have properly filed notice as herein required shall be printed upon the ballots for any municipal election. 
Sec. 4.5. - Regulation of elections. 
    All municipal elections shall be conducted in accordance with the general laws of North Carolina relating to municipal elections, except as otherwise herein provided. 
State Law reference- Municipal elections, G.S. 163-279 et seq.; qualifications of voters, G.S. 163-54 et seq. 
ARTICLE V. - TOWN ATTORNEY 

Sec. 5.1. - Appointment; qualifications; term; compensation. 
    The council shall appoint a town attorney who shall be an attorney at law licensed to engage in the practice of law in North Carolina and who need not be a resident of the town during his tenure. The town attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the board and shall receive such compensation as the council shall determine. 
State Law reference- Defense of employees and officers, G.S. 160A-167; municipal attorney generally, G.S. 160A-173. 
Sec. 5.2. - Duties of town attorney. 
    It shall be the duty of the town attorney to prosecute and defend suits for and against the town; to advise the mayor, council, and other town officials with respect to the affairs of the town; to draw all legal documents relating to the affairs of the town; to draw proposed ordinances when requested to do so; to inspect and pass upon all agreements, contracts, franchises and other instruments with which the town may be concerned; to attend all meetings of the council; and to perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position of town attorney. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Secs. 6.1-6.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 6.1-6.3, relative to the town clerk, town tax collector and town accountant, respectively, have been deleted pursuant to Ordinance No. 1982-27, § 6(2), September 14, 1982. 
Sec. 6.4. - Consolidation of functions. 
    The council may consolidate any two (2) or more of the positions of town clerk, town tax collector, and town accountant, or may assign the functions of any one (1) or more of these positions to the holder or holders of any other of these positions. 
Sec. 6.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Ordinance No. 1982-27, § 6(2), September 14, 1982, § 6.5 of the Charter, relative to the delegation of administrative authority, has been deleted. 
Sec. 6.6. - City manager-Office created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of G.S. 160A-101 and 160A-106 regarding altering its form of government and of G.S. 160A-147 [160A-146] granting the board of commissioners power to create offices and positions in order to promote orderly and efficient administration, the board of commissioners of the town hereby amends its form of government to the council-manager form, changes its governing body to the title "council," and authorizes the appointment by the council of a city manager to be the administrative head of the town government. 
(Ord. No. 1982-27, § 1, 9-14-1982) 
Sec. 6.7. - Same-Appointment; term; compensation. 
(a)  The city manager shall be appointed with regard to merit only and need not be a resident of the town when appointed, provided, however, that the city manager, within three (3) months of his appointment, shall live within the municipal limits of the town. The mayor or any member of the council shall not be eligible for appointment or act as city manager during their [sic] term of office. 
(b)  The city manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the council and shall receive such compensation as the council by ordinance may determine. 
(Ord. No. 1982-27, §§ 2, 3, 9-14-1982) 
State Law reference- Qualifications for appointive office, G.S. 160A-60. 
Sec. 6.8. - Same-Duties. 
    The city manager shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  As chief administrative officer of the town government, he shall be responsible to the council for the effective and efficient management of the town. The manager shall have direct supervision over all departments, department heads, and officers of the town except the town attorney. 
(b)  Attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom. 
(c)  Recommend to the council such measures and policies as he may deem necessary or expedient and make investigations, studies and reports concerning town affairs as the council may direct. 
(d)  Keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition of the town and its future financial needs and perform such other financial and fiscal control duties as may be required for the sound fiscal management of the town. 
(e)  Prepare and submit a proposed annual budget to the council. 
(f)  See that all laws and ordinances of the town are enforced. 
(g)  Appoint and remove all department heads and other officers and employees of the town except the town attorney and the tax collector. Such appointments shall be made on the basis of merit only and in accordance with ordinances or other regulations applicable thereto. 
(h)  The city manager shall perform such other duties not inconsistent with law as shall be prescribed by the town charter, ordinances, resolutions, or directives of the council and by the provisions of section 160A-148(1) through (8) inclusive of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 1982-27, § 4, 9-14-1982) 
Sec. 6.9. - Limitation on commissioners. 
    Commissioners (council members) will deal with administrative matters and with officers and employees through the city manager and will not bypass the line of authority. 
(Ord. No. 1982-27, § 5, 9-14-1982) 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE AND TAXATION 

Sec. 7.1. - Custody of town money. 
    All moneys received by the town for or in connection with the business of the town government shall be paid promptly into the town depository or depositories. Such institutions shall be designated by the council in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by the General Statutes of North Carolina. All interest on moneys belonging to the town shall accrue to the benefit of the town. All moneys belonging to the town shall be disbursed only in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Fiscal Control Act. 
Editor's note- The Municipal Fiscal Control Act has been superseded by the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, in G.S. 159-7 et seq. 
Sec. 7.2. - Independent audit. 
    As soon as practicable after the close of each fiscal year, an independent audit shall be made of all books and accounts of the town government by a certified public accountant or a qualified public accountant registered under Chapter 93 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, who shall have no personal interest directly or indirectly in the affairs of the town or of any of its officers. The council shall select the public accountant, and the results of such audit shall be made available for inspection by any interested citizen of the town, and may be published if so ordered by the council. 
Sec. 7.3. - Limitation of tax for general purposes. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 160-402, for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to the proper government of the town, the council may annually levy and collect ad valorem property taxes at such rate as it deems necessary. 
Editor's note- G.S. 160-402 limited the tax rate, notwithstanding any other law, general or special. For current law, see G.S. 160A-209, which does not contain such proviso, and G.S. 160A-5 on the effect of citations to the former law. 
ARTICLE IX. - POLICE 

Sec. 9.1. - Jurisdiction extended. 
(a)  The jurisdiction of the police force is hereby extended to include all territory outside and within one (1) mile of the corporate limits, and all members of the police force shall have within such territory all rights, power and authority as they have within the corporate limits. 
(b)  The jurisdiction of the police is hereby extended to include all town-owned property and facilities whether located within or outside the corporate limits, and all members of the police force shall have upon and within such property and facilities all rights, power and authority as they have within the corporate limits. 
Sec. 9.2. - Effect of ordinances on town property. 
    All applicable ordinances of the town shall have full force and effect upon and within all property and facilities owned by the city, whether located within or outside the corporate limits. 
State Law reference- Ordinances effective on city property outside limits, G.S. 160A-176. 
Sec. 9.3. - Effect of ordinances on certain waters. 
    All applicable ordinances of the town shall have full force and effect upon the waters of Bogue Sound, Calico Creek, and Newport River, a distance of three hundred (300) yards in parallel lines from the corporate limits at the respective shorelines, subject, however, to the constitution and laws of the United States pertaining to the rights of the United States government over navigable waters. 
ARTICLE X. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 10.1. - Assessment of costs. 
    In addition to any authority which is now or may hereafter be granted by general law to the town for making sidewalk improvements, the council is hereby authorized to order to be made or to make sidewalk improvements or repairs according to standards and specifications of the town, and to assess the total cost thereof against abutting property owners. In ordering sidewalk improvements or repairs under authority of this section, the council shall comply with the procedure provided by Article 9, Chapter 160 of the General Statutes, except those provisions relating to the petition of property owners and the sufficiency thereof. The effect of levying assessments under authority of this section shall for all purposes be the same as if the assessments were levied under authority of Article 9, Chapter 160 of the General Statutes. 
Editor's note- G.S. Ch. 160, Art. 9, is repealed. For current law see G.S. 160A-216 et seq. and 160A-5. 
ARTICLE XI. - CLAIMS AGAINST THE TOWN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Periods for commencement of certain actions, G.S. 1-46 et seq.; waiver of immunity through insurance purchase, G.S. 160A-485. 

Sec. 11.1. - Presentation of claims; suit upon claims. 
(a)  [Reserved.] 
(b)  No action shall be instituted against the town on account of damages to or compensation for real property taken or used by the town for any public purpose, or for the ejectment of the town therefrom, or to remove a cloud upon the title thereof, unless, within two (2) years after such alleged use, the owner, his executor, administrator, guardian, or next friend, shall have given notice in writing to the council of the claim, stating in the notice the date that the alleged use commenced, a description of property alleged to have been used, and the amount of the damage or compensation claimed. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) [subsection (b)] of this section, if a complainant suffers from physical or mental incapacity that renders it impossible for him to give notice, his action shall not be barred if notice of claim is given by him or on his behalf within six (6) months after the termination of his incapacity; provided that minority shall not of itself constitute physical or mental incapacity. If the complainant is a minor, his action shall not be barred if notice of claim is given on his behalf within three (3) years after the happening or the infliction of the injury complained of; or, if the minor suffers from physical or mental incapacity that renders it impossible for him to give notice, his action shall not be barred if notice of claim is given on his behalf within six (6) months after termination of the incapacity, or within three (3) years after the happening or the infliction of the injury complained of, whichever is the longer period. The town may at any time request the appointment of a next friend to represent any person having a potential claim against the town and known to be suffering from physical or mental incapacity. 
Editor's note- Pursuant to G.S. 1-539.16, subsection (a) of the above section has been deleted. 
Sec. 11.2. - Settlement of claims. 
    The council may authorize the town attorney to settle claims against the town for (1) personal injuries or damages to property when the amount involved does not exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and does not exceed the actual loss sustained, including loss of time, medical expenses, and any other expense actually incurred and (2) the taking of small portions of private property which are needed for the rounding of corners at intersections of streets, when the amount involved in any such settlement does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and does not exceed the actual loss sustained. Settlement of a claim by the town attorney pursuant to this section shall constitute a complete release of the town from any and all damages sustained by the person involved in such settlement in any manner arising out of the accident, occasion, or taking complained of. 
SECTION 2. - [PURPOSE.] 
    The purpose of this act is to revise the charter of the Town of Morehead City and to consolidate herein certain acts concerning the property, affairs, and government of the town. It is intended to continue without interruption those provisions of prior acts which are consolidated into this act, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued are preserved and may be enforced. 
SECTION 3. - [PROVISIONS SAVED FROM REPEAL.] 
    This act shall not be deemed to repeal, modify, nor in any manner to affect any of the following acts, portions of acts, or amendments thereto, whether or not such acts, portions of acts, or amendments are expressly set forth herein: 
(a)  Any acts concerning the property, affairs, or government of public schools in the Town of Morehead City; 
(b)  Any acts validating, confirming, approving, or legalizing official proceedings, actions, contracts, or obligations of any kind; 
(c)  Any acts relating to the operation or use of revenues of alcoholic beverage control stores. 
SECTION 4. - [SPECIFIC REPEALER.] 
(a)  The following acts or portions of acts, having served the purposes for which enacted, or having been consolidated into this act, are hereby repealed: 
Chapter 172, Private Laws, 1860-61 (Regular Session) 
Chapter 111, Private Laws, 1887 
Chapter 234, Private Laws, 1889 
Chapter 263, Private Laws, 1889 
Chapter 248, Private Laws, 1893 
Chapter 513, Public Laws, 1899 
Chapter 96, Public Laws, 1905 
Chapter 254, Private Laws, 1905 
Chapter 291, Private Laws, 1905 
Chapter 477, Public Laws, 1909 
Chapter 117, Private Laws, 1911 
Chapter 242, Public-Local Laws, 1913 (Extra Session) 
Chapter 455, Public-Local Laws, 1915 
Chapter 783, Public-Local Laws, 1915 
Chapter 67, Private Laws, 1921 (Extra Session) 
Chapter 245, Private Laws, 1923 
Chapter 202, Private Laws, 1925 
Chapter 174, Private Laws, 1927 
Chapter 128, Private Laws, 1929 
Chapter 141, Private Laws, 1929 
Chapter 77, Private Laws, 1931 
Chapter 71, Private Laws, 1933 
Chapter 158, Private Laws, 1933 
Chapter 175, Public-Local Laws, 1933 
Chapter 196, Private Laws, 1933 
Chapter 237, Private Laws, 1933 
Chapter 207, Public-Local Laws, 1935 
Chapter 381, Public-Local Laws, 1939 
Chapter 474, Public-Local Laws, 1939 
Chapter 493, Public-Local Laws, 1939 
Chapter 3, Private Laws, 1941 
Chapter 420, Session Laws, 1943 
Chapter 627, Session Laws, 1947 
Chapter 726, Session Laws, 1949 
Chapter 804, Session Laws, 1949 
Chapter 598, Session Laws, 1951 
Chapter 331, Session Laws, 1953 
Chapter 657, Session Laws, 1953 
Chapter 517, Session Laws, 1955 
Chapter 1356, Session Laws, 1955 
Chapter 629, Session Laws, 1957 
Chapter 716, Session Laws, 1957 
Chapter 694, Session Laws, 1963 
(b)  The following acts, which have been superseded by application of the Judicial Department Act of 1965 in the County of Carteret, are hereby repealed: 
Chapter 59, Private Laws, 1924 (Extra Session) 
Chapter 924, Session Laws, 1953 
Chapter 991, Session Laws, 1957 
SECTION 5. - [RIGHTS PROTECTED.] 
    No provision of this act is intended, nor shall be construed, to affect in any way any rights or interests (whether public or private): 
(a)  Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provisions of law repealed by this act; 
(b)  Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in reliance upon, action heretofore taken (including the adoption of ordinances or resolutions) pursuant to or within the scope of any provision of law by this act. 
SECTION 6. - [LAWS NOT REVIVED.] 
    No law heretofore repealed expressly or by implication, and no law granting authority which has been exhausted, shall be revived by: 
(a)  The repeal herein of any act repealing such law, or 
(b)  Any provision of this act that disclaims an intention to repeal or affect enumerated or designated laws. 
SECTION 7. - [ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, RULES; PENDING ACTIONS.] 
(a)  All existing ordinances and resolutions of the Town of Morehead City, and all existing rules or regulations of departments or agencies of the Town of Morehead City, not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, shall continue in full force and effect until repealed, modified or amended. 
(b)  No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal, judicial or administrative, or otherwise) pending at the effective date of this act by or against the Town of Morehead City or any of its departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this act. 
SECTION 8. - SEVERABILITY. 
    If any provision of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are declared to be severable. 
SECTION 9. - [GENERAL REPEALER.] 
    All laws and clauses of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
SECTION 10. - [EFFECTIVE DATE.] 
    This act shall be effective on July 1, 1969. In the General Assembly read three (3) times and ratified, this the sixteenth day of June, 1969. 
    /s/ ___________ 
H. P. Taylor, Jr. 
President of the Senate 
    /s/ ___________ 
Earl W. Vaughn 
Speaker of the House of Representatives 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Title Date Section  Section 
this Charter Ord. No. 1982-27 9-14-1982 1 6.6 2 6.7 3 6.7 4 6.8 5 6.9 Ord. No. 2007-55 11-7-2007 4.3 Ord. No. 2015-06 3-10-2015 1 3.3 2 3.3 3 3.3 3 4.1  
PART II - SESSION LAWS 
Relevant to Morehead City, North Carolina 
SESSION LAW 2008-23. - CHRONIC VIOLATOR NOTICE 
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA 
SESSION 2007 
SESSION LAW 2008-23 
SENATE BILL 1636 
    An act to authorize the town of Morehead City and the City of Wilson to give annual notice to chronic violators of the town's public nuisance ordinance. 
    The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts: 
SECTION 1. Section 2 of S.L. 2005-44, as amended by S.L. 2007-3 and S.L. 2007-254, reads as rewritten: 
    "Section 2. This act applies to the County of New Hanover, the Cities of Wilmington and Wilson,and the Towns of Cornelius, Davidson, Matthews and Morehead City only." 
SECTION 2. This act is effective when it becomes law. 
    In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 30th day of June, 2008. 
SESSION LAW 2005-44. - CHRONIC VIOLATOR NOTICE[1] 
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA 
SESSION 2005 
SESSION LAW 2005-44 
HOUSE BILL 962 
    An act authorizing the Town of Matthews to give annual notice to chronic violators of the town's public nuisance ordinance. 
    The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts: 
SECTION 1. A municipality may notify a chronic violator of the municipality's public nuisance ordinance that, if the violator's property is found to be in violation of the ordinance, the municipality shall, without further notice in the calendar year in which notice is given, take action to remedy the violation, and the expense of the action shall become a lien upon the property and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. The initial annual notice shall be served by registered or certified mail. A chronic violator is a person who owns property whereupon, in the previous calendar year, the municipality gave notice of violation at least three times under any provision of the public nuisance ordinance. 
SECTION 2. This act applies to the Town of Matthews only. 
SECTION 3. This act is effective when it becomes law. 
    In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 16th day of May, 2005. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Session Law 2005-44 is included only because the scope of its application was expanded, by Session Law 2008-23, to include Morehead City. 

SESSION LAW 2005-305. - OMNIBUS LOCAL LAWS 
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA 
SESSION 2005 
SESSION LAW 2005-305 
HOUSE BILL 328 
    An act to add the City of Albemarle and the Towns of Beaufort and Southern Shores to the municipalities in which law enforcement officers may operate unregistered all-terrain vehicles on highways with speed limits of 35 miles per hour or less and the Towns of Duck, Kill Devil Hills, Kitty Hawk, and Nags Head to the municipalities in which law enforcement officers and municipal employees may operate unregistered all-terrain vehicles on highways with speed limits of 35 miles per hour or less, to allow the town of St. James to exercise planning jurisdiction within the corporate limits in 2005 and to allow extraterritorial planning jurisdiction in 2010, to exempt the Town of Leland from the requirement that an ABC store in Brunswick county be located no closer than seven miles from a municipality with an existing ABC store, to add Washington County to the counties in which it is illegal to remove or destroy an electronic dog collar, clarifying the Orange County voting centers act, and to authorize the Town of Matthews to adopt ordinances regulating the removal, replacement, and preservation of trees within that town, and to validate elections and actions of the Pamlico County board of education, and to change the office of tax collector in Henderson County from elective to appointive, and to reconfirm and validate nonpartisan elections for the Elizabeth City-Pasquotank board of education and validate actions of that board, and to authorize the Town of Bladenboro to give annual notice to chronic violators of the town's public nuisance ordinance, and to clarify that certain state land is subject to municipal planning jurisdiction and the imposition of overlay and special use districts by the Town of Southport without the approval of the council of state, and to clarify that Morehead City may order owners of residential property to repair rather than vacate housing and to authorize that city to order dwellings determined unfit for human habitation be repaired or demolished after a period of six months. 
    The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts: 
[Sections 1-11 of this session bill are omitted, being irrelevant to Morehead City] 
SECTION 12.(a) G.S. 160A-443 reads as rewritten: 
    "§ 160A-443. Ordinance authorized as to repair, closing, and demolition; order of public officer. 
    Upon the adoption of an ordinance finding that dwelling conditions of the character described in G.S. 160A-441 exist within a city, the governing body of the city is hereby authorized to adopt and enforce ordinances relating to dwellings within the city's territorial jurisdiction that are unfit for human habitation. These ordinances shall include the following provisions: 
(1)  That a public officer be designated or appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by the ordinance. 
(2)  That whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwellings a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer (or his designated agent) at a place within the county in which the property is located fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer. 
(3)  That if, after notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
a  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling (the ordinance of the city may fix a certain percentage of this value as being reasonable), requiring the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation. 
b  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling (the ordinance of the city may fix a certain percentage of this value as being reasonable), requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling. However, notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the dwelling is located in a historic district of the city and the Historic District Commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by ordinance, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and closed consistent with G.S. 160A-400.14(a). 
(4)  That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve the dwelling, the public officer may cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved. 
(5)  That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling, the public officer may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished. The duties of the public officer set forth in subdivisions (4) and (5) shall not be exercised until the governing body shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this Article with respect to the particular property or properties which the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with the housing code. This ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. 
(5b)  If the governing body shall have adopted an ordinance, or the public officer shall have: 
a  In a municipality other than municipalities with a population in excess of 190,000 by the last federal census, issued an order, ordering a dwelling to be repaired or vacated and closed, as provided in subdivision (3)a, and if the owner has vacated and closed such dwelling and kept such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of six months pursuant to the ordinance or order; 
b  In a municipality with a population in excess of 190,000 by the last federal census, commenced proceedings under the substandard housing regulations regarding a dwelling to be repaired or vacated and closed, as provided in subdivision (3)a, and if the owner has vacated and closed such dwelling and kept such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of six months pursuant to the ordinance or after such proceedings have commenced, then if the governing body shall find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the municipality in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in this State, then in such circumstances, the governing body may, after the expiration of such six-month period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following: 
c  If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days; or 
d  If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days. 
This ordinance shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with this ordinance, the public officer shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance. 
(6)  Liens. 
a  That the amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in Article 10 of this Chapter. 
b  If the real property upon which the cost was incurred is located in an incorporated city, then the amount of the cost is also a lien on any other real property of the owner located within the city limits or within one mile thereof except for the owner's primary residence. The additional lien provided in this sub-subdivision is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment. 
c  If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the public officer, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or otherwise. 
(7)  If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling, the public officer may file a civil action in the name of the city to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying such dwelling. The clerk of superior court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the hearing the public officer produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the governing body pursuant to subdivision (5) authorizing the officer to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this paragraph unless such occupant was served with notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that the governing body has ordered the public officer to proceed to exercise his duties under subdivision (5) of this section to remove and demolish the dwelling. 
(8)  That whenever a determination is made pursuant to subdivision (3) of this section that a dwelling must be removed or demolished, under the provisions of this section, notice of the order shall be given by first-class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum period of 45 days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal or demolition by action of the public officer, to allow the opportunity for any organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease, or purchase the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The public officer or clerk shall certify the mailing of the notices, and the certification shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written request for such notices may raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order requiring the public officer to wait 45 days before causing removal or demolition. 
SECTION 12.(b) This section applies only to Morehead City. 
SECTION 13. Sections 1 through 3 and Sections 5 through 13 of this act are effective when it becomes law. Section 4 of this act becomes effective October 1, 2005, and applies to offenses occurring on or after that date. 
    In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 23rd day of August, 2005. 
SESSION LAW 2005-175. - MUNICIPAL WEEDED LOT ORDINANCE 
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA 
SESSION 2005 
SESSION LAW 2005-175 
HOUSE BILL 196 
    An act authorizing the cities of Oxford and Morehead City and the towns of Atlantic Beach and Newport to give annual notice to violators of the municipalities weeded lot ordinances. 
    The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts: 
SECTION 1. A municipality may notify a violator of the municipality's weeded lot ordinance that if the violator's property is found to be in violation of the ordinance again in the calendar year in which notice is given, the municipality shall, without further notice, take action to remedy the violation and the expense of that action shall be charged to the violator. The notice may also provide that for each additional violation the municipality shall charge the violator the expense of the action and a surcharge of up to fifty percent (50%) over the expense to remedy the preceding violation. Notice of violation shall be served by registered or certified mail. 
SECTION 2. This act applies to the Cities of Oxford and Morehead City and the Towns of Atlantic Beach and Newport only. 
SECTION 3. This act is effective when it becomes law. 
    In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 12th day of July, 2005. 
SESSION LAW 2001-75. - MOREHEAD CITY ANNEXATIONS 
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA 
SESSION 2001 
SESSION LAW 2001-75 
HOUSE BILL 712 
    An act to annex certain described areas to the corporate limits of Morehead City. 
    The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts: 
SECTION 1. The corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City are extended to include the following described area: 
Area 1: Medical Park Foundation 6/30/97 Voluntary Annexation Correction 
Being all of lots 6, 7, 8 and 9 inclusive of the Little Nine Subdivision as per survey by James L. Powell, Registered Surveyor, dated December 23, 1981, recorded in Map Book 18, page 97, Carteret County Registry. Being a part of the property conveyed by Ballou Enterprises, Inc., a North Carolina corporation to William H. Page and wife, Jane W. Page, by deed dated October 18, 1983, recorded in Book 489, page 51, Carteret County Registry, and being the same property conveyed by William H. Page and wife, Jane W. Page to Bay Foods, Inc., a North Carolina corporation, by deed dated December 14, 1983, recorded in Book 491, page 274, Carteret County Registry. 
SECTION 2. The corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City are extended to include the following described areas: 
Area 2: Annexation of Waterways Adjacent to Corporate Limits 
Beginning at a point on the southwesternmost corporate boundary at the point of intersection with the eastern shore of Spooners Creek, then traveling due South a distance of 500 feet, then eastward remaining parallel with and 500 feet south of the corporate limit boundary the length of the Bogue Sound shoreline to the point of intersection with the western shoreline of Sugarloaf Island, then continuing eastward along the northernmost boundary of Sugarloaf Island to a point 500 feet east of the NC State Ports Authority property [Morehead City Port Terminal], then southwardly and then eastwardly remaining 500 feet from and parallel to the Port Terminal property and continuing in an eastwardly direction to a point of 500 feet west of the western shoreline of Radio Island, then southwardly remaining 500 feet west of and parallel to the shoreline of Radio Island to a point 500 feet due south of the southernmost point of tax parcel identification number (PIN) 639566594100 NC State Port Authority property located on Radio Island, then due north 500 feet to the point of intersection with the shoreline of Radio Island, then northwardly following the westernmost shoreline of Radio Island and crossing the causeway to the point of intersection with the northernmost right-of-way boundary of the Morehead-Beaufort high rise bridge [U.S. Highway 70 right-of-way], then westwardly following the northernmost boundary of the Morehead-Beaufort high rise bridge right-of-way to a point 500 feet west of the easternmost Morehead City limits line, then northwardly remaining 500 feet east of and parallel to the easternmost boundary of the Morehead City limit line and continuing in this direction northwardly until the point of intersection with the easternmost shoreline of the Haystack Marshes, identified by Tax Parcel Identification Number (PIN) 639625456300, then following the shoreline of this marsh in a southwardly, then northwestwardly, then northwardly direction along the property line of Tax PIN 639607251800 to a point due east of the northeasternmost corner of Tax PIN 638608884980 [Haystacks Property], then southwardly following the shoreline, encompassing the entire westernmost boundary of Calico Bay and its tributaries to the point of intersection with the northeasternmost corner of Tax PIN 638614349096 [Lot 12, Sec 4, Block F, N Morehead Subdivision property] and being the point of intersection with the primary Morehead City Corporate limit line. 
Area 3: Annexation of Bridges Street Extension Right-of-Way and Remnant State Owned Parcels 
Beginning on the northernmost boundary of the Bridges Street Extension [SR 1176] right-of-way at the point of intersection with the southwesternmost corner of Tax PIN 637614227856 [Carteret County Property/former "A&P" location] then westwardly, including the portion of Country Club Road [SR 1177] right-of-way northwardly to the existing corporate limit [in the vicinity of West Carteret High School], along the entire length of Bridges Street Extension [SR 1176] to its intersection with the northernmost right-of-way boundary of U.S. Highway 70 and including the full width of these sections of SR 1176 and SR 1177 highway rights-of-way and all the adjoining state-owned remnant properties acquired by the NC Department of Transportation and referenced as follows: Tax PIN 636616748607, 636610468193, 6366104644057, 636610361969 and 636610268767. 
Area 4: Annexation of Railroad Right-of-Way 
Beginning at the point of intersection with the southeasternmost corner of Tax PIN 636601089018 [NC State Port Authority "Edgewater" Tract] then westwardly and crossing the Arthur Farm Road [SR 1153] right-of-way to the point of intersection with the westernmost right-of-way boundary of Arthur Farm Road [SR 1153] and the point of intersection with the southeasternmost corner of Tax PIN 635607791542 [Town of Morehead City owned property] and including the full width of the railroad right-of-way [North Carolina Railroad Company]. 
SECTION 3. Section 1 of this act is effective from and after June 30, 1997. The remainder of this act is effective when it becomes law. 
    In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 15th day of May, 2001. 
SESSION LAW 1997-185. - NEWPORT-MOREHEAD BOUNDARIES 
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA 
1997 SESSION 
SESSION LAW 1997-185 
HOUSE BILL 604 
    An act to allow the towns of Morehead City and Newport to exercise extraterritorial planning jurisdiction over an area extending not more than two miles from their corporate limits. 
    The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts: 
SECTION 1. The Towns of Morehead City and Newport may exercise extraterritorial planning jurisdiction as provided in Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes within an area extending not more than two miles beyond their respective corporate limits. In the area where the Towns' extraterritorial planning jurisdiction overlaps, the dividing line shall begin where the run of Hull Swamp Creek empties into the Newport River, and then runs with the run of Hull Swamp Creek to the northwest corner of the property of Merritt-Williams Ford in the southern right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70, thence northwestwardly with the southern margin of U.S. Highway 70 to the northwesternmost corner of the property of Paul Wysocki (tax parcel number 634608990762), and thence with the Wysocki northwest line in a southwestern direction to the North property line of Mamie Murdoch (tax parcel number 634704708233), and thence westwardly and southwardly with the north and West lines of the Murdoch property back to the run of Hull Swamp Creek. 
SECTION 2. This act is effective when it becomes law. 
    In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 16th day of June, 1997. 
SESSION LAW 1997-219. - MOREHEAD-NEWPORT/MOORESVILLE ANNEX 
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA 
1997 SESSION 
SESSION LAW 1997-219 
HOUSE BILL 698 
    An act limiting the authority of the towns of Morehead City and Newport to annex noncontiguous areas and modifying the laws relating to satellite annexations which apply to Mooresville. 
    The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts: 
SECTION 1. The Towns of Morehead City and Newport may not annex noncontiguous areas as provided in Part 4 of Article 4A of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes if the area to be annexed is closer to the other Town's corporate limits than it is to the corporate limits of the Town desiring to annex the area. However, either Town may annex such an area if it lies within an area where the Town is exercising its extraterritorial planning jurisdiction under Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes. 
SECTION 2. Section 2 of Chapter 82 of the 1995 Session Laws reads as rewritten: 
    "Sec. 2. This act applies only to the Town of Apex and only with respect to annexation ordinances adopted on or before December 31, 2000. The authority this act grants to the Town of Apex does not apply to property in Chatham County; therefore, the Town of Apex may not annex property in Chatham County by satellite annexation if the area to be annexed, when added to the area within the satellite corporate limits of the Town of Apex, exceeds the limit set by general law in G.S. 160A-58.1(b)(5)." 
SECTION 3. G.S. 160A-58.1(b)(5) does not apply to the Town of Mooresville. 
SECTION 4. G.S. 160A-58.4, as amended by Chapter 289 of the 1991 Session Laws, reads as rewritten: 
    "§ 160A-58.4. Extraterritorial powers. 
    Satellite corporate limits for areas annexed prior to January 1, 1997, shall be considered a part of the city's corporate limits for the purposes of extraterritorial land-use regulation pursuant to G.S. 160A-360, but not for purposes of abatement of public health nuisances pursuant to G.S. 160A-193. Satellite corporate limits for areas annexed on or after January 1, 1997, shall not be considered a part of the city's corporate limits for the purposes of extraterritorial land-use regulation pursuant to G.S. 160A-360. However, a city's power to regulate land use pursuant to Chapter 160A, Article 19, or to abate public health nuisances pursuant to G.S. 160A-193, shall be the same within satellite corporate limits as within its primary corporate limits." 
SECTION 5. Section 4 of this act applies only to the Town of Mooresville. 
SECTION 6. This act is effective when it becomes law. 
    In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 24th day of June, 1997. 
PART III - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Ordinances effective on municipal property outside limits, G.S. 160A-176. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Morehead City, North Carolina," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1973, § 1-1; Code 1993, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Code of ordinances, G.S. 160A-77; ordinance book, G.S. 160A-78; pleading and proving ordinances, G.S. 160A-79; general ordinance-making power, G.S. 160A-174. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Bond. Where a bond is required an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The Charter of the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina, derived from Chapter 879 of the 1969 session of the General Assembly. 
    City. The term "city" means Morehead City in the County of Carteret, North Carolina. 
Editor's note- Because Morehead City is most frequently referred to as "city," although it is designated "town" in the Charter, the term "city" is used in this Code in lieu thereof. 
    City council, commissioners. The term "city council" or "commissioners" shall be construed as if the words "of Morehead City, North Carolina" followed it. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Morehead City, North Carolina. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code or by order of court, the day of the act, event, default or publication after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and holidays shall be excluded in the computation. A half holiday shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday. Eastern Standard Time shall be the official time except during that period when what is commonly known as "Daylight Saving Time" is in effect, through adoption by the city council or otherwise. 
    Corporate limits; city limits. The term "corporate limits" or "city limits" means the legal boundary of Morehead City, North Carolina. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Carteret in the State of North Carolina. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty, unless the terms of the provisions shall specifically designate or provide otherwise. 
    Finance director. The term "finance director" means the finance director and deputy finance officer for the city. 
    G.S. The abbreviation "G.S." means the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Health director, health officer. The term "health director" means the health director of Carteret County, North Carolina. Health officers are subordinate to the health director. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    NCAC, N.C.A.C, and N.C. Admin. Code. The abbreviations "NCAC," "N.C.A.C.," and "N.C. Admin. Code" mean the North Carolina Administrative Code. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn." 
    Officials, departments, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, departments, boards, commissions, committees and the like, by title only, they shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Morehead City, North Carolina." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, club, society, cooperative, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
    Personal property. The terms "personal property" shall include every species of property, except real property as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of North Carolina. 
    State law references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to G.S. 160A-200, it shall be construed to refer to the General Statutes of North Carolina, section 160A-200, as amended, or to whatever section is cited. 
    Street, highway. The term "street" or "highway" means the entire width between property or right-of-way lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular traffic, and shall include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, and the approaches thereto within the city. 
    Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the present. 
    Time. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall include printing, engraving, lithographing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1973, §§ 1-2, 19-1, 22-1; Code 1993, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Computation of time, G.S. 1-593, 1A-1, Rule 6(a), 159-2; construction of statutes, G.S. 12-3; citation of General Statutes, G.S. 164-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1993, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the city Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a statement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-4; Code 1993, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Looseleaf supplementation of Code, G.S. 160A-77. 
Sec. 1-5. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages, or any portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever, except pursuant to ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. 
(Code 1973, § 1-5; Code 1993, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1973, § 1-6; Code 1993, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; enforcement of ordinances; continuing violations. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, violation of any provision of this Code or any other town ordinance shall subject the offender to the remedies hereinafter provided; except, that where the General Statutes of North Carolina provide specific civil remedies for violations of provisions of this Code adopted pursuant to such statutes, such remedies available to the city for enforcement of this Code shall be in addition to the remedies hereinafter stated. 
(b)  Violations of any provision of this Code shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as provided by G.S. 14-4. 
(c)  In addition to any civil or criminal penalties set out in this section, any provision of this Code or any other town ordinance may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to the application of the city for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law. 
(d)  In addition to any civil or criminal penalties set out in this section, any provision of this Code or any other town ordinance that makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement, and the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such a provision occurs, the city may apply to the appropriate division of the general court of justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular. 
(e)  In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that: 
(1)  Buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed; 
(2)  Fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from buildings on the property; 
(3)  Grass and weeds be cut; 
(4)  Improvements or repairs be made; or 
(5)  Any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Code or such other ordinance. 
If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he may be cited for contempt, and the city may execute the order of abatement. The city shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the clerk of the superior court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith. 
(f)  The provisions of this Code and any other town ordinances may be enforced by one, all or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this section. 
(g)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day's continuing violation of any provision of this Code or any other town ordinance shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(h)  Upon determination of a violation of any section of this Code, the penalty for which is a civil penalty, the city may cause a warning citation to be issued to the violator, setting out the nature of the violation, the section violated, the date of the violation and an order to immediately cease the violation or, if the violation is in the nature of an infraction for which an order of abatement would be appropriate in a civil proceeding, stating a reasonable period of time in which the violation must be abated. 
(i)  Upon failure of the violator to obey the warning citation, a civil citation shall be issued by the appropriate official of the city and either served directly on the violator or his duly designated agent, or registered agent if a corporation, in person or posted in the United States mail service by first class mail addressed to the last known address of the violator as contained in the records of the town, or obtained from the violator at the time of issuance of the warning citation. The violator shall be deemed to have been served upon the mailing of such citation. The citation shall direct the violator to appear before the city manager or his designee, located in the city hall, within 15 days of the date of the citation or alternatively to pay the citation by mail. The violation for which the citation is issued must have been corrected by the time the citation is paid; otherwise, further citations shall be issued. Citations may be issued for each day the offense continues until the prohibited activity is ceased or abated. 
(j)  If the violator fails to respond to a citation within 15 days of its issuance and pay the penalty prescribed therein, the city may institute a civil action in the nature of debt in the appropriate division of the North Carolina General Court of Justice for the collection of the penalty. 
(Code 1993, § 1-7; Ord. No. 1997-32, 9-9-1997) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violations of local ordinances, G.S. 14-4; enforcement of ordinances, G.S. 160A-175. 
Sec. 1-8. - Ordinances, etc., not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any municipal officer or employee; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance or taxing ordinance; 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing subdivision regulations or dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat; 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or extending the boundaries of the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance designating one-way streets, stop intersections, intersections at which traffic-control signals are to be installed, areas or space in which the parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited, intersections at which the turning of vehicles is prohibited, restricted or regulated, or any other ordinance regulating traffic on specific streets or portions thereof or in specific areas of the city; 
(14)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing the amount of license or taxes, permit fees or other rates or charges; 
(15)  Any ordinance prescribing the charge to be paid for impact fees, water and sewer taps and connections or the rates to be paid for utility, water or sewer service rendered by the city, and the amount of the deposit required to ensure the payment thereof; 
(16)  Any ordinance enacted after November 10, 1987; 
(17)  Ordinance 1985-21 is not repealed; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 1-8; Ord. of 4-10-1973, § 3) 
State Law reference- Designated classes of ordinances may be omitted from Code, G.S. 160A-77; statutes not repealed by General Statutes, G.S. 164-7; subdivision regulations, G.S. 160A-371 et seq. 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific references to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Morehead City, North Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows: _____." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Morehead City, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: _____." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of the Code desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1993, § 1-9) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Director of public trust contracting for his own benefit, participating in business transaction involving public funds, G.S. 14-234; meetings of public bodies, G.S. 143-318.9 et seq.; local development, G.S. Ch. 158; local government finance, G.S. Ch. 159; cities and towns, G.S. Ch. 160A; elections, G.S. Ch. 163; government and general management of municipality vested in governing body, G.S. 160A-67; governing body has authority to organize and reorganize municipal government, G.S. 160A-146; general ordinance-making power, G.S. 160A-174; municipality may adopt personnel rules and regulations, G.S. 160A-164; city council to fix pay, expense allowance and other compensation of employees, G.S. 160A-162; city may provide retirement benefits, enroll employees in Local Governmental Employees' Retirement System, G.S. 160A-163. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Council meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings; place and times. There shall be a regular meeting of the city council at the municipal building on the second Tuesday of each month at 5:30 p.m. unless otherwise specified, in which case each member of the city council shall be so notified. 
(b)  Rules of procedure. Except as otherwise provided by resolution, the procedure of the city council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(c)  Elections by ballot. All elections by the city council shall be by ballot if required by any two members present. 
(d)  Resignations of members. The resignation of any member of the city council shall be in writing and any such resignation shall lie on the table until the next regular meeting, unless considered by unanimous consent. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-40-2-43; Code 1993, § 2-1; Ord. No. 1992-01, 1-14-1992; Ord. No. 2000-44, 11-28-2000) 
State Law reference- Council required to fix time and place for regular meetings, G.S. 160A-71. 
Sec. 2-2. - Mayor-Generally. 
    The mayor shall be the official head of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Code 1993, § 2-2) 
State Law reference- General powers of mayor and council, G.S. 160A-67. 
Sec. 2-3. - Same-Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the mayor to: 
(1)  Keep himself informed as to the business of the city; 
(2)  Preside over the meetings of the city council; 
(3)  Sign all contracts, franchises or paper-writings authorized by the city council; 
(4)  Appoint such committees and outline their powers and duties as he deems necessary to care properly for the affairs of the city; and 
(5)  Make such recommendations as he deems necessary or expedient to the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 2-2; Code 1993, § 2-3) 
State Law reference- Mayor to preside over council, G.S. 160A-69. 
Sec. 2-4. - Committees. 
    All committees shall, unless otherwise ordered, be appointed by the mayor. All reports of committees shall be in writing, and committee members shall receive such compensation for extra and special service as the city council may designate. 
(Code 1973, § 2-3; Code 1993, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-5. - City clerk; duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to: 
(1)  Perform all duties required of the clerk by the Charter, state law and ordinances; 
(2)  Devote his entire time and attention to the duties imposed upon him by the office of the city clerk; 
(3)  Keep his office open daily and abide by such office hours as may be prescribed by the city council; 
(4)  Act as secretary to the city council, and as such keep a complete and accurate account of all proceedings of all meetings in a book especially provided for this purpose by the city council; 
(5)  Receive and turn over to the finance director moneys which he shall receive on behalf of the city; 
(6)  Supply the city council with such information as it may require; 
(7)  Perform such other duties as the city manager may direct. 
(Code 1973, § 2-9; Code 1993, § 2-5) 
State Law reference- Municipal clerk, duties, G.S. 160A-171. 
Sec. 2-6. - Finance director-Appointment, monthly statement, payment of bond premium. 
    The city manager shall appoint a finance director and deputy finance director officer, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. The city council shall require of the finance director a monthly statement and exhibit of receipts and disbursements or the finance director should provide a platform for which the city council may obtain such information on a regular basis. If he shall fail for 30 days after having been required to make such exhibit to render the same, it shall be declared a breach of his/her official bond, and the city council may declare the office vacant and appoint his/her successor. If the bond is given in a surety company, the premium for the same shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-10; Code 1993, § 2-6) 
State Law reference- Finance officer, G.S. 159-24 et seq. 
Sec. 2-7. - Same-Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the finance director to: 
(1)  Perform all duties required of the finance director by the Charter, state law and ordinances; 
(2)  Devote his entire time and attention to the duties imposed upon him by the office of finance director; 
(3)  Keep his office open daily and abide by such office hours as may be prescribed by the city council; 
(4)  Approve all accounts and issue warrants for the payment of funds; 
(5)  Act as accountant for the city, and as such supervise and examine all accounts, receipts, vouchers and other public records; 
(6)  Make such financial reports and statements as the city council may require of him; 
(7)  Keep the records and receive the funds from city-owned utilities and other property, and make a report of the same each month to the city council; 
(8)  Audit and examine every claim presented to ascertain if the same is justly due and that payment has been legally authorized, and that an appropriation has been duly made therefor; 
(9)  Receive and faithfully keep moneys which he shall receive on behalf of the city; 
(10)  Keep an accurate account of all moneys deposited with him and disbursed by him for the city; 
(11)  Supply the city council with such information as it may require of him relative to finances; 
(12)  Make a monthly report to the city council of all receipts and disbursements of funds of the city; 
(13)  Honor all checks and drafts duly executed, for which purpose an appropriation has been made, that are presented to him. 
(Code 1973, § 2-11; Code 1993, § 2-7) 
State Law reference- Duties of finance officer, G.S. 159-25. 
Sec. 2-8. - Tax collector-Collection of license taxes. 
    The tax collector shall make diligent inquiry as to all persons liable to license taxes and shall collect the same and make due report thereof to the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 2-12; Code 1993, § 2-8) 
Sec. 2-9. - Same-Nonpartisan, plurality basis. 
    City elections shall be conducted on the nonpartisan, plurality basis, and as provided by G.S. 163-292. 
(Code 1973, § 2-15; Code 1993, § 2-10) 
State Law reference- Determination of election results under plurality method, G.S. 163-292. 
Sec. 2-10. - Contracts; execution requirements. 
    All contracts should be in writing and no contract shall be deemed to have been made or executed until signed by the officer authorized by law to sign such contract and approved by the city council. Any contract made may be required to be accompanied by a bond with sureties or by a deposit of money, certified check or other security for the faithful performance thereof satisfactory to the official having the matter in charge, and such bonds or other securities shall be deposited with the city manager until the contract has been carried out in all respects. No such contract shall be altered except by a written agreement of the contractor, the sureties on his bond, and the officer making the contract, with the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 2-11) 
Secs. 2-11-2-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local government finance, G.S. Ch. 159; public building contracts, G.S. 143-128 et seq.; sale and disposition of property, G.S. 160A-265 et seq. 

Sec. 2-39. - Official depositories-Generally. 
    Any banking institution or savings and loan association meeting the requirements of G.S. 159-31 and doing business within the corporate limits of the city may be an official depository for the city. 
(Code 1973, § 7-1; Code 1993, § 2-31) 
State Law reference- Selection of depository, deposits to be secured, G.S. 159-31. 
Sec. 2-40. - Same-Daily deposit of funds. 
    The finance director is authorized and directed to deposit daily in the designated depositories, in the name of the city, all funds coming into his hands as finance director of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 7-2; Code 1993, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-41. - Same-Escrow agreements and collaterals. 
    The escrow agreements with the official depositories, copies of which are incorporated in the minutes, are hereby approved. The collaterals provided by the depositories securing deposits made by and in the name of the city are hereby approved. Lists of the collaterals fully and completely identifying the same are of record in the minutes of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 7-3; Code 1993, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-42. - Disbursal of funds; signatures for checks and vouchers. 
(a)  All checks and/or vouchers drawn by and in the name of the city shall be signed by any two of the following: mayor, mayor pro tempore, finance commissioner or a commissioner, city manager, finance director or deputy finance officer, and no funds shall be withdrawn from any of the depositories by check and/or voucher or otherwise unless so signed. 
(b)  Checks drawn on the payroll account of the city shall in the same manner be signed. No check shall be signed until fully completed and accompanied by proper supporting documents for any disbursal of funds. 
(Code 1973, § 7-4; Code 1993, § 2-34; Ord. No. 1996-07, 1-30-1996) 
Sec. 2-43. - Investment and transfer of funds. 
    Signatures of all transactions involving time deposits (savings, certificates of deposit, and other interest-bearing time deposits) shall consist of any two of the following signatures: mayor, mayor pro tempore, city manager or finance officer; and furthermore, such transactions shall consist of transfers between various time deposits or between time or demand accounts. 
(Code 1993, § 2-36; Ord. No. 1983-20, 10-24-1983) 
Sec. 2-44. - Petty cash. 
    The use of petty cash expedites minor purchases and minimizes accounting costs. Expenditures of $20.00 or less (including sales tax) can be made through the use of petty cash. Petty cash must only be used when the expenditure is clearly for a public purpose and the person initiating its use is certain that the funds have been appropriated. Petty cash may not be used for purchases that exceed the $20.00 limit without the prior approval of the finance director or deputy finance director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-31, 10-11-2016) 
Secs. 2-45-2-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CODE OF ETHICS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Local governing boards' code of ethics, G.S. 160A-83. 

Sec. 2-62. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. 
(b)  In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for city officials is hereby adopted. The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts and actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 2-375; Ord. No. 1995-04, 3-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-63. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business entity means any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership, person in representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or corporation which is organized for financial gain or for profit. 
    City official means the mayor, members of the city council, the city manager, the city clerk and the tax collector. 
    Gift means a thing of value presented to a person who does not present, transfer, convey or pay fair value in consideration therefor. Remuneration by the city for services rendered to the city and reimbursement to a city official by the city for travel, meals or other expenses are not gifts. 
    Immediate household means the city official, his spouse and all dependent children of the city official. 
    Interest means direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing in a city official as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. For the purpose of this article, a city official shall be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of: 
(1)  Any person in his immediate household, as such term is defined in this section; 
(2)  Any business entity in which the city official is an officer or director; 
(3)  Any business entity in which in excess of five percent of the stock of, or legal or beneficial ownership of, is controlled or owned directly or indirectly by the city official; or 
(4)  Any nonprofit organization on which the mayor or any member of the city council currently serves as an officer, director or board member. 
    Official act or actions means any legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of any city official. 
(Code 1993, § 2-376; Ord. No. 1995-04, 3-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-64. - Standards of conduct. 
    All city officials as defined in this article shall be subject to and abide by the following standards of conduct: 
(1)  Interest in contract or agreement. No city official, as herein defined, shall have or hereafter acquire an interest in any contract or agreement with the city. 
(2)  Use of official position. No city official shall use his official position or the city's facilities for his private gain, nor shall he appear before or represent any private person, group or interest before any department, agency, commission or board of the city except in matters of purely civic or public concern. The provisions of this subsection are not intended to prohibit his speaking before neighborhood groups, nonprofit organizations or political organizations or gatherings. 
(3)  Use and disclosure of information. No city official shall use or disclose confidential information gained in the course of or by reason of his official position to advance or promote his interest nor the interest of a member of his household or of any other person or business entity. 
(4)  Incompatible service. No city official shall engage in or accept private employment or render service for private interests when such employment or service would be incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(5)  Gifts. No city official shall directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept or receive any monetary gift in any amount nor any other gift having a value of $25.00 or more, whether in the form of services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him or could reasonably be expected to influence him in the performance of his official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on his part. A city official may solicit money for a recognized charity, educational institution or eleemosynary organization. Legitimate political contributions or solicitations shall not be considered as gifts or solicitations under the provisions of this paragraph. 
(6)  Special treatment. No city official shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. It is the obligation of every elected official to ensure that every citizen receives a fair and impartial hearing on any matter coming before the city council. 
(7)  Town employees and equipment. No city official shall solicit, seek or demand any gift, favor or service from any employee of the city, nor the use of any town equipment, machinery, building or property. Use of town property or buildings, but not machinery or equipment, may be obtained on the same basis that any non-city official could obtain such use. 
(Code 1993, § 2-377; Ord. No. 1995-04, 3-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-65. - Disclosure of interest in legislative action. 
(a)  The mayor or any member of the city council who has an interest in any official act or action before the council shall publicly disclose on the record of the council the nature and extent of such interest and shall withdraw from any consideration of the matter if excused by the council pursuant to law. 
(b)  In addition to complying with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, in all transactions involving an interest in real property (whether for acquisition, lease or sale) in which the mayor or any member of the city council has an interest therein, he shall inform the city manager and city attorney of such interest. Any real property transaction authorized by the city council shall be handled exclusively through the office of the city manager, who shall garner all of the material facts and disclose such facts on the official record when the matter comes before the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 2-378; Ord. No. 1995-04, 3-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-66. - Investigations instigated by city council; city manager; any other person. 
(a)  The city council may direct the city attorney to investigate any apparent violation of this article, as it applies to the mayor, any member of the city council or city manager and to report the findings of his investigation to the city council. 
(b)  The city manager may direct the city attorney to investigate any apparent violation of this article as it applies to the city clerk and collector and to report the finding of his investigation to the city manager. 
(c)  Any person who believes that a violation of this article has occurred may file a complaint in writing with the city council when the mayor, a member of the city council or city manager is the subject of the complaint or with the city manager when the city clerk, tax collector or a department head is the subject of the complaint, who may thereafter proceed as provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 2-379; Ord. No. 1995-04, 3-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-67. - Sanctions by city manager; city council; rights of accused at hearings. 
(a)  If the city manager, after the receipt of an investigation by the city attorney, has cause to believe a violation of this article has occurred, he shall schedule a hearing on the matter. The city official who is charged with the violation shall have the right to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, including the complainant or complainants, and be represented by counsel at the hearing. If, after such hearing and a review of all of the evidence, the city manager finds that a violation of this article has occurred, he shall take whatever lawful disciplinary action he deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, reprimand, suspension, demotion or termination of service. No further hearing or proceedings under the personnel ordinance shall be required. 
(b)  If the city council, after receipt of an investigation by the city attorney, has cause to believe a violation has occurred, the city council shall schedule a hearing on this matter. The official who is charged with the violation shall have the right to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, including the complainant or complainants, and be represented by counsel at the hearing. If, upon conclusion of the hearing, at least four members of the council vote to find a violation has occurred, the council may adopt a resolution of censure, which shall be placed as a matter of record in the minutes of an official council meeting. 
(Code 1993, § 2-380; Ord. No. 1995-04, 3-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-68. - Advisory opinions. 
    When any city official has a doubt as to the applicability of any provision of this article to a particular situation, or as to the definition of terms used in this article, he may apply to the city attorney for an advisory opinion. The city official shall have the opportunity to present his interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicability of provisions of this article before such advisory opinion is made. Action in accordance with this advisory opinion shall be prima facie proof that the official has not violated the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 2-381; Ord. No. 1995-04, 3-14-1995) 
Secs. 2-69-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONCEALED WEAPONS ON CERTAIN CITY PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-81. - Posting of signs required. 
    Subject to state law requirements, the city manager is hereby authorized and instructed to post conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or within each park and each building or portion of a building owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the city, as well as the appurtenant premises to such buildings, indicating that carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited therein. 
(Code 1993, § 2-391; Ord. No. 1995-34, 12-12-1995) 
Sec. 2-82. - Location of signs. 
    Subject to state law, signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the building. The city manager shall exercise discretion in determining the number and appropriate location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises and parks. 
(Code 1993, § 2-392; Ord. No. 1995-34, 12-12-1995) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, G.S. 14-360 et seq.; protection of livestock running at large, G.S. 14-366 et seq.; protection of animals, G.S. Ch. 19A; dogs, G.S. Ch. 67; fences and stock law, G.S. Ch. 68; strays, G.S. Ch. 79; livestock brands, G.S. 80-45 et seq.; agriculture, G.S. Ch. 106; rabies, G.S. 130A-184 et seq.; abuse of animals, G.S. 160A-182; municipal regulation of animals generally, G.S. 160A-186 et seq.; animal taxes, G.S. 160A-212; animal shelters, G.S. 160A-493. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Bird sanctuary established. 
    The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city shall be a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1973, § 3-1; Code 1993, § 3-1) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipalities to create bird sanctuary, G.S. 160A-188. 
Sec. 4-2. - Keeping livestock. 
    No livestock, as defined in G.S. 68-15, shall be penned or kept within the city, except on vehicles passing through. 
(Code 1973, § 3-4; Code 1993, § 3-3) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipalities to prohibit the keeping of any domestic animals, G.S. 160A-186. 
Sec. 4-3. - Animal slaughter. 
    No livestock of any nature shall be slaughtered within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1973, § 10-13; Code 1993, § 3-4) 
Sec. 4-4. - Removal of carcasses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any occupant of any premises to fail to remove any dead animal, fowl, fish or shellfish therefrom, or to fail to dispose of same as required by law. 
(Code 1973, § 3-5; Code 1993, § 3-5) 
Sec. 4-5. - Animal control officer. 
(a)  Purpose, authority. In order to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to enforce the regulations herein set forth, primary responsibility is hereby delegated to the animal control officer. The animal control officer, in the performance of his duties, shall have all the powers, authorities and immunities granted under this section and by the general laws of this state to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the General Statutes of North Carolina which relate to the care, treatment or impounding of animals. 
(b)  Appointment. The animal control officer shall be appointed by the city manager upon recommendation of the chief of police and shall be under the operational supervision of the police department but subject to such policies as may be established by the city council. 
(c)  Duties. The animal control officer shall be charged with certain duties, including: 
(1)  Seeing that all dogs and cats in the city are duly licensed; 
(2)  Cooperating with the health director and health officers and assisting them in the enforcement of the laws of the state with regard to the care, custody and control of animals, and especially with regard to the vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies and the confinement or leashing of vicious animals; 
(3)  Investigating complaints with regard to matters covered by this chapter; and 
(4)  Enforcing within the city all of the state laws and ordinances enacted by the city for the care, control and custody of animals covered by this chapter. 
(d)  Liability. Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or local law or ordinance, no official, agent or employee of the city charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of such duties unless he acted with actual malice. 
(e)  Interference with enforcement. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or molest any animal control officer, police officer, veterinarian or other duly appointed agent while in the performance of any duty authorized by this chapter, or to seek to release any animal in the custody of such agents except in the manner as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 3-6; Code 1993, § 3-6) 
State Law reference- Assault upon law-enforcement officer with deadly weapon, G.S. 14-34.2; animal welfare violations by dog wardens, G.S. 19A-36; animal cruelty investigators, G.S. 19A-45 et seq.; public officers and employees liability insurance commission, G.S. 58-27.20 et seq.; county animal control officers and dog wardens, G.S. 67-30 et seq.; defense of local employees and officers, payment of judgments, G.S. 160A-167. 
Secs. 4-6-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 4-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cat means all domesticated animals of the feline species ( Felis catus ). 
    Dog means all animals of the canine species. 
    Lot means a typical land area as defined on the map of the city as being 50 feet by 100 feet or 50 feet by 120 feet, as the case may be. 
    Owner means any person who shall harbor any dog or cat, or permit any dog or cat to remain on any premises within the city under his charge or control. 
    Stray cat means a cat running at large. 
    Stray dog means a dog running at large. 
(Code 1993, § 3-26; Ord. No. 1991-13, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 4-32. - Listing dogs and cats with city. 
    Every owner of a dog/cat shall declare on oath the number of male and female dogs/cats he may own or which may belong to any person residing or boarding with his family and list such with the chief of police or animal control officer. 
(Code 1993, § 3-27; Ord. No. 1991-13, 7-25-1991; Ord. No. 2009-42, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 4-33. - License. 
(a)  Registration and fee payment. Every person who owns or keeps any dogs/cats within the city shall register the same with the chief of police or animal control officer and shall then pay a license fee as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Fees. The license fee to be paid shall be as provided in the most current adopted schedule on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Issuance of tag. The chief of police or animal control officer shall provide a license tag for each animal registered. 
(d)  Record. The chief of police or animal control officer shall keep a dog/cat registration book. 
(e)  Attaching tag to collar. Every owner or keeper of a licensed dog or cat shall keep and maintain a collar around the neck of such dog/cat with the tag prescribed in subsection (c) of this section securely attached thereto. Every dog/cat found in the city without such tag shall be deemed an unlicensed dog/cat and shall be attended to by the chief of police or other police officer as provided in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 3-28; Ord. No. 1991-13, 7-25-1991; Ord. No. 2009-42, 9-8-2009) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipalities to levy annual license tax on the privilege of keeping domestic animals, G.S. 160A-212. 
Sec. 4-34. - Inoculation for rabies. 
    Every owner or keeper of a dog or cat in the city shall have such dog/cat inoculated for rabies as required by state law. Failure to have such inoculation performed and reported to the chief of police or animal control officer shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 3-29; Ord. No. 1991-13, 7-25-1991) 
State Law reference- Vaccination of all dogs and cats, G.S. 130A-185; appointment and certification of certified rabies vaccinator, G.S. 130A-186; rabies vaccination certificates, G.S. 130A-189; rabies vaccination tags, G.S. 130A-190; vaccination and confinement of dogs and cats brought into this state, G.S. 130A-193. 
Sec. 4-35. - Running at large-Prohibited generally; violations. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit any dog or cat to be at large in the city. All dogs or cats found at large contrary to the provisions of this section shall be impounded as provided in this article. All persons who, owning, keeping or having charge, possession or control of any dog or cat suffers, permits or allows any such dog or cat to be at large contrary to the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code. A dog or cat shall be at large if: 
(1)  It is off the premises of its owner, keeper or custodian, unless on a leash held by a responsible person over 12 years of age; or 
(2)  It is unlicensed. 
(Code 1993, § 3-30; Ord. No. 1991-13, 7-25-1991) 
State Law reference- Bitches in heat running at large, G.S. 67-2; dogs running at large at night, G.S. 67-12; dogs and cats not wearing required rabies vaccination tags, G.S. 130A-192; quarantine of districts infected with rabies, G.S. 130A-194. 
Sec. 4-36. - Same-Impoundment. 
    The police department shall capture, and impound in such place as is designated by the city council, each dog or cat unlawfully at large in the city as provided in this article and shall receive stray dogs or cats which are turned in to it by members of the public residing in the city. The police department shall thereupon notify the owner of the dog or cat so taken, if the name of the owner can be reasonably ascertained, and the owner may redeem the dog or cat within five days by paying all license and other fees then due upon the dog or cat together with fees for pickup, meals, care and keeping. The owner of any dog or cat impounded for lack of inoculation shall have such dog or cat properly inoculated in addition to paying all required license and pound fees in order to redeem such dog or cat. Should no redemption be made of any dog or cat thus impounded, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to exterminate or have exterminated in a humane manner all dogs and cats so unredeemed at the end of the fifth day. The police department may utilize the services of the Carteret County Humane Society to accomplish the duties described in this section. 
(Code 1993, § 3-31; Ord. No. 1991-13, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 4-37. - Extermination of diseased impounded dogs or cats. 
    Any dog or cat picked up and determined by competent veterinary authority to be rabies-infected shall be forthwith exterminated without awaiting the five-day period provided in section 4-36. 
(Code 1993, § 3-32; Ord. No. 1991-13, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 4-38. - Kennels-Number of dogs and cats restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of property, either residential, business or commercial, to have, keep or maintain upon a single lot a dog or cat kennel, house or other types of habitation for dogs or cats in which there are more than two dogs or cats occupying the same at a time. 
(b)  The terms "dogs" or "cats" as used in subsection (a) of this section shall mean adult animals as distinguished from puppies or kittens. 
(c)  This section shall not be in lieu of any existing nuisance ordinance, but shall be in addition thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 3-33; Ord. No. 1991-13, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 4-39. - Same-Prohibited for commercial and certain other purposes in residential districts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a kennel to house or confine dogs or cats being held for sale or being raised for any purpose or as a boarding kennel in any area zoned for residential purposes only. 
(Code 1993, § 3-34; Ord. No. 1991-13, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 4-40. - Removal of animal feces. 
(a)  No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog or cat shall cause or allow the dog or cat to defecate or otherwise commit any nuisance on any street, sidewalk, park, municipal right-of-way or other publicly owned area, or upon any private property without permission of the owner of the property, without the excrement immediately being removed by the person owning, harboring or keeping the dog or cat responsible for the excrement, and then depositing such excrement in an appropriate waste container. 
(b)  If any person shall violate this section, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.00. Further, the town may assess a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00 for the first offense, and $100.00 for each subsequent offense for violation of said section. Payment of a civil penalty shall not be admissible as evidence in any criminal prosecution for violation of the sections of this chapter. 
(c)  Any court costs in which a violation is judged to have occurred will be borne by the owner of the animal. 
(Code 1993, § 3-35; Ord. No. 2016-15, 5-10-2016) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Administrative search and inspection warrants, G.S. 15-27.2; inspection of buildings for fire hazards, G.S. 60-4; fire escapes, G.S. 69-8 et seq.; contractors, G.S. Ch. 87; public building contracts, G.S. 143-128 et seq.; building code council and building code, G.S. 143-136 et seq.; manufactured housing and mobile homes, G.S. 143-143.8 et seq.; North Carolina Code Officials Qualification Board, G.S. 143-151.8 et seq.; enforcement of building code insulation and energy utilization standards, G.S. 143-151.26 et seq.; technical ordinances, G.S. 160A-76; regulating and licensing businesses, trades, etc., G.S. 160A-194; building inspection, G.S. 160A-411 et seq.; fire limits, G.S. 160A-435 et seq.; minimum housing standards, G.S. 160A-441 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Applicability of codes. 
    The provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council shall, without limitation, apply to the following: 
(1)  The location, design, materials, equipment, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal, use and occupancy of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such building or structure; 
(2)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains, waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems, and all fixtures and appurtenances thereof; 
(3)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment and appurtenances thereof; 
(4)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 4-1; Code 1993, § 4-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Amendments to codes; when effective. 
    Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference in this chapter, which are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations referred to in this chapter, shall be effective in the city at the time such amendments are approved and become effective, per the North Carolina Building Code Council. 
(Code 1973, § 4-8; Code 1993, § 4-7) 
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance with codes. 
(a)  All buildings or structures which are constructed, reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished or moved after January 16, 1969, shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards and other provisions of either the North Carolina State Building Code, or the North Carolina Residential Code, whichever is applicable, or to both if both are applicable. 
(b)  Every building or structure intended for human habitation, occupancy or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems or plumbing fixtures installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired or reconstructed in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the North Carolina Plumbing Code. 
(c)  All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment, and appurtenances, shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the North Carolina Mechanical Code. 
(d)  All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall be erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the National Electrical Code . 
(Code 1973, § 4-9; Code 1993, § 4-8) 
Sec. 6-4. - Copies of codes on file. 
    An official copy of each regulatory code, and official copies of all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. Such copies shall be the official copies of the codes and the amendments. 
(Code 1973, § 4-10; Code 1993, § 4-9) 
Sec. 6-5. - Planning and inspections department. 
(a)  Organization. The planning and inspections department shall consist of the department director and the number of planners, code enforcement officials and inspectors necessary to effectively enforce any state and local building codes and any state or local land development codes. 
(b)  General duties. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the planning and inspections department to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter, the regulatory codes adopted and amended by the North Carolina Building Code Council, any other applicable state codes, and the city's land development codes, and to make all inspections necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of this chapter and such codes and ordinances are being met. 
(2)  The planning and inspections department shall be responsible for the enforcement of any ordinances or codes adopted by the city council relating to the repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation, pursuant to G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Pt. 6. 
(3)  No permit for alteration, repair or construction of any building or structure shall be issued unless the plans and specifications show that the building or structure and its proposed use will be in compliance with applicable provisions of the unified development ordinance. 
(c)  Powers of inspection and code enforcement officials. Officials shall enforce all the provision of this chapter, the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter and ordinances referred to in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-11, 4-12, 4-15; Code 1993, § 4-10) 
State Law reference- Qualifications of inspectors, G.S. 160A-411.1; responsibilities of inspection department, G.S. 160A-412. 
Sec. 6-6. - Reporting violations-Duties of fire department. 
    The chief of the fire department or his designee shall report in writing to the building inspector any violations of any provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of all members of the fire department to report any violations to the chief of the fire department or his designee, which violations shall be reported promptly. 
(Code 1973, § 4-16; Code 1993, § 4-11) 
Sec. 6-7. - Same-Duties of the police department. 
    The chief of the police department or his designee shall report in writing to the building inspector or head of the planning and inspections department any violations of any provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of all members of the police department to report any violations to the chief of the police department or his designee, which violations shall be reported promptly. 
(Code 1973, § 4-17; Code 1993, § 4-13) 
Sec. 6-8. - Removal or demolition of property; bond. 
    In all cases of removal or demolition of a building or structure, a good and sufficient bond in the sum as established from time to time, shall be posted by the property owner or by his contractor at the time of application for a permit to ensure complete removal or demolition, including all rubble and debris. Failure on the part of the property owner or his contractor to completely demolish, remove and clear the premises after 30 days' notice by the building inspector shall be cause for forfeiture of such bond. 
(Code 1973, § 4-21; Code 1993, § 4-17) 
Sec. 6-9. - Inspections-Procedure. 
    The planning and inspections department shall inspect all buildings and structures and work therein for which a permit of any kind has been issued as often as necessary in order to determine whether the work complies with this chapter and the appropriate codes. 
(Code 1973, § 4-22; Code 1993, § 4-18) 
Sec. 6-10. - Same-Oversight not to legalize violation. 
    No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any inspector or other official or employee of the planning and inspections department shall be deemed to legalize the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of any regulatory code adopted in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 4-23; Code 1993, § 4-19) 
Secs. 6-11-6-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 6-45. - Application. 
    Written application shall be made for all permits required by this article, and shall be made on forms provided by the planning and inspections department. Such application shall be made by the owner of the building or structure affected or by his authorized agent or representative. In addition to such other information as may be required by the appropriate inspector to enable him to determine whether the permit applied for should be issued, the application shall show the following: 
(1)  Name, residence and business address of the owner; 
(2)  Name, residence and business address of the authorized representative or agent, if any; 
(3)  Name and address of the contractor, if any, together with evidence that he has obtained a certificate from the appropriate state licensing board for such contractors, if such is required for the work involved in the permit for which application is made. 
(Code 1973, § 4-44; Code 1993, § 4-66) 
Sec. 6-46. - Plans and specifications. 
    Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for a permit under this article when required by the planning and inspections department, and for any other building or structure where plans and specifications are deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector in order for him to determine whether the proposed work complies with the appropriate regulatory codes. Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed, and the plans and specifications together shall contain information sufficient to indicate that the work proposed will conform to the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes. Where plans and specifications are required, a copy of the same shall be kept at the work site until all authorized operations have been completed and approved by the appropriate inspector. 
(Code 1973, § 4-45; Code 1993, § 4-67) 
Sec. 6-47. - Issuance. 
    When proper application for a permit has been made pursuant to this article, and the appropriate inspector is satisfied that the application and the proposed work comply with the provisions of this article and the appropriate regulatory codes, he shall issue such permit upon payment of the proper fee or fees as provided in section 6-48. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no building permit shall be issued for any proposed work or for any building or other structure where the site is located in an area under active consideration for rezoning by the planning board or city council when the result of such rezoning would be to make such building, structure or other work nonconforming or the use intended would be nonpermitted. Nor shall a building permit be issued if a proposed change in the zoning ordinance would make the proposed building, structure, other work or the use thereof nonconforming, provided such proposed change is then being actively pursued. Such proposal for rezoning or change in the zoning ordinance will be considered under active consideration or being actively pursued from the time when the planning board adopts a motion to recommend rezoning of property or to change the zoning ordinance until final action upon the rezoning or change by the city council or withdrawal of the request. 
(Code 1973, § 4-47; Code 1993, § 4-68; Ord. No. 1989-05, 3-23-1989) 
Sec. 6-48. - Fees. 
(a)  Permit fees shall be as provided in the most current adopted schedule, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued until such time as proper fees are paid. 
(Code 1973, § 4-51; Code 1993, § 4-69) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Annotations- Morehead City was not authorized to prohibit the sale of a malt beverage containing over one-half percent of alcohol and less than two percent, State v. Dannenberg, 150 N.C. 799, 63 S.E. 946 (1909). Morehead City was not authorized to levy a tax on the soliciting or taking orders for goods, which only applied to nonresident businesses, State v. Williams, 158 N.C. 610, 73 S.E. 1000 (1912). 
State Law reference- Commerce and business, G.S. Ch. 66; discrimination in business, G.S. Ch. 75B; occupational licensing boards, G.S. Ch. 93B; state department of labor and labor regulations, G.S. Ch. 95; taxation, G.S. Ch. 105; places of amusement, G.S. 160A-181; Sunday closing ordinances, G.S. 160A-191; regulating and licensing businesses, trades, etc., G.S. 160A-194; municipal taxation, G.S. 160A-206 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SHOWS, SHOW HOUSES AND CIRCUSES 

Sec. 8-19. - License for theaters, opera houses, motion picture houses. 
    No person shall maintain or operate any house, room, tent or other structure or part thereof as a theater or opera house or as a motion picture house in which public performances are given for profit, without a license therefor issued by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 12-20; Code 1993, § 8-46) 
Sec. 8-20. - License for outside show required; exceptions. 
    No person shall operate or maintain any show or circus outside of any house or structure licensed under the provisions of section 8-19 without a license therefor issued by the city council; provided, amateur shows, circuses or other performances operated by any church, school or college or by any fraternal organization shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 12-21; Code 1993, § 8-47) 
Sec. 8-21. - Application for license. 
    Application for licenses required by this article shall be made upon a form provided by the city, made to the city council and filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 12-22; Code 1993, § 8-48) 
Sec. 8-22. - Causes for license denial. 
    The city council shall refuse to issue a license under this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  When the person applying for same is not of good moral character; 
(2)  For any show or circus that is obscene, as defined by state law; 
(3)  For any other good and sufficient cause, in the discretion of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 12-23; Code 1993, § 8-49) 
State Law reference- "Obscene" defined, G.S. 14-190.1. 
Sec. 8-23. - Revocation of license. 
    The city council may at any time, for cause, and after a hearing of which reasonable notice shall be given the licensee, revoke any license issued under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 12-24; Code 1993, § 8-50) 
Sec. 8-24. - Proximity to churches, schools. 
    No commercial show, theater, drama, motion picture show or any other type of show shall be located nearer than 200 feet from any of the churches or the public or private schools within the city. This section, however, shall not apply to any amusement or show that the schools or churches may have to raise funds for the benefit of the schools or churches. 
(Code 1973, § 12-25; Code 1993, § 8-51) 
Secs. 8-25-8-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ITINERANT MERCHANT LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate peddlers and itinerant merchants, G.S. 160A-178. 

Sec. 8-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person, firm, association, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or proprietorship. Any of these under common ownership or in which the same three or less persons own the majority interest shall be considered the same applicant. 
    Goods means anything of value offered for sale. 
    Itinerant merchant/transient merchant/itinerant vendor means any person other than a merchant with an established retail store in the town, who transports an inventory of goods to a building, vacant lot, or other location in the town, and who, at that location, displays the goods, for sale and sells or offers to sell the goods at retail including, without limitation, a merchant who sells goods at such location for less than six consecutive months. 
    Peddler means any person engaged in business with no fixed place of business and who travels from place-to-place with an inventory of goods, who sells the goods at retail or offers the goods for sale at retail and who delivers the identical goods carried with him. Included is anyone who offers any articles of goods or merchandise for sale from house-to-house by any person on foot, or from a cart, truck, automobile or other vehicle operated over and upon the streets/highways. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, firm, joint venture, or professional association. 
(Code 1993, § 8-121; Ord. No. 1997-33, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 8-53. - Peddlers. 
(a)  Exemptions and special provisions. The following persons or firms are exempt from the peddler's provisions of this article: 
(1)  Sellers of farm or nursery products they produce or seafood they catch; 
(2)  Sellers of crafts or goods they or their household produced; 
(3)  Nonprofit charitable, educational, religious, scientific or civic organizations; 
(4)  Licensed automobile dealers; 
(5)  Peddlers who maintain a fixed permanent location from which they make at least 90 percent of their sales; and 
(6)  Peddlers who comply with G.S. 25A-38 25A-45 (consumer credit sales at residences with right to cancel) or G.S. 14-401.13 (off-premises sales of consumer goods/services of $25.00 or more). 
(b)  License fee for peddlers. The most current adopted license fee on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Application. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to peddle any goods within the city until such person shall have first complied with the requirements of this article and shall have annually made application to obtain a license as required by the city's Code of Ordinances and pay such administrative fees, as required, to cover cost of investigation and processing relevant to the issuance of a license. 
(Code 1993, § 8-122; Ord. No. 1997-33, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 8-54. - Itinerant merchant/transient merchant/itinerant vendor. 
(a)  Exemptions and special provisions. The following persons or firms are exempt from the itinerant merchant's, transient merchant's and itinerant vendor's provisions of this article: 
(1)  Sellers of farm or nursery products they produce or seafood they catch; 
(2)  Seller of crafts or goods they or their household produced; 
(3)  Nonprofit charitable, educational, religious, scientific or civic organizations and sellers at events sponsored by them; 
(4)  Licensed automobile dealers; 
(5)  A specialty market vendor at a licensed specialty market or at a specialty market operated by the state or a local government; 
(6)  Sellers located at farmer's market; and 
(7)  One who sells goods at an auction conducted by an auctioneer licensed in compliance with Chapter 85B of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
(b)  Fees for itinerant merchants. It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor to engage in such business within the city without obtaining an itinerant merchant license from the city manager or his designee and license from the city clerk. 
(c)  Application and licenses. 
(1)  Applicants for a license under this article shall pay the fee specified in the fee schedule adopted by the city council and shall file with the city manager or his designee a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city manager or his designee which shall: 
a.  Give the name of the business and applicant's permanent address; and 
b.  Give the permanent name and address of the person, firm or corporation being represented; and 
c.  Include the proposed location and written permission and/or copy of contract from the property owner or his authorized agent to use the property/place where goods or property are proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof; and 
d.  Provide a brief description of the nature of the business and the merchandise to be sold; and 
e.  Provide a two-inch by two-inch head and shoulder photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application; and 
f.  Provide proof of sales tax reporting number issued by the North Carolina Department of Revenue; and 
g.  Post a $5,000.00 surety bond issued by a surety company licensed to do business in the state, payable to the city and approved by the city attorney as to form, to provide payment of any and all penalties provided by this ordinance and to protect members of the public by providing a fund from which payment of court orders or judgments may be made. Such bond shall be in effect for a period of one year from the date that a license is issued to the applicant. 
(2)  Licenses shall be good for six months from the date of issue and not more than one license may be issued to an itinerant merchant in any 12-month period. Licenses may not be transferred, and the license shall not be extended by the opening of other or additional locations. 
(3)  The license fee shall be deemed to cover and include charges for solid waste pick-up for one location according to the town's regular collection schedule and policies in place from time to time and one 90-gallon rollout cart as a receptacle for solid waste. For each additional location, the applicant shall pay the fee specified by the fee schedule adopted by the city council, which fee will cover solid waste fees (including one 90-gallon roll-out cart for each location) and license. 
(d)  Regulations generally. 
(1)  Anyone holding an itinerant merchant license shall comply with the following: 
a.  An itinerant merchant must remove his goods, trailers, trucks, buses, vehicles, tables, coolers, ice machines, tents, refrigerators, lighting, flags/pennants, signs, etc., from the premises each day by 8:00 p.m. This provision shall not apply to those itinerant merchants selling within a permanent building meeting all building, zoning and health code requirements; 
b.  Itinerant merchants shall not place any food, wares, or articles of goods on any municipally owned or occupied property nor within the public street and highway rights-of-way, nor, without the written consent of the owner thereof, on parking lots and other outdoor areas open to the public; 
c.  Itinerant merchants shall not place more than one freestanding sign per lot on any one street in order to advertise/identify the location of the itinerant merchant ; 
d.  Itinerant merchants shall not sell or offer for sale any article of goods from any location prior to 4:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. each day; 
e.  Itinerant merchants shall not sell nor offer for sale any goods except in a zoning district in which itinerant merchants are permitted; 
f.  Itinerant merchants shall not transfer a license of or to another person, firm or corporation. 
(Code 1993, § 8-123; Ord. No. 1997-33, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 8-55. - North Carolina Seafood Festival itinerant merchant. 
(a)  Regulations and special exemptions. Applicants for a North Carolina Seafood Festival itinerant merchant license shall be required to meet all conditions of this article, except as hereby noted: 
(1)  Festival itinerant merchants may operate only within the boundaries of the North Carolina Seafood Festival, as identified each year by resolution of the city council; 
(2)  Festival itinerant merchants shall only operate during the days and hours of the seafood festival as published by the festival board; 
(3)  Festival itinerant merchants shall not keep vehicles of any nature within the boundaries of the North Carolina Seafood Festival except as provided by the festival; 
(4)  Itinerant merchants shall not sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the boundaries of the North Carolina Seafood Festival except as provided by the festival. 
(b)  Application and license. Applicants for a North Carolina Seafood Festival itinerant merchant license under this article shall pay the fee specified in the fee schedule adopted by the city council and shall file with the city manager or his designee a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city manager or his designee. The application deadline shall be July 1 of each year. 
(Code 1993, § 8-124; Ord. No. 2004-35, 9-14-2004; Ord. No. 2006-40, 6-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-56. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  Any violation of this article shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $500.00. Violators shall be issued a written citation that shall be paid at the city hall within 96 hours after it is served on the applicant or his agent. 
(b)  Each day a violation continues shall be a separate and distinct violation. 
(c)  The provisions of this article may be enforced through equitable remedies including injunction or abatement issued by a court of competent jurisdiction or any other civil remedy provided by G.S. 160A-175. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(e)  A license may be revoked for any violation of this article. Written notification of revocation shall be sent by the city manager or his designee. Anyone aggrieved by such revocation may ask for a hearing with the city manager by filing a written request therefor with the city manager within ten calendar days of receiving notice of the revocation. The city manager shall hear the request for review of the revocation within 14 working days after the request is delivered to him, and his decision shall be final. No sales shall be made during the appeal process. 
(f)  This article is not a criminal ordinance and shall not be enforced under the provisions of G.S. 14-4-1. 
(Code 1993, § 8-125; Ord. No. 1997-33, 10-14-1997) 
Secs. 8-57-8-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXICABS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Transporting fortified wine or spirituous liquor in a for-hire passenger vehicle, G.S. 18B-401; age limits for drivers of public passenger-carrying vehicles, G.S. 20-10; general municipal powers as to taxicabs, G.S. 20-37, 160A-304; passenger vehicle registration fees, G.S. 20-87; for-hire vehicles to be marked, G.S. 20-201; financial responsibility, G.S. 20-280. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-86. - Definitions; compliance required; provision of service. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base fare means the minimum fare plus the fare per mile and per minute. 
    Driver means a person who actually drives a vehicle for hire on streets or highways in the city or within one mile thereof. 
    Holder means one to whom a certificate of convenience and necessity has been issued. 
    Limousine means a for-hire motor vehicle engaged in the on-call or on-demand business of carrying, transporting or conveying people but does not solicit passengers indiscriminately between points along streets or highways. The driver, owner, employee or any person assisting with the operation of, or business of, a limousine shall not leave the vehicle to solicit passengers. 
    Owner means: 
(1)  Any person having control of the operation or maintenance and collection of all or part of the revenue of vehicles for hire; 
(2)  Any person who holds the legal title of a vehicle; 
(3)  Any vendee or lessee in legal possession or entitled to possession of a vehicle subject to an agreement for conditional sale or lease with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement; 
(4)  A mortgagor of a vehicle who is entitled to possession; or 
(5)  A lessee of a vehicle who is entitled to its possession. 
    Pedicabs means a cycle with three or more wheels operated by one person for the purpose of, or capable of, transporting passengers for hire in seats or on a platform made part of the pedicab. 
    Permit means an owner's permit or a driver's permit as the context indicates. 
    Premium service means transportation of passengers when each passenger will pay a fare. 
    Rate card means every taxicab, pedicab and rickshaw operated under this chapter shall have a rate card setting forth the rates of fare for the distance traveled and the waiting time, displayed in a conspicuous place inside each taxicab, pedicab and rickshaw. Such card shall also set forth the charge for carrying packages or similar articles in addition to the fee assessed by taxicabs for each passenger of a party in excess of four in number. 
    Response time means the time which elapses between the time a prospective passenger specifies as the time he wishes to have a vehicle at the trip origin, and the time when the vehicle arrives at that location, provided that no indirect route is taken unless required by authority. 
    Rickshaw means a two-wheeled vehicle pulled by one person for the purpose of, or capable of, transporting not more than two passengers. 
    Shared service means transportation of passengers when they divide one fare among them. 
    Taxicab means vehicles other than limousines driven or intended to be driven or propelled by gasoline, electric motor or other power or mechanical devices, which is or is intended to be used for the purpose of carrying, transporting or conveying one or more persons from one place to another, for which services a charge or fee is made or accepted. Any taxicab parked or traveling on the streets of the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article. This definition shall not include motorbuses operating along regular, established, authorized routes or between fixed termini. 
    Taximeter means a mechanical instrument or device attached to a taxicab by which the charge for the hire of a taxicab and its corresponding waiting time at a predetermined rate is mechanically calculated and registered for the distance traveled and the period of time awaited and upon which such charges shall be identified by means of figures clearly visible to a passenger for the passenger's information. 
    Vehicle means a device, such as, but not limited to, a car, bus or cycle, for carrying passengers, goods, or equipment. 
    Vehicle for hire means any vehicle (including, without limitation, limousines of whatever capacity and "party buses") or device designed or used for the transportation of passengers for hire, the charges or compensation for which are determined by chance, agreement, mileage, by the length of time for which the vehicle is engaged or by tips. As used in this article a vehicle for hire does not include: 
(1)  School buses; 
(2)  Vehicles used or operated under the control of the United States, the State of North Carolina or any political subdivision of the state; 
(3)  Vehicles used for ride-sharing on a not-for-profit basis; 
(4)  Vehicles used for commuter services operated by an employer for the exclusive use of its employees; 
(5)  Vehicles used as ambulances; 
(6)  Vehicles without a taximeter that are used exclusively to provide transportation for persons with a mental or physical disability or illness, older adults, or persons who require nonemergency medical treatment and that are operated by a nonprofit corporation or a state or local social service agency; 
(7)  Vehicles which are the subject of a cost-sharing arrangement between passengers and drivers, which arrangements are not designed to generate a profit, as in the case of carpools; 
(8)  Vehicles providing shuttle transportation of passengers to or from prescribed locations such as hotels, motels, shopping centers, retirement homes, nursing homes, business or commercial buildings, factories or theaters pursuant to a contract with a business at the prescribed location where the passengers are not charged a fee and passengers are not accepted or discharged indiscriminately between prescribed locations; and 
(9)  Vehicles excluded from the town's regulatory authority by state law, including vehicles regulated by the utilities commission under the provisions of G.S. 62-260. 
    Waiting time means: 
(1)  The period of time consumed when, at the direction of a passenger or other customer, a taxicab is not in motion, beginning with the time of acceptance of such direction, and ending at the time of discharge from that direction; and 
(2)  The time consumed while a driver is waiting for a passenger after having responded to a call but not including the time consumed by a premature response nor the first three minutes following an on-time time arrival in response to a call. Time spent which is caused by delay resulting from traffic interruption or backup, the inefficiency of the taxicab or its driver or unnecessary indirect route taken shall not be compensable. 
(b)  Compliance required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating one or more vehicles for hire, or to drive any vehicle for hire, within the corporate limits of the city or within a radius of one mile beyond the corporate limits in all directions, but not including any part of this one-mile area lying within the corporate limits of another municipality, unless such person shall have complied with and shall continue to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
a.  Any taxicab or limousine or other vehicle for hire operated between fixed termini only one of which is within the corporate limits of the city or within one mile beyond the corporate limits; 
b.  If the owner of a vehicle has a certificate of convenience and necessity from another jurisdiction and the owner and/or driver does not solicit business within the city or within one mile thereof; and 
c.  Only the point of origin or only the point of destination of any trip is within the corporate limits of the city or within one mile beyond in all directions, except that even such operations as these described in this subsection (b)(2) shall be subject to the following sections of this article, to wit: 8-209(a)(2), (3) and (4), 8-211, 8-212, 8-216, 8-243, and 8-244 to the extent applicable. Nor shall any of the provisions of this article apply to any taxi, limousine or other vehicle for hire operated through the corporate limits of the city without picking up and/or discharging any passenger within the city and surrounding one-mile territory. 
(c)  Provision of service. All persons engaged in the business of operating vehicles for hire in the city shall render service to the public desiring to use such vehicles. Holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity (other than limited taxi services) shall maintain a central place of business for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching vehicles and may provide an alternate telephone number where calls are to be received during other than business hours. All holders shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the city as soon as they can do so, and if services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers of how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere within the city at any time when such holder has available vehicles, or who shall fail or refuse to give service, shall be deemed a violator of this article, and the certificate granted to such holder may be revoked at the discretion of the city council subject to the hearing requirements of subsection 8-122(b). 
(Code 1993, § 8-180; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, 5-10-2016) 
Secs. 8-87-8-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 

Sec. 8-116. - Application. 
    Every person desiring to operate a taxicab or limousine business, other than as an employee of a taxicab or limousine business which has a certificate of convenience and necessity issued by the city, upon and over the streets of the city must hold a certificate of convenience and necessity. Each such person shall file an application or renewal application on forms supplied by the city clerk. Each application or renewal application shall be accompanied by the most currently adopted fee on file in the office of the city clerk. Each application or renewal of application shall be for a certificate to operate for a period of two years. 
(Code 1993, § 8-185; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-117. - Public hearing. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity, the city clerk shall be notified and shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon not later than 30 days after the date of a fully completed application. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience and necessity have been theretofore issued by the town. Due notice shall also be given the general public by posting a notice of such hearing in the city hall and by advertising once in a local newspaper for one week not less than seven nor more than 14 days before the date of the public hearing. Any interested person may file with the city clerk a letter or memorandum in support or opposition to the issuance of a certificate. Prior to the designated date of public hearing, the chief of police or his designee shall examine the vehicle of the applicant in order to determine its condition and the applicant's eligibility for a license. In addition, the chief of police or his designee shall ascertain if the applicant has made appropriate arrangements to comply with the insurance requirements as established by the city council for the provision of taxicab or limousine service within the town. 
(Code 1993, § 8-186; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-118. - Determination of convenience and necessity. 
(a)  In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require the franchising of taxicabs or limousines, the city council shall, among other things, take into consideration the following factors: 
(1)  Whether or not the public convenience and necessity will be favorably affected by such proposed or additional taxicab or limousine service within the town; 
(2)  The financial responsibility of the applicant and the likelihood of the proposed service being permanent; 
(3)  The number and condition of equipment; 
(4)  The schedule of proposed rates to be charged; 
(5)  The number of taxicabs or limousines now operated and the demand for increased service, if any, and whether or not the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved, and whether or not adequate provision has been made for off-street parking of such vehicles; 
(6)  The experience of the applicant in the taxicab and/or limousine business; 
(7)  Such other relevant facts as may be deemed necessary and advisable. 
(b)  Before making any decision with respect to the issuance of a certificate of convenience and necessity, the city council, or a committee thereof, shall make a full and complete investigation of all facts, and may, if it so desires, subpoena witnesses and utilize the service of the chief of police or his designee or any other officer or employee of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 8-187; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-119. - Issuance. 
    The town council shall order certificates issued, refuse to issue certificates, or issue certificates for a partial exercise only of the privileges sought. It may attach to the exercise of the rights granted by such certificates such terms and conditions as in its judgment the public convenience and necessity may require. 
(Code 1993, § 8-188; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-120. - Duration. 
    A certificate shall constitute a franchise for two years from the city for the operation of taxicabs or limousines within the city, subject to the provisions of this article, unless a shorter period of time is specified in the certificate. Application for renewal shall be filed biannually, and if there have been no formal written complaints from the public received during the preceding two year period regarding the company, and with the provision of certificates of insurance, driver's license and other required elements, a renewed certificate shall be issued for the same period as the original by the city clerk. Should any formal written complaints have been received, the renewal will follow the same process as the original application, including public notice and the convening of a public hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 8-189; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2014-34, 9-9-2014) 
Sec. 8-121. - Insurance required for all taxis, limousines and other vehicles for hire. 
(a)  No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or continue in effect unless there is in full force and effect common carrier insurance, if available, and if not, automobile liability insurance for all vehicles and public liability insurance for pedicabs and rickshaws authorized in the amount of $30,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of any one person; in the amount of $60,000.00 for injuries to or death of more than one person which are sustained in the same accident and $25,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. If the holder has in operation 15 or more taxicabs or limousines, the insurance limits shall be $20,000.00 for bodily injury or death to one person, $40,000.00 for injury or death to two or more persons; and $25,000.00 for property damage. Such insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured and the estate of anyone dying or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of a holder, his employees, servants, or agents, or by a pedicab or rickshaw owner or operator or their servants, agents or employees. The insurance shall be filed in the office of the city clerk with photostatic copies being distributed to the police department and shall have been issued by a company authorized to do business in the state. 
(b)  If the automobile or liability insurance on any taxi, limousine or other vehicle for hire expires without a new certificate being filed with the city clerk, the city clerk shall immediately notify the chief of police or his designee in writing, and the holder's certificate or driver's permit of a limited taxi service driver shall be null and void. 
(c)  When the city clerk notifies the chief of police or his designee that the automobile or liability insurance on any taxi, limousine or other vehicle for hire has been cancelled or has not been renewed, the chief of police or his designee shall have the certificate of public convenience and necessity canceled and ensure that the business of the uninsured does not thereafter operate any vehicle for hire until such insurance has been reinstated. 
(d)  If the taxicab, limousine or other vehicle for hire is to be operated by a lessee, such insurance shall be posted by the owner or the lessee, or by both. 
(Code 1993, § 8-190; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-122. - Revocation; grounds. 
(a)  The town council may at any time after a hearing, at which the certificate holder may be present and may be represented by a licensed North Carolina attorney, revoke any certificate issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Failure to operate the taxicab or limousine specified in the certificate of convenience and necessity in such a manner as to serve the public adequately and efficiently. 
(2)  Failure to maintain taxicabs and limousines equipment in good repair. 
(3)  Failure to maintain liability insurance in force, as required by G.S. 20-280, and/or failure to file proof of financial responsibility (as defined in such statute) with the city clerk, on or before the tenth calendar day after the adoption of this article, and thereafter, annually, on or before January 31, which such proof of financial responsibility shall include the commitment of the insurance carrier to provide the city with no less than 30 days' notice prior to cancellation of said insurance for any reason whatsoever. 
(4)  Failure to pay to the city taxes or license fees imposed upon such taxicabs or limousines. 
(5)  Repeated and persistent violation, by the holder or by the holder's taxicab or limousine drivers, of traffic and safety ordinances, or provisions of this Code, or state or federal laws relating to alcoholic beverages, prostitution, controlled substances, prescription medication, or of driving while impaired. 
(6)  Failure to report any accident within 24 hours from the time of the occurrence thereof. 
(7)  The making of any false or erroneous statement with reference to: 
a.  The ownership of the taxicabs, limousines, or the taxicab or limousine business; 
b.  The names of those financially interested therein; 
c.  The name of the manager in charge thereof, if the operation of the business is in the charge of a manager; and 
d.  Any other false or erroneous statement made in the application for a certificate required by this article. 
(8)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article relative to transfer of the certificate of convenience and necessity. 
(9)  Failure to give notice of any change of ownership or title to any taxicab or limousine. 
(10)  The employment of any taxicab or limousine driver who shall not have a driver's permit issued by the city. 
(11)  The employment or continued employment of any taxicab or limousine driver whose license shall have been revoked or suspended within five years prior to the time of his employment, or who shall have been twice convicted of any violation of any motor vehicle law within such period. 
(12)  If the record of the holder of the certificate no longer meets the requirements to obtain a certificate of convenience and necessity. 
(13)  The holder of the certificate or anyone financially interested in the business of the certificate holder has been convicted of a felony or violation of any federal or state law, or any provision of this article or other town ordinance, relating to the possession or sale of intoxicating liquor, prostitution, or the use, possession, or sale of controlled substances or prescription medicines not prescribed to the user or purchaser or not used in accordance to the prescription directions, has had repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances, or has become an habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic, barbiturate or hallucinogenic drugs, or prescription or over-the-counter drugs, when any of which affects ability to safely drive a vehicle. 
(14)  Failure to comply with any provision of this article or other ordinances or state or federal laws relating to the operation of taxicabs. 
(b)  No certificate shall be revoked, except as provided in section 8-121, until the owner has had at least five days' notice by personal delivery or registered or certified mail sent to the address designated in his application of the charges against him, and of the time, place, and date of a hearing on the revocation. If by mail, the notice shall be complete three days after posting. If, after the hearing, it is found that a holder is guilty of one or more of the offenses enumerated in this article, the city council shall have the power to revoke the certificate, or to condition a revocation upon failure to comply with its order within a time fixed by it. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the police chief finds that to allow continued operation by a holder of a certificate of convenience and necessity would constitute a clear and present danger to the public health and/or safety, he may immediately order that all operations under that certificate be suspended until the hearing called for in subsection (b) of this section and action taken thereafter. Failure to request a hearing shall cause the suspension to become a permanent revocation. 
(Code 1993, § 8-191; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Secs. 8-123-8-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIMITED TAXI SERVICE 

Sec. 8-143. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Limited taxi service means a business that owns and operates one vehicle for hire which does not advertise for customers, does not solicit fares, and does not pick up or discharge passengers indiscriminately along the city streets and alleys. 
(Code 1993, § 8-192; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-144. - Parts which apply. 
    Only the following parts of this article apply to businesses and vehicles operated as limited taxi service businesses and vehicles: Sections 8-116 through 8-121, 8-180, 8-181 through 8-185, 8-209(a)(2) and (3), 8-210, 8-211, 8-212, and 8-244. 
(Code 1993, § 8-193; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2012-41, 10-9-2012) 
Sec. 8-145. - Fares and markings. 
    Limited taxi service drivers may not solicit nor charge fares, and shall not have any marking on or about the vehicle indicating that it is a taxi or vehicle for hire other than an official taxi license plate. No phone number shall be displayed on or about the vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 8-194; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-146. - Capacity. 
    Limited taxi service vehicles may not carry more than 12 passengers. 
(Code 1993, § 8-195; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-147. - Required displays within vehicle. 
    In addition to the requirement of subsection 8-209(a)(4), limited taxi vehicles shall display, inside the vehicle where visible to passengers, the owner's/driver's name and phone number, and a placard stating that pursuant to section 8-145, they cannot solicit or charge fares. 
(Code 1993, § 8-196; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-148. - Identifying decal. 
    Limited taxi service vehicles shall obtain from the police department and prominently display in a place visible from the exterior of the vehicle a decal identifying the vehicle as a limited taxicab. 
(Code 1993, § 8-197; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Secs. 8-149-8-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 8-180. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the transportation of passengers in a taxi, limousine or other vehicle for hire, in the city or within one mile thereof (which is not in another municipality) unless such person shall have first applied to and secured a driver's permit from the chief of police or his designee. Permits shall be valid for one year from issuance. Renewal applications must be submitted not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the annual permit. 
(b)  The exceptions from compliance with the requirements of this article in subsection 8-86(b)(2) shall apply here to the requirements for a driver's permit. 
(Code 1993, § 8-200; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-181. - Application. 
    Each driver, limousine driver, pedicab driver or operator, rickshaw operator, or "vehicle for hire" driver subject to the provisions of this article shall complete an application on forms furnished by the chief of police. Each applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee to the city and shall submit from his prospective employer, or pay himself if self-employed, a nonrefundable processing fee to defray the cost of conducting the background investigation and other costs of processing the application. Both fees shall be paid at the time the application is made. 
(1)  A person may qualify to be considered for obtaining a driver's permit upon meeting the qualifications herein and by filing, in writing, with the chief of police or his designee, a fully completed application, signed and sworn to by the applicant, which shall contain the following specific information: 
a.  The full name, age, date of birth, place of birth and address of the applicant. 
b.  The length of time of the applicant's residence in the city and in the state and whether or not he is a citizen of the United States. Citizens of the United States shall provide a social security card and noncitizens shall provide a current alien registration card, without which the applicant cannot receive a driver's permit. 
c.  The applicant's full personal description; including his height, weight, sex, race, color of eyes, color of hair, complexion, body and facial marks, scars, tattoos and handicaps, if any. Race shall not be considered when passing on an application. 
d.  The applicant's physical condition including hearing acuity and/or impairment and eyesight condition, his present and past health problems or impairment due to intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages and narcotic, barbiturate or hallucinogenic drugs. 
e.  The applicant's previous places of employment for the five years immediately preceding the date of his application for a driver's permit, and his previous experience in driving taxicabs and other vehicles carrying passengers for hire. 
f.  The applicant's complete record of criminal citations (including those for traffic violations), arrests and convictions. 
g.  The number and date of issuance of the applicant's required state driver's license. 
h.  Such other information as the chief of police or his designee may require. 
i.  Whether the applicant will be a taxicab driver, limousine driver, pedicab operator or rickshaw operator. 
j.  All places in which he has resided during the previous ten years. 
(2)  Every application for a driver's permit shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  Full fingerprints of the applicant. 
b.  Four front-view photographs of the applicant of such sizes as specified by the chief of police or his designee. 
c.  For drivers of taxis, limousines and other motor-propelled vehicles for hire, a physical examination conducted by a licensed medical examiner. The term "medical examiner" includes, but is not limited to, doctors of medicine (MD), doctors of osteopathy (DO), physician assistants (PA), advanced practice nurses (APN), and doctors of chiropractic (DC). The physical exam is valid for up to 24 months. The medical examiner may also issue a medical examiner's certificate for less than 24 months when it is desirable to monitor a condition, such as high blood pressure. 
d.  Additional fees to be determined by the chief of police or his designee to defray the cost of the fingerprint check. All fees are nonrefundable. 
e.  Fees charged by the department of justice for conducting checks of criminal records. 
f.  On forms provided by the chief of police or his designee: 
1.  A letter of introduction from his prospective employer unless self-employed; and 
2.  Consent to a check of criminal records and to use of fingerprints and other identifying information which may be required by the state or national repositories. 
(3)  Applications for a driver's permit shall be granted or denied within 30 days of its submission, if complete when submitted, or within 30 days of when it is made complete. 
(4)  Any material false statement or false information made or given by an applicant in applying for a driver's permit shall invalidate the permit issued to such applicant. 
(Code 1993, § 8-201; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 8-182. - Probationary driver's permit. 
    After the chief of police or his designee has become satisfied as to the qualifications of the applicant as they are indicated on the fully completed application, and after an interview with the applicant, the chief of police or his designee, after checking locally available information contained in the application, may issue a probationary driver's permit to the applicant, not to exceed 60 days in duration, pending receipt of a FBI report and other information on the applicant. 
(Code 1993, § 8-202; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-183. - Examination and investigation. 
(a)  Each applicant for a new or renewed driver's permit may be examined orally, in writing, or both, by the chief of police or his designee as to his knowledge of the provisions of this division, the traffic regulations of the state and the town, and the geography of the town. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to cause a thorough investigation to be made of each applicant for a new or renewed driver's permit to determine: 
(1)  Whether or not the information stated in the application is true. 
(2)  Whether or not the applicant is a person meeting the qualifications required by this division. 
(3)  Whether, as to the particular applicant, there is any basis for refusing to grant or renew a driver's permit as prescribed herein. 
(c)  The chief of police or his designee shall conduct an investigation of an applicant for a license for a driver's permit. In checking an applicant's criminal record, the chief of police or his designee shall examine the criminal records of the city/county bureau of identification, the administrative office of the courts, the division of motor vehicles, the division of criminal information network (DCI), FBI records and the National Crime Information Center (NCIC). The applicant shall provide fingerprints and all other necessary personal identification including a birth certificate, social security number and driver's license, so that the chief of police, or his designee, may cause a thorough search to be made of local, state and national criminal history records to determine if the applicant has a history of criminal convictions of the crimes enumerated in this article by use of the DCI network and NCIC. Any fees for the record check are to be paid by the applicant. No action to issue or deny a license, except a probationary driver's permit, will be taken until the chief of police, or his designee, confirms the identity of the applicant by a match of the applicant's fingerprints to the state bureau of investigation or a certified copy of the public record document is retrieved. 
(d)  The following factors shall be deemed sufficient grounds for refusing to issue a permit or for revoking a permit already issued: 
(1)  Conviction of a felony against the state, or conviction of any offense against another state which would have been a felony if committed in this state; 
(2)  Violation of any federal or state law relating to the use, possession, or sale of alcoholic beverages or narcotic, barbiturate or hallucinogenic drugs or improperly using or possessing prescription drugs; 
(3)  Addiction to or habitual use of alcoholic beverages or narcotic, barbiturate drugs or hallucinogenic drugs or improper use of prescription drugs; 
(4)  Violation of any federal or state law relating to prostitution; 
(5)  Noncitizenship in the United States; 
(6)  Habitual violation of traffic laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1993, § 8-203; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-184. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  In addition to the above, the chief of police or his designee shall refuse to grant or renew a driver's permit for any person: 
(1)  Whose state driver's license or chauffeur's license has been revoked or suspended; provided, however, in case of a state license revocation or suspension a driver's permit may be granted or renewed at the end of the suspension or revocation period. 
(2)  Who has accumulated a sufficient number of points against his driving record under the schedule in G.S. Ch. 20 to justify the suspension or revocation of a state driver's or chauffeur's license. 
(3)  Who, within a period of five years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been convicted of a felony. 
(4)  Who, within a period of five years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been convicted of any crime involving the driving of an automobile resulting in death to any person. 
(5)  Who, within a period of five years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been convicted of driving a motor vehicle while intoxicated. 
(6)  Who, within a period of five years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been convicted of a violation of any town, county, state or federal law relating to the use, possession or sale of intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, beer, wine, narcotic, or barbiturate or other habit-forming drugs or illegal use, possession or sale of prescription drugs. 
(7)  Who, within a period of five years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been convicted of a violation of any town, county, state or federal law relating to prostitution, lotteries or gambling. 
(8)  Who, within a period of five years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been an habitual user of intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, narcotic, barbiturate or other habit-forming drugs, whether prescription drugs or not. 
(9)  Who is a person of such bad character or reputation that it would be clearly contrary to the public interest, safety and welfare to permit such applicant to have a driver's permit. 
(10)  Who has ever been convicted of any sex offense requiring him to be classified as a sex offender. 
(b)  Subsections (a)(1), (2) and (4) of this section shall not apply to pedicab or rickshaw drivers and operators. 
(Code 1993, § 8-204; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-185. - Revocation. 
(a)  A driver's permit may be revoked by the chief of police or his designee for any reason which would be sufficient for refusing to issue a license as provided in subsection 8-183(d) and in subsections 8-184(a)(1), (2), (9) and (10), and: 
(1)  Conviction of any crime involving the driving of an automobile resulting in death to any person. 
(2)  Conviction of any crime involving the sale, possession or use of prescription drugs unless prescribed by one authorized to prescribe or dispense such drugs. 
(3)  Conviction for violation of any law relating to lotteries or gambling. 
(4)  If he has become an habitual user of intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, narcotic, barbiturate or other habit-forming drugs, or prescription drugs for which he has no prescription from an authorized medical professional. 
(5)  Failure to pay any civil penalty assessed in accordance with division 3 of this article for 30 days or more after it is assessed. 
(6)  Charging a fare or collecting any money other than tips and those fares allowed by the provisions of this article or other town ordinance. 
(b)  Appeal. 
(1)  Any person whose driver's permit has been revoked by the chief of police or his designee may appeal from the decision of the chief of police or his designee to the city manager provided that he files with the city clerk a notice or request for the appeal, providing the following information not later than ten days following receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police or his designee: appellant's name, phone number, driver's permit number, North Carolina driver's license number and reason or basis for the appeal. Upon such notice of appeal, the city manager shall schedule a hearing to be held not more than ten business days from the date of such notice of appeal. 
(2)  At the hearing, the appellant may be represented by an attorney if he notifies the city clerk of intent so to do not less than five days before the scheduled hearing. The appellant may produce such affidavits or witnesses as he may desire so long as the same are relevant to the reason for the revocation of the driver's permit. The appellant will have the right to examine any other witnesses appearing at the hearing. 
(3)  The city manager shall reach a decision within ten days of the date of the hearing and will notify the appellant of the decision either by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address which the appellant shall furnish at the time of the notice of appeal. A decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205; Ord. No. 2012-39, 9-11-2012) 
Secs. 8-186-8-208. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EQUIPMENT, VEHICLE CONDITION, INSPECTIONS AND RECORDS 

Sec. 8-209. - Equipment required. 
(a)  In addition to equipment required of motor vehicles by the General Statutes, every vehicle for hire, the operation of which is subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Be equipped with a tell-tale light on top of a taxicab so designed that when the meter is engaged and the parking lights are on, the light goes out, and when the vehicle is not engaged, the light is burning. The size of the light shall be no less than ten inches across, four inches deep, and four inches high; 
(2)  Be equipped with a standard speedometer properly installed, maintained in good working order and exposed to view. No taxicab shall be operated in taxicab service while such speedometer is out of repair or disconnected; 
(3)  Be equipped with a heater and an air conditioner with a shutoff appliance thereon, sufficient to heat and cool the interior of the cab to a comfortable temperature in hot or cold weather; 
(4)  Be equipped with a card frame for the proper display of the owner's permit and the driver's permit; 
(5)  Be equipped with a single-tariff taximeter of a type approved by the chief of police or his designee, inspected for accuracy and installed according to the requirements of the chief of police or his designee unless the taxicab is to be used exclusively to provide shared taxi service; provided, no taxicab shall be operated while occupied by a person in addition to the driver with the taximeter not engaged, except when the taxicab is being used to provide shared taxi service. The taximeter shall be attached to and located within the taxicab so as to be in front of the passengers and visible to them at all times, day and night. The face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. The taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, operated either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels of the taxicab by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism; and 
(6)  Have a taximeter that is sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect its correct reading and recording. The taximeter on each taxicab shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the taxicab inspector. Any inspector or other officer of the police department is hereby authorized, either on complaint of any person or without such complaint, to inspect any taximeter, and upon discovery of any inaccuracy, to notify the owner and person operating the taxicab to cease operation on premium service; thereupon, such taxicab shall not be operated on premium service until the taximeter has been repaired and is in the required working condition, approved by the proper inspecting officer of the town. 
(b)  Only subsection (a)(4) of this section shall apply to pedicabs and rickshaws. Only subsections (a)(2), (3) and (4) of this section shall apply to limousines. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205.1; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 8.210, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-210. - Vehicle inspection; condition of vehicle. 
    Every vehicle, or other device, operating under this chapter shall be periodically inspected by the chief of police or his designee at such intervals as shall be established by the chief of police or his designee to ensure the vehicle or other device used to transport passengers for hire is mechanically and structurally in good repair and working order and is safe to operate upon the streets of the town. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205.2; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 8.211, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-211. - Maintenance. 
    When an owner shall find any vehicle or other device used to transport passengers for hire to be in unsafe or improper condition for operation, he shall have such repairs and alterations made as may be required and shall not operate, or cause or permit to be operated, any such vehicle or device until all such repairs and alterations have been completed. Every owner shall institute a system of regular monthly inspection of vehicles or other devices and equipment owned and operated by such owner. A record of these inspections shall be kept by each owner and shall be available to the chief of police or his designee upon request. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205.3; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 8.212, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-212. - Sanitation. 
    Every owner of a vehicle or other device to transport passengers for hire shall clean the exterior as needed to keep it presentable and shall clean the interior of such so that it is clean and free of trash and debris at least once in every 24 hours, and shall disinfect the interior when required by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205.4; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 8.213, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-213. - Identification of taxicabs and other vehicles for hire. 
(a)  A name identifying the owner, vehicle number, and telephone number shall be painted with permanent paint on both sides and rear of each cab with letters and numbers at least four inches high or greater on sides, and with a cab number at the rear of at least four inches high at a location to be designated by the chief of police or his designee. Pedicabs and rickshaws shall identify vehicles so as to plainly and visibly disclose the owner, business name and telephone number in such size letters and numbers on the rear and/or sides of their vehicles as may be approved by the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall issue a city decal for each vehicle covered by this section signifying that said vehicle is in compliance in all respects to this section. This includes limousines and vehicles for hire. 
(c)  Colors of paint to be used for lettering and numbers shall be of sharp contrast with color of the surface paint to which it is applied, so as to be plainly visible at a reasonable distance during daylight and at nighttime by the light of the streetlights. No lettering or numbers will be acceptable which have been painted upon a sheet of metal or other material which can be removed or detached. 
(d)  In lieu of paint, any material required by this section to be painted on a taxicab may be placed on the cab through the use of an adhesive decal containing the required information and name. This authorization does not include or permit the use of magnetic signs or devices to convey the required information. 
(e)  All vehicles subject to this article must comply with the provisions of this section as they are first put into service, replaced or repainted. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205.5; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 8.214, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 8-214. - Taximeter. 
(a)  Each taxicab subject to this article and operated in the city shall be equipped with a taxicab meter, the make and model of which shall have been approved by the chief of police or his designee. After each meter shall have been installed, it shall be tested for accuracy by the chief of police or his designee and sealed in such a fashion that it shall be readily apparent if the meter shall have been opened and subjected to tampering. 
(b)  Prior to use, each meter shall be set so that it registers the fares that shall have been established by ordinance of the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205.6; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 8.215, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-215. - Schedule of fares. 
    The owners or operators of taxicabs, pedicabs and/or rickshaws shall be required to post a printed schedule of passenger fares in a conspicuous place in each vehicle where it may be seen and easily read by passengers. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205.8; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 8.217, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-216. - Receipts required. 
    The driver of any vehicle subject to this article shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt approved by the police department on which shall be the name of the owner, license number (if applicable), amount of meter reading or charges and the date of the transaction. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205.9; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 8.218, 9-11-2012) 
Secs. 8-217-8-242. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 8-243. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In addition to civil penalties, this article may be enforced by the equitable remedies of injunction, abatement and mandamus. 
(b)  Pursuant to G.S. 160A-175(c), and in addition to all other civil remedies and sanctions imposed under this Code, there is hereby imposed a civil penalty in the amount of $250.00 for failure to observe the standards established, and requirements and restrictions imposed, under this article. Such penalties shall bear interest at 12 percent per annum from the tenth day after it is assessed until paid. Each day an infraction continues and each time an infraction is repeated shall be cause for the assessment of an additional penalty as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  The levying of civil penalties shall be initiated by any police officer giving written notice of the infraction committed to the taxicab owner or driver, along with a statement that a civil penalty is being imposed. The notice shall inform the owner or driver that he may appeal the civil penalty within ten days to the chief of police or his designee. If an appeal is made, a hearing shall be held before the chief of police or his designee, who, following the hearing, shall affirm or reverse the imposition of the penalty. 
(d)  For the second violation of the same provision of this article during that 12 months beginning with the date of the first violation, the civil penalty shall be double that imposed for the first violation. A third violation of the same or of any provision of this article within the 12-month period will result in the revocation of the certificate of convenience and necessity or driver's permit, as applicable. 
(e)  Civil penalties shall be paid within 30 days to the office of the tax collector. If not so paid, the city may initiate a civil action in the name of the city in the nature of debt to collect the unpaid penalties, interest and costs of court which shall include reasonable attorney's fees. 
(f)  Any permit required to be issued and renewed under the terms of this article shall not be issued or renewed in the event civil penalties for violations remain unpaid by the applicant or by an employee of the applicant. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205.10; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 8.221, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-244. - Refusal to pay fare. 
    Failure to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this article after having hired the same or employing any vehicle for hire with intent to not to pay for such service shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00. 
(Code 1993, § 8-205.11; Ord. No. 2012-39, § 8.222, 9-11-2012) 
Secs. 8-245-8-266. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TOW SERVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Trailers and towed vehicles, G.S. 20-123. 

Sec. 8-267. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Day towing means tow service during the local hours of 7:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, except official federal and state holidays. 
    Hook-up means the application and first connection of a chain hook from the tow service truck to the towed motor vehicle. 
    Night, weekend and holiday towing means tow service at all times other than day towing. 
    Tow service means a person engaged in the business of a wrecker or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are towed or otherwise removed by the use of a wrecker or motor vehicle designed for that purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 22-1; Code 1993, § 8-266) 
State Law reference- Dates of public holidays, G.S. 103-4. 
Sec. 8-268. - Exclusions. 
    This article shall not apply to wrecker services that are not listed on the police call list. 
(Code 1973, § 22-9; Code 1993, § 8-267) 
Sec. 8-269. - Police call list. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish a call list of tow services desiring to provide towing services upon request of police officers. The tow services that desire to be placed upon the call list shall comply with the requirements of this article and with all other rules and regulations the chief of police may issue regarding towing services. 
(Code 1973, § 22-2; Code 1993, § 8-268) 
Sec. 8-270. - Selection of tow services during police investigations. 
    In all police-initiated towing of vehicles, the operator of the vehicle, if present and not incapacitated, shall have the right to select a tow service of his choice to perform the towing service. If the operator of the vehicle to be towed is not present, or is incapacitated, or has no preference as to any specific towing service, the police officer ordering the tow shall request that the towing service be performed by the tow service then on call according to the call list maintained by the police communications center. If this tow service cannot, does not or will not answer the request within a reasonable time, the officer will call the towing service that is next in rotation. When emergency circumstances prevail, the police officer may request towing services from the tow service nearest to the scene of the accident or emergency. A police officer may also request towing services from any company operating large cranes or other heavy equipment if necessary to remove traffic obstructions involving large trucks or heavy equipment. 
(Code 1973, § 22-3; Code 1993, § 8-269; Ord. No. 2010-08, 3-9-2010) 
Sec. 8-271. - Application for call list privilege. 
(a)  Application for listing on the police call list of tow services shall be notarized and shall be made upon blank forms prepared and made available by the chief of police and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, home address and proposed business address of each owner, part owner or partner, silent or active, and if a corporation, each officer, director and shareholder; 
(2)  The business address, business telephone number, telephone number for night calls, location and telephone number for storage area; 
(3)  A description of the size and capacity of all tow trucks used by the tow truck operator; 
(4)  A description of the storage area for towed vehicles; and 
(5)  A copy of the registration card issued by the state department of motor vehicles for each tow truck used by the tow truck operator, indicating that each tow truck is registered as a wrecker as defined in G.S. Ch. 20. 
(b)  Application payment. Every wrecker shall pay a fee as provided in the most current adopted schedule on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  The application shall be signed by each owner, part owner or partner, silent or active, and if a corporation, shall be signed by all shareholders, officers and directors. 
(Code 1973, § 22-4; Code 1993, § 8-270; Ord. No. 2009-35, 8-11-2009) 
State Law reference- "Wreckers" defined, G.S. 20-4.01. 
Sec. 8-272. - Insurance. 
    No tow service shall be added to the police call list until the applicant has deposited with the police chief proof of the following liability coverage: 
(1)  Garage keeper's policy. A garage keeper's comprehensive facility liability policy covering fire, theft and explosion in an amount not less than $20,000.00, together with collision liability coverage of not less than $20,000.00, subject to a maximum deductible of $100.00. 
(2)  Garage liability policy. A garage liability policy, covering the operation of the applicant's business, equipment and vehicles, for any bodily injury, personal injury or property damage. This policy shall be in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for each person and not less than $300,000.00 aggregate. This policy shall also have not less than $50,000.00 coverage for any damage arising out of injury to or loss of or destruction of property. 
(Code 1973, § 22-5; Code 1993, § 8-271) 
Sec. 8-273. - Investigation by chief of police. 
    Within five business days after receipt of each application for listing on the police call list, the chief of police or his agents shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and of his proposed operation. Such investigation shall be made for the purpose of verifying the information in the application and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 22-6; Code 1993, § 8-272) 
Sec. 8-274. - Standards for services on call list. 
    The police chief shall add a tow service to the police call list when he finds that: 
(1)  The public convenience and necessity require the proposed tow service for which application has been submitted; 
(2)  The tow service business location and its storage facilities are or will be located within the city limits; 
(3)  Insurance policies as required by this article have been procured; 
(4)  All applicants, owners, officers, directors, shareholders and partners are fit and proper persons to conduct or work in the proposed business and have never been convicted of any felony, assault, theft or any other crime involving the taking, use, tampering with or conversion of a motor vehicle; 
(5)  The tow service will use only tow trucks equipped with an amber-colored flashing light, which shall be operating during any tow as provided by law; 
(6)  The tow service will provide 24 hours per day, seven days per week, on-call service; 
(7)  The tow service will arrive at the location of the vehicle to be towed within 20 minutes after receiving a request for day towing service and within a reasonable time after receiving a request for night, weekend and holiday towing from the police department; 
(8)  The tow service will provide and use a storage area for towed vehicles that is enclosed by a chain link fence or equivalently secured fence or enclosure which shall be illuminated at night; 
(9)  The requirements of this article and all other governing laws and ordinances have been met; 
(10)  No applicant nor any owner, officer, director, shareholder, associate or partner of the applicant is already listed on the call list whether in his own name or as an owner, officer, director, shareholder, associate or partner of any other listed towing service. 
(Code 1973, § 22-7; Code 1993, § 8-273) 
State Law reference- Use of amber lights on wreckers, etc., G.S. 20-130.2. 
Sec. 8-275. - Duties of services on call list. 
    A tow service shall be added to the police call list subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Maintenance of equipment. Tow services shall maintain towing equipment that is adequate to perform towing service in a reasonably workmanlike manner and is properly equipped to tow vehicles in such a manner as to minimize any damage to towed vehicles. 
(2)  Compliance with rate schedule. Tow services shall not charge for their services more than the most currently adopted schedule, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(3)  Towing involving extraordinary labor and expenses. The maximum charge may be exceeded if unusual and extraordinary circumstances prevail at the scene of an emergency, but use of a dolly in making a tow of an unwrecked motor vehicle shall not be considered justification for an additional charge in the absence of unusual and extraordinary circumstances requiring an unusual expenditure of time and labor by the tow truck operator. 
(4)  Interception of police calls. No tow service shall arrive at the scene of a police investigation as a result of monitored or intercepted police calls by radio or other device for the purpose of soliciting towing or repair services. 
(5)  Records. Any tow service operating under this article must have the following records of any motor vehicle towed: the make and model of the motor vehicle, the license number of the motor vehicle and the date of the towing service. These records shall be maintained for one year from the date of towing by the tow service. 
(6)  Storage. Any motor vehicle towed must be stored in a yard with adequate security against intruders, including chain link or equivalently secured fencing or enclosure and lighting at night. 
(7)  Availability for redemption. The tow service shall post a phone number at the place of business setting forth the manner in which to redeem any towed vehicle. Such phone number shall be printed not less than three inches high and posted in a place clearly visible outside the business. The sign shall explain in what manner a stored vehicle can be redeemed. 
(8)  Damage. The person operating any such tow service shall make every reasonable effort to minimize damage to towed and stored motor vehicles. Where applicable, such reasonable effort shall include, but is not limited to: the use of a dolly or carriage for towing, the disconnection of the driveshaft, release of brakes, towing at a reasonable speed, and the securing of the motor vehicle from damage by elements. 
(9)  Early surrender. If the owner of a motor vehicle shall return before the hook-up is complete, the tow service shall release the vehicle to such owner or operator upon demand and shall not have the right to charge such owner or operator a fee as specified in this section. 
(10)  Securing stored vehicles. No towed vehicle may be dismantled, have parts removed, or tires deflated, except as necessary for towing the motor vehicle or securing it from damage by the elements. 
(11)  Itemized statement. The tow service bill for towing and storage of any motor vehicle shall be itemized to reflect services performed, labor or other materials required, and any storage or other charges. 
(Code 1973, § 22-8; Code 1993, § 8-274) 
Sec. 8-276. - Revocation of listing. 
    The city manager will revoke a police call listing when he finds any of the following to be true: 
(1)  The listing was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact, or that any fact concerning the applicant was not disclosed at the time of making application, and such fact would have constituted just cause for refusal to issue the listing. 
(2)  The applicant illegally solicited tow or repair services at a police investigation. 
(3)  The applicant paid any third person for information as to the location of any vehicle in compensation for calling the applicant to tow such vehicle. 
(4)  The applicant has exceeded the fee schedule. 
(5)  The applicant has violated any of the requirements of this article or any of the rules and regulations as established by the police chief or the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 22-10; Code 1993, § 8-275) 
Sec. 8-277. - Period of revocation. 
    The period of revocation of the listing of a tow service shall be as follows: 
(1)  Thirty days' revocation for the first violation. 
(2)  Ninety days' revocation for the second violation. 
(3)  Such revocation as the city manager shall determine, including permanent loss of listing, for third or subsequent violations. 
(Code 1973, § 22-11; Code 1993, § 8-276) 
Sec. 8-278. - Renewal. 
    The police call list listing shall be valid for one year from the date of acceptance. Each application for renewal shall contain adequate assurances that the applicant continued to comply with all standards, rules and regulations prescribed under this article. Such renewals shall be on a form designated by the chief of police and shall contain the names of any new owners, part owners, officers, directors, shareholders or partners, and the names of any new employees. 
(Code 1973, § 22-12; Code 1993, § 8-277) 
Sec. 8-279. - Service call rotation. 
    All towing services that meet the requirements of this article to be on the police rotation list will be placed into the computerized dispatch list in consecutive repeating order. As a call for service arises the next rotation service will be contacted and given the opportunity to respond with a driver and equipment. Refusal by the tow service to respond or to respond with an inadequate driver and/or equipment will initiate contact with the next service on the list. Repeated refusals from the tow service to respond will result in a letter from the chief of police removing the service from the rotation list and the tow service must reapply for appointment. 
(Code 1973, § 22-13; Code 1993, § 8-278; Ord. No. 2009-35, 8-11-2009) 
Secs. 8-280-8-306. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ALARM SYSTEMS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Alarm systems, G.S. Ch. 74D. 

Sec. 8-307. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any mechanism, equipment or device that is designated to operate automatically through the use of public telephone facilities to transmit to a city department a signal, message or warning of fire, burglary or unauthorized intrusion. 
    False alarm means any alarm system signal transmitted to a city department that is caused by equipment malfunction or by user error in operating the system. 
    False alarm day means any 24-hour period that begins with the receipt of a false alarm. 
    PBX means private board exchange. 
(Code 1973, § 21/2-1; Code 1993, § 8-296) 
Sec. 8-308. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate or maintain an alarm system that automatically transmits a signal, message or warning to the city police department or fire department, without first obtaining a permit as required by this article. 
(b)  Application. Applications for permits to install, maintain or operate an alarm system which is intended to transmit automatically a signal, message or warning to the city police department or fire department shall be filed with the chief of the concerned department on forms supplied by the city, together with the most currently adopted application fee, on file in the office of the city clerk. The application shall set forth the name, address and telephone number of both the installer of the system and the person on whose premises the system will be installed, as well as a description of the location where it is proposed to be installed. The chief of the concerned department shall approve such application if he finds that: 
(1)  The use of the alarm system to transmit a signal, message or warning to a designated city police department or fire department will not interfere with the orderly conduct of city business. 
(2)  The installer of an alarm system maintains a service organization capable of making necessary repairs within a reasonable period after notice of equipment malfunction. 
(3)  The installer of a burglar or unauthorized entry detection system is licensed by the state under G.S. Ch. 74D. 
(c)  Right of inspection. The chief of the concerned department, either police or fire, shall have the right to test any alarm system on the premises where it is intended to function prior to issuance of any permit for its operation, and he may cause a test of such system to be made at any time after issuance of a permit to determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of a permit and the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Revocation. The chief of the concerned department may revoke any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, after giving written notice to the permit holder and an opportunity for the permit holder to be heard, if he determines that the alarm installed pursuant to the permit has been installed, maintained or operated in violation of the provisions of this article, or of any term or condition of the permit. 
(Code 1973, §§ 21/2-2-21/2-4, 21/2-6; Code 1993, § 8-297) 
Sec. 8-309. - Restricted numbers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain an alarm system that automatically transmits a signal, message or warning to any city police department or fire department telephone line, except to such telephone number as designated by a permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 21/2-5; Code 1993, § 8-298) 
Sec. 8-310. - False alarms. 
    The chief of the department involved may order disconnected any alarm system that shall have more than four false alarm days during any consecutive three-month period. If disconnection was ordered because of repeated equipment malfunction, such disconnected alarm shall not be reconnected until the system for that alarm has been tested and any malfunctions repaired. The person responsible for using such alarm shall certify to the chief of the department concerned that he has tested the system or caused it to be tested and the problems with the system have been discovered and corrected. Thereafter, if the system causes as many as four false alarm days in any ensuing consecutive three-month period within 12 months after such reconnection, unless such false alarms are caused by acts of God, the system shall again be disconnected, tested and a certification made by a licensed installer concerning the location of the problems in the alarm system and their repair. In addition, before the system may be reconnected this second time, the person responsible for the use of the system shall pay to the city the most currently adopted penalty on file in the office of the city clerk, unless satisfactory reasons for such malfunction are provided by the maintaining company. 
(Code 1973, § 21/2-7; Code 1993, § 8-299) 
Sec. 8-311. - License required for companies connecting to police department. 
    No company shall be allowed to connect any alarm in the police department of the city unless such company shall be licensed under the provisions of G.S. Ch. 74D. Unless so licensed, no such company shall have access to any of the alarm equipment, wires, receiving panels, PBX room, or any other appurtenances to any alarm system connected to the police department. 
(Code 1973, § 21/2-8; Code 1993, § 8-300) 
Sec. 8-312. - Registration of alarm companies. 
    No person shall install any alarm device or system in the police or fire department of the city without first registering with the city at the appropriate department. Such registration shall be upon forms supplied by the appropriate department, and shall include at a minimum the name, address, telephone number and, if an alarm connected to the police department, the license number of such alarm company. In addition, the company will list with the city the names of all employees who will be working on any alarm system connected to the police or fire department. No company not so registered and no personnel not so registered shall be permitted access to any of the equipment, wires, PBX room, terminals, alarm receiving panels or any other appurtenances of any alarm system. All personnel must carry identification satisfactory to the chief of the department involved, or his designated representative. 
(Code 1973, § 21/2-9; Code 1993, § 8-301) 
Sec. 8-313. - Contracts with subscribers. 
    No company shall install any alarm system connected to the police or fire department of the city unless such company shall first have a contract with the subscriber for such system. This contract shall provide that the city, its agents, servants and employees shall not be responsible for the installation, maintenance, servicing or functioning of the system, nor any failure to respond to an alarm received through such system. 
(Code 1973, § 21/2-11; Code 1993, § 8-303) 
Sec. 8-314. - Installation, maintenance of alarm receiving system. 
    The city, by whatever method or arrangement it deems best, shall provide for the receiving of alarms within the police department and the fire department. The chief of the department involved is authorized to designate one or more persons to install and maintain such receiving equipment, including without limitation, receiving alarm panels, wiring and alarm modules. No other person shall install, repair or maintain such department equipment and facilities. If any person not so authorized to install, repair and maintain such equipment desires to connect any alarm system with such equipment, that person will contact the company designated by the city to perform such functions in order to have the connection made. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if all that is necessary to connect the alarm system to the receiving equipment is the plugging in of an alarm module, then any person licensed under G.S. Ch. 74D and registered with the appropriate department as required by this article may plug in such module. All persons wishing to connect to the receiving equipment shall give the company designated by the city to make such connections reasonable notice prior to such connection being made. 
(Code 1973, § 21/2-12; Code 1993, § 8-304) 
Sec. 8-315. - Publication of specifications. 
    One copy of the system specifications for the alarm receiving panel and other equipment installed in the fire or police department shall be maintained in such departments. The specifications shall not be given out to any person not licensed and registered as required by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 21/2-13; Code 1993, § 8-305) 
Sec. 8-316. - Maintenance and repair. 
    No alarm system shall be connected to the police department or the fire department of the city unless the user of the system has a maintenance contract or written arrangement for the maintenance of such system. A certificate of the user, but not the contract, that such a contract exists shall be filed with the appropriate department. In the event of any malfunction of any alarm system connected to the police or fire department of the city that causes the alarm to sound at the police or fire department, the company having such maintenance contract or arrangement shall respond to any notice of such malfunction within 24 hours, and the alarm at the police or fire department may be disconnected until such malfunction has been identified and repaired. 
(Code 1973, § 21/2-14; Code 1993, § 8-306) 
Secs. 8-317-8-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS AND ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 8-336. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore/adult video store means a bookstore/video store: 
(1)  Which receives a majority of its gross income during any calendar month from the sale of publications (including videos, books, magazines and other periodicals) which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section; or 
(2)  Having a preponderance of its publications, books, magazines, videos and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined by this section. 
    Adult establishment means an adult bookstore/video store, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater or adult live entertainment business, excluding massage parlors. 
    Adult live entertainment means any performance of or providing of a service on a fee basis involving the actual presence of real people which exhibits specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section. 
    Adult live entertainment business means any establishment or business wherein adult live entertainment is shown for observation by patrons. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with viewing booths designed to hold patrons which is used for presenting motion pictures, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building or premises used for presenting motion pictures, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined by this section, for observation by patrons therein. The term "adult motion picture theater" does not include any adult mini-motion picture theater as defined by this section. 
    Sexually oriented devices means, without limitation, any artificial or simulated specified anatomical area or other device or paraphernalia that is designed principally for specified sexual activities but shall not mean any contraceptive device. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus or sodomy; or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts. 
(Code 1993, § 8-331; Ord. No. 1992-13, § I, 7-28-1992) 
Sec. 8-337. - License provisions. 
(a)  Required. Any person desiring to open or operate an adult establishment shall obtain a license by filing an application addressed to the city council prior to commencement of the adult establishment. 
(b)  Application procedures. The application shall be in writing and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; and if such applicant is a corporation, the address of such corporation and its officers, directors and shareholders. 
(2)  Qualifications and experience of the applicant, which must be plainly stated in writing. An applicant for a license required by this article, prior to making an application for such a license, must: 
a.  Submit proof of good moral character, and in the case of applicants who are corporations, such corporation must be created in or domesticated by the laws of this state, and the affidavits of good character shall be submitted on all officers, directors and shareholders if there are less than 11 shareholders. 
b.  Submit to the city police department: 
1.  The full name, address, physical description, age, driver's license number and social security number of all persons currently a part of the owners, officers, directors or shareholders (if less than 11 shareholders) of or employed by adult entertainment at the time of application. The term "currently employed" includes all persons who manage, operate or work in the adult establishment and all persons working for the adult establishment even if such persons would otherwise be considered independent contractors. 
2.  Within five days of any change of ownership in or officers, directors and shareholders (if there are less than 11 shareholders) of such business or of the hiring or contracting with any person to become an employee, the applicant shall also provide all information listed above concerning all persons hired or contracted for after the date of application and all new owners, officers, directors or shareholders (if there are less than 11 shareholders). 
(3)  Each applicant shall pay a fee which must be tendered at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Consideration of application. 
(1)  The chief of police shall investigate all applicants seeking an adult establishment business license and employees, owners, directors or shareholders (if less than eleven shareholders) of the adult establishment prior to the approval of the application. 
(2)  Upon the completion of the investigation, the chief of police shall make a recommendation to the city council as to whether the license should be granted. The council shall vote on whether to approve or deny each application. 
(3)  Applicants may be denied a license if anyone (employee, owner, officer, directors, or shareholders of a corporation which has less than eleven shareholders) required to be investigated has been convicted of a felony, or of a crime involving prostitution, assignation or a related offense, in the five years immediately preceding the date of the license application. 
(d)  Issuance; denial of application. 
(1)  Issuance. If the application for a license as required by this article is submitted in proper form and is approved by the city council, the city clerk shall issue a business license to such applicant. Once issued, the license remains in effect with no renewal required so long as all provisions of this article are met. 
(2)  Denial of issuance. If an applicant is refused a license by the city council, the applicant shall have an opportunity to review his application with the city council or its designee in order to determine the reason for denial. A license may be denied for the following reasons: 
a.  Any person required to be investigated is convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
b.  An adult establishment continues to employ an existing employee who is convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
c.  The adult establishment hires a person in violation of any requirement of this article, if such hiring was known or should have been known by the adult establishment to be a violation. 
d.  The adult establishment employs minors for the performance of adult live entertainment or permits minors to patronize the adult establishment. 
e.  Any other requirement of this article is not met. 
(e)  Revocation; recommendation by the chief of police. Whenever the chief of police shall have good cause to believe there exists grounds for revocation of any license under this article, he shall submit a written recommendation of revocation to the city council and, by registered mail, forward a copy of the recommendation to the licensee. Good cause shall be any violation of any requirement of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 8-332; Ord. No. 1992-13, § II, 7-28-1992) 
Sec. 8-338. - Patronage of adult establishment by minors, employment of minors, etc. 
(a)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to patronize any adult establishment. 
(b)  Duty of the owner/operator of the adult establishment. It shall be the duty of the owner/operator of any such adult establishment to determine the age of the persons patronizing such establishment. 
(c)  Hiring minors. It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator of any such adult establishment to hire a minor. 
(d)  Exploitation of minors. It shall be unlawful to display or sell any photograph, moving picture or video tape depicting anyone under 18 years of age in any specified sexual activity or showing specified anatomical areas. 
(e)  Violations. A violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such establishment. Such revocation shall not exclude any and all other remedies, penalties or fines. 
(Code 1993, § 8-333; Ord. No. 1992-13, § III, 7-28-1992) 
Sec. 8-339. - Restrictions as to adult establishments. 
(a)  No person shall permit any building, premises, structure or other facility that contains any adult establishment to contain any other kind of adult establishment. No person shall permit any building, premises, structure or other facility in which sexually oriented devices are sold, distributed, exhibited or contained to contain any adult establishment. 
(b)  No person shall permit any viewing booth in an adult mini-motion picture theater to be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(Code 1993, § 8-334; Ord. No. 1992-13, § IV, 7-28-1992) 
Sec. 8-340. - Penalties and enforcement. 
    Each day on which any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation and offense. Each offense shall be punishable by a fine of $200.00 or imprisonment for 30 days, or both, and shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of $500.00 per day to be collected by the city in a civil action if the offender does not pay the civil penalty within ten days of receiving a notice of the levy of the penalty by the city council. In addition, this article may be enforced by injunction or abatement by an action brought in the general court of justice as provided by G.S. 160A-175. 
(Code 1993, § 8-335; Ord. No. 1992-13, § V, 7-28-1992) 
Secs. 8-341-8-368. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RETAIL SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 8-369. - Tax on gross receipts derived from retail short-term motor vehicle leases or rentals. 
    The city hereby imposes and levies a tax of 11/2 percent of the gross receipts from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the general public, as authorized by G.S. 160A-251.1. 
(Code 1993, § 8-346; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 8-370. - Administration. 
    The city through the county tax collector will administer and collect from operators of leasing and rental entities the tax levied hereby. The county tax collector may promulgate additional lawful rules and regulations necessary for implementation and collection of the tax. 
(Code 1993, § 8-347; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 2, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 8-371. - Payment of tax and filing of returns. 
    The taxes levied hereby are due and payable to the county in monthly installments on or before the 15th day of the month following the month in which the tax accrues. Every entity required to collect the tax shall, on or before the 15th day of each month, prepare and render a return to the county. The county shall design, print, and furnish to all such entities the necessary forms for filing returns and instructions to ensure the full collection of the tax. These tax proceeds shall be placed in a segregated account by the collecting entity and are the property of the town. A return filed for this purpose is not a public record as defined by G.S. 132-1 and may not be disclosed except as provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 8-348; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 3, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 8-372. - Penalties. 
    In case of failure or refusal to file a return or pay the tax for a period 30 days after the time required for filing the return or paying the tax, there shall be an additional tax, as a penalty, of five percent of the tax due, with an additional tax of five percent for each additional month or fraction thereof until the tax is paid. The county board of equalization and review, for good cause shown, may consider appeals and adjust any penalty or additional tax imposed hereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 8-349; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 4, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 8-373. - Misdemeanor for willful violation. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or association who willfully attempts in any manner to evade a tax imposed herein or who willfully fails to pay the tax or make and file a return shall, in addition to the penalties provided by law and herein, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 8-350; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 5, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 8-374. - Delegation of powers. 
    The county tax collector shall exercise the powers authorized to the city by G.S. 160A-215.1(l) with the county board of equalization and review exercising the powers of the tax review board. 
(Code 1993, § 8-351; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 6, 6-27-2000) 
Secs. 8-375-8-391. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LEVYING A TAX ON GROSS RECEIPTS DERIVED FROM RETAIL SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL OF HEAVY EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 8-392. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Customer means any person that leases or rents heavy equipment on a short-term lease or rental basis. 
    Finance officer means that individual appointed pursuant to the provisions of the city Charter to serve as finance officer for the city and any other person authorized to carry out the duties and functions of such individual. 
    General statutes means the North Carolina General Statutes and any reference to a particular section thereof shall include the same as may be from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or superseded. 
    Gross receipts means the amount that is or would be reported as gross receipts on a business's state income tax return, or on the federal income tax return filed with the state income tax return if the state return does not separately state gross receipts for the most recently completed tax year. Taxes collected hereunder are not subject to the tax herein imposed and are not included in gross receipts. 
    Heavy equipment means earthmoving, construction, or industrial equipment that is mobile, weighs at least 1,500 pounds, and is either: 
(1)  A self-propelled vehicle that is not designed to be driven on a highway; or 
(2)  Industrial lift equipment, industrial material handling equipment, industrial electrical generation equipment, or similar piece of industrial equipment. 
The term "heavy equipment" includes an attachment for heavy equipment, regardless of the weight of the attachment. (G.S. 160A-215.2(a)(1)) 
    Lease or rental means a transfer of possession or control of tangible personal property for a fixed or indeterminate term for consideration. The term "lease" or "rental" does not include any of the following: 
(1)  A transfer of possession or control of property under a security agreement or deferred payment plan that requires the transfer of title upon completion of the required payments. 
(2)  A transfer of possession or control of property under an agreement that requires the transfer of title upon completion of required payments and payment of an option price that does not exceed the greater of $100.00 or one percent of the total required payments. 
(3)  The providing of tangible property along with an operator for a fixed or indeterminate period of time if the operator is necessary for the equipment to perform as designed. For the purpose of this subsection, an operator must do more than maintain, inspect, or set up the tangible personal property. (G.S. 105-164.3(17)) 
    Long-term lease or rental means a lease or rental made under a written agreement to lease or rent property to the same person for a period of at least 365 continuous days. (G.S. 105-187.1(3)) 
    Person means any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm, or other legal entity. 
    Short-term lease or rental means any lease or rental that is not a long-term lease or rental. (G.S. 160A-215.2(a)(2) and G.S. 105-187.1(7)) 
    Taxpayer means any person liable for the taxes imposed by this article. 
(Code 1993, § 8-361; Ord. No. 2008-52, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 8-393. - Levy of tax. 
    A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to eight-tenths percent of the gross receipts derived from the short-term lease or rental of heavy equipment at retail. 
(Code 1993, § 8-362; Ord. No. 2008-52, § 2, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 8-394. - Collection of the tax. 
    Every person whose principal business is the short-term lease or rental of heavy equipment at retail shall collect at the time of the lease or rental, or at the time of the payment of the consideration therefor, the tax herein levied. A person is not considered to be in the short-term lease or rental business if the majority of the person's lease and rental gross receipts are derived from leases and rentals to a person who is a related person as defined under G.S. 105-163.010. The tax so collected shall be placed in a segregated account, and thereafter remitted to the finance officer in accordance with the provisions of this article. The taxpayer shall include a provision in each retail short-term lease or rental agreement, or other documentation evidencing the transaction, stating that the percentage amount enacted by this resolution of the total lease or rental price, excluding sales tax, is being charged as a tax on gross receipts. The amount of the tax shall be stated separately from the lease or rental and shown separately on the taxpayer's records. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the taxpayer as trustee for and on account of the town. The taxpayer shall be liable for the collection thereof and for its payment to the finance officer and the taxpayer's failure to charge or to collect said tax from the customer shall not affect such liability. 
(Code 1993, § 8-363; Ord. No. 2008-52, § 3, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 8-395. - Report and payment of tax. 
    Taxes levied under this article are due and payable when a return is required to be filed. Every taxpayer shall, within the time specified, submit a return to the finance officer on the form prescribed by the finance officer. A return must be signed by the taxpayer or the taxpayer's agent. Returns of taxpayers are due to the finance officer for each calendar quarter on or before the last day of the month following the end of the quarter in which the tax accrues. As provided in G.S. 160A-208.1, a return shall not be considered a public record and information contained in a return may be disclosed only in accordance therewith. 
(Code 1993, § 8-364; Ord. No. 2008-52, § 4, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 8-396. - Taxpayer to keep records. 
    The taxpayer shall keep and preserve suitable records of the gross receipts received by such taxpayer in the conduct of business and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax for which such taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this article. It shall be the duty of the taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of three years all such records of gross receipts and other books and accounts described. All records, books and accounts herein described shall be open for examination at all reasonable hours during the day by the finance officer or the finance officer's duly authorized agent. 
(Code 1993, § 8-365; Ord. No. 2008-52, § 5, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 8-397. - Finance officer to provide forms. 
    The finance officer or designee shall design, prepare, print and make available to all taxpayers operating within the municipal boundaries of the city, forms and instructions for filing returns to ensure a full collection of and an accounting for taxes due. The failure of any taxpayer to obtain or receive forms shall not relieve such taxpayer from the payment of the tax at the time and in the manner provided. 
(Code 1993, § 8-366; Ord. No. 2008-52, § 6, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 8-398. - Situs. 
    Gross receipts from the short-term lease or rental of heavy equipment are subject to the tax imposed by this article if the place of business from which the heavy equipment is delivered is located within the municipal boundaries of the town. (G.S. 160A-215.2(b)) 
(Code 1993, § 8-367; Ord. No. 2008-52, § 7, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 8-399. - Penalties and remedies. 
    The provisions with respect to penalties and collection remedies that apply to the payment of sales and use taxes under G.S. Ch. 105, Art. 5 shall be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized to be levied and collected under this resolution, to the extent that the same are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The finance officer may exercise any power the secretary of revenue may exercise in imposing these penalties and remedies. (G.S. 160A-215.2(d)) 
(Code 1993, § 8-368; Ord. No. 2008-52, § 8, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 8-400. - Authority. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S. 160A-215.2. 
(Code 1993, § 8-370; Ord. No. 2008-52, § 10, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 8-401. - Administration. 
    The city may contract with the county to implement the provisions as outlined above. The city may compensate the county for their services in a manner consistent with other tax collection agreements. 
(Code 1993, § 8-372; Ord. No. 2008-52, § 12, 10-7-2008) 
Secs. 8-402-8-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 8-431. - Sunday service hours. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by Senate Law 2017-87, any establishment located in the corporate limits of the city and holding an ABC permit issued pursuant to G.S. 18B-1001 is permitted to sell beverages allowed by its permit beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28, 7-12-2017) 
Chapter 10 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses relating to grave sites and graves, G.S. 14-148, 14-149; cemeteries, G.S. Ch. 65; municipal cemeteries, G.S. 65-37 et seq., G.S. 160A-341 et seq.; cemetery trustees, G.S. 160A-349.1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Supervision and control. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to supervise the cemeteries of the city and to have the same kept in good order and worked and maintained as provided in this chapter. The city manager may delegate these duties to the appropriate department head. 
(Code 1973, § 5-1; Code 1993, § 5-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Burial and disinterment; authorization; restrictions. 
(a)  Burial in cemetery only. No person shall bury or cause to be buried any dead human body in any place within the city other than a properly established cemetery. 
(b)  Disinterment. No person shall disinter the remains of any human body buried within the city without first having obtained written permission from the health director and the city or as otherwise provided by law. 
(c)  Grave depths. All graves over four and one-half feet in length shall be a minimum of six feet in depth. 
(Code 1973, § 5-2; Code 1993, § 5-2; Ord. No. 2003-42, 11-20-2003) 
State Law reference- Judicial exhumation orders in certain cases, authority of next of kin, G.S. 130A-390. 
Sec. 10-3. - Sale of lots-Contracts; execution of deeds; conveyances. 
(a)  The city shall have the power to make contracts for the sale of lots in the public cemeteries of the city, at prices prescribed by the city council. The size of lots sold shall be in accordance with the cemetery plots. Deeds for cemetery lots shall be executed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk and no deed shall be delivered until the city has received in full the purchase price of the lot conveyed. Prices shall include perpetual care. 
(b)  Nonresidents of the city shall be required to pay a purchase price of 50 percent per plot more than the price established for residents. 
(c)  The city will consider purchase of cemetery lots from individuals who wish to sell their lots back to the city at the price originally sold. 
(Code 1973, § 5-3; Code 1993, § 5-3; Ord. No. 1994-33, 7-26-1994) 
Sec. 10-4. - Same-Transfer by private owner of lot. 
(a)  No deed for a burial space or section in any cemetery maintained by the city may be transferred or assigned to any third person except by the written consent of the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Such transfer shall not be sold for profit to exceed the original purchase price on any burial space or section. 
(Code 1973, § 5-4; Code 1993, § 5-4) 
Sec. 10-5. - Prices and fees for burial in municipal cemetery. 
    All prices and fees, as associated criteria, shall be as established from time to time and are listed on the fee schedule on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1973, § 5-5; Code 1993, § 5-5; Ord. No. 1989-07, 4-27-1989; Ord. No. 1994-33, 7-26-1994; Ord. No. 2003-42, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 10-6. - Enclosure of lots and placement of grave markers in Greenwood Park. 
(a)  The owner of any cemetery lot shall not have the right to enclose such lot with a railing, fence or other similar device in Greenwood Park Cemetery. The only exception permitted will be brick walls to a height of 18 inches or less. 
(b)  Aboveground grave markers and mausoleums will be permitted in Greenwood Park Cemetery. 
(Code 1973, § 5-6; Code 1993, § 5-6; Ord. No. 1996-41, 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 10-7. - Use; maintenance; care; specifications. 
(a)  No person shall do any work of any kind on any lot in a cemetery belonging to any other person without first notifying the superintendent thereof, and presenting to him an order in writing from the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the lot authorizing the bearer thereof to do such work in Bayview Cemetery. 
(b)  The border or perimeter property not otherwise designated on the cemetery plot for the Bayview Cemetery may be used for interment of infants. 
(c)  No planting of any kind shall be made in any cemetery without the permission of the superintendent of cemeteries. 
(d)  Specifications for the foundations of monuments, tombstones and markers must meet the approval of the superintendent of cemeteries. 
(e)  All interments in city cemeteries shall be in vaults. 
(f)  More than one adult burial grave space shall be prohibited. 
(g)  Square number 184 in the Greenwood Park Cemetery is hereby designated as "baby square" and shall be divided into four spaces per lot. 
(h)  The mausoleum area in Greenwood Park Cemetery is hereby constituted as the area south of Myrtle Street, and burial space therein, four feet by ten feet, shall be sold as such. 
(i)  Planting in the cemeteries that may be deemed detrimental to other property or operations of the cemeteries may be removed at the discretion of the director of public services, or the director's designee. 
(Code 1973, § 5-7; Code 1993, § 5-7; Ord. No. 1996-42, 10-29-1996) 
Sec. 10-8. - Removal of trash, debris, building materials, etc. 
    In the cemeteries that permit markers above the ground, all monument, tombstone and curb builders shall remove from the cemetery grounds any trash and unused materials. 
(Code 1973, § 5-8; Code 1993, § 5-8) 
Sec. 10-9. - Destroying, injuring, tampering with monuments, flowers, trees, etc. 
    No person shall destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove, without permission of the cemetery superintendent, any fence, railing or other work built for the protection or ornamentation of any tomb, monument or gravestone, or for the adornment or protection of a cemetery; or willfully pluck any flowers or shrubs, or cut, destroy, break, remove or injure any tree, shrub or plant in any city cemetery; or commit any other trespass in any city cemetery. 
    (Code 1973, § 5-9; Code 1993, § 5-9) 
Sec. 10-10. - Sale of merchandise. 
    No person shall sell or offer for sale any article of merchandise or any fruit drink or beverage or any other thing of value within the limits of cemeteries. 
(Code 1973, § 5-10; Code 1993, § 5-10) 
Sec. 10-11. - Speed limit; firearms; driving on walks. 
(a)  No person shall drive, ride or lead any horse or vehicle in any cemetery in the city at a speed of more than six miles per hour. 
(b)  No person shall discharge any firearms in any cemetery within the city except in the case of a military burial. 
(c)  No person shall drive any vehicle over any walks or drives of a cemetery, or allow any vehicle to stand thereon, if forbidden by the superintendent or cemetery authorities. 
(Code 1973, § 5-11; Code 1993, § 5-11) 
Sec. 10-12. - Use as playground. 
    No person shall use any part of any cemetery within the city as a playground. 
(Code 1973, § 5-12; Code 1993, § 5-12) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal or county declaration of state of emergency, G.S. 166A-19.22; North Carolina Emergency Management Act, G.S. 166A-19 et seq.; county and municipal emergency management, G.S. 166A-19.15; power of counties and municipalities to enact ordinances to deal with states of emergency, G.S. 166A-19.31; violation of emergency prohibitions and restrictions, G.S. 166A-288.20A. 

Sec. 12-1. - State of emergency; curfew authorized. 
(a)  A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar public emergency, for any reason, city public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property. 
(b)  In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the city, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public declaration declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the city, to place in effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter authorized. 
(c)  The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the declaration the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area specifically designated or described within the corporate limits of the city and to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military personnel whether state or federal; on duty employees of public utilities, public transportation companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting, and television broadcasting corporations operated for profit; and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health, and welfare needs of the people within the city. 
(d)  The mayor shall declare the end of such state of emergency or all or any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the board. 
(e)  During the existence of a declared state of emergency, the mayor may impose by declaration any or all of the following restrictions: 
(1)  Prohibit or regulate the possession off one's own premises of explosives, firearms, ammunition, or dangerous weapons of any kind, and prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof; 
(2)  Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine, or intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off one's own premises; 
(3)  Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil, or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any public property; 
(4)  Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, or any other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances; 
(5)  Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley, or roadway or upon any other public property, except by those in search of medical assistance, food, or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves or their families or some member thereof; 
(6)  Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of business, places of entertainment, and any other places of public assembly. 
(f)  Any declaration may be extended, altered, or repealed in any particular manner during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent declaration. 
(g)  During the existence of a state of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by any declaration authorized by this article. 
Sec. 12-2. - Form and content of declarations. 
    The declaration of a state of emergency and the imposition of specific prohibitions and restrictions shall take substantially the following form; the declaration should specify any one or more of the following restrictions which are presented herein as options: 
WHEREAS, the governing body of the Town of Morehead City, has duly adopted an ordinance authorizing the mayor to determine the existence of a state of emergency and to impose various restrictions after he determines that such restrictions are necessary as a response to an emergency. 
NOW THEREFORE, I, ___________, Mayor of the Town of Morehead City, declare that: 
I. An emergency exists, and restrictions set forth in this declaration are necessary in order to maintain an acceptable level of public order, services, and protection of lives, safety, and property during this emergency. 
II. I determine the following restrictions: 
A. No person shall be a part of any assembly of three or more persons in the area bounded by the corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City. 
B. Possession, consumption, and transfer of intoxicating liquor. 
1. No person shall possess or consume any intoxicating liquor, including beer and wine, other than on his premises. 
2. No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any intoxicating liquor, including beer and wine. 
C. Curfew. 
1. No person not exempted by this declaration shall appear in public in the geographic area described in this declaration between the hours of ___ P.M. and midnight or between the hours of midnight and ___ A.M. of any day until I remove this curfew by determination. 
2. This curfew shall apply to the area bounded by ___________. 
3. I find it necessary to the preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare to exempt from these curfew restrictions the following classes of people in the circumstances indicated: 
(a) Those whose appearance is essential in order to obtain or furnish a service or commodity which is immediately necessary to sustain the health or well-being of themselves or of someone within curfew area. 
(b) Those whose appearance necessarily occurs in the process of leaving a place at which they were temporarily engaged and from which they could not reasonably have planned their departure so as to avoid appearing during the period during which the curfew was applicable. 
(c) Other. 
D. Possession and transfer of dangerous weapons or substances. 
1. No person shall possess any dangerous weapons or substances unless they remain in a place of storage on his premises, or, if they cannot be readily stored on his premises, unless they remain in a customary place of storage not readily available to the possessor. No person may transport or sell or otherwise transfer any dangerous weapons or substances. 
2. I find it necessary to the prevention of the public health, safety, and welfare to exempt from these restrictions the following classes of people in the circumstances indicated: 
Police officers may possess any weapon necessary to carry out their duties when on active duty. Anyone may possess gasoline when the gasoline is in the tank of a car in his possession. 
E. Access for restricted areas. 
1. I direct the chief of police and his subordinates to restrict or deny access to any area, location, or street where such a restriction is necessary in order to help overcome this emergency or to prevent the emergency from worsening. These restrictions on access shall be indicated by means of barricades, posted notices, or orders to anyone in the area. 
2. No person shall obtain access or attempt to obtain access to any area, location, or street to which the chief of police and his subordinates have restricted access according to the directions I have just given to them. 
III. Anyone violating any restriction imposed by this declaration or under its authority violates town ordinance and is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
IV. This declaration shall take effect immediately. 
___________ 
Hour and Date 
___________ 
Mayor 
SEAL OF THE TOWN 
Sec. 12-3. - Penalty for violation. 
    The violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any provision of any restriction imposed by any declaration authorized by this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.S. 14-4. 
Chapter 14 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Failure of owner of property to comply with orders of public authorities, G.S. 14-68; setting fires unlawfully, G.S. 14-136 et seq.; exposing children to fire, G.S. 14-318; fire protection, G.S. Ch. 69; fire safety in hotels, G.S. 69-26 et seq.; authority and liability of firefighters, G.S. 69-39 et seq.; mutual aid between fire departments, G.S. 69-40; firefighter's relief fund, G.S. Ch. 118; municipal retirement benefits, G.S. 160A-163; municipal fire protection, G.S. 160A-291 et seq.; municipalities authorized to install and maintain water mains and hydrants, G.S. 160A-293; municipal authority to regulate or prohibit explosive and corrosive substances, G.S. 160A-183. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Street naming and numbering. 
(a)  Purpose and authority for enactment. Since the display of street numbers would greatly enhance the ability of the city police, fire and rescue department personnel to rapidly respond to law enforcement, fire, rescue and other emergency calls to residents and businesses within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction by assisting these agencies with regard to properly locating the exact location of the request for assistance, and since G.S. 160A-174, 160A-193, 160A-194, 160A-296 and 160A-300 authorize the city to adopt ordinances promoting the health, safety and general welfare of property owners, residents and the general public with regard to traffic and the use and the control of streets, therefore, the board of commissioners of the city ordains the provisions set out herein. 
(b)  City to make street numbers available; written notification. The city shall make available to each owner of a building, structure or premises within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, upon request, the street number assigned to such building, structure or premises by the town. Additionally, the city shall forward to each owner of the building or structure, written notification as to the assigned street numbers for all structures or buildings not having street numbers prominently displayed in a readily visible location at or near the street right-of-way on the front of such property or on the front of such building or structure. As used herein, the term "front" shall mean the property line or wall of the building closest to the street on which the lot, building or structure faces. In the case of a corner lot, the term "front" shall mean the property line or wall of the building or structure on which the principal entry and exit to the building or structure faces. 
(c)  Numbers to be affixed and readily visible. Each street number assigned for a building or structure by the city shall be affixed or displayed prominently and in a readily visible location by the owner on the front of such building, structure or premises or on or near the front street lot line at a location perpendicular to the main entrance to such building or structure. 
(d)  Numbers to contrast with front of building. The numbers used by each owner shall be at least four inches tall for residential properties, six inches tall for commercial properties and shall be painted, tinted or colored so that the numbers contrast with the front of each building, structure or premises, so that the numbers are readily, clearly and reasonably visible from the street right-of-way. For example, white or other pastel colors shall be used on the front wall of buildings having a dark color or tint and darker letters shall be used on the front wall of buildings or structures having a lighter color. 
(Code 1993, § 6-2; Ord. No. 1991-22, 10-24-1991; Ord. No. 2005-39, 11-1-2005) 
Secs. 14-2-14-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Approach of fire department vehicles, etc., G.S. 20-157; authority and liability of firefighters, G.S. 69-39 et seq.; duties of fire chief, G.S. 160A-292. 

Sec. 14-22. - Created. 
    A department to be known as the "Morehead City Fire and EMS Department," the object of which shall be the prevention and extinguishment of fire and the protection of life and property, is hereby created. 
(Code 1973, § 8-40; Code 1993, § 6-21) 
Sec. 14-23. - Composition. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The fire department shall consist of a chief and as many assistant chiefs and other officers and members as the chief and city manager may deem necessary for the effective operation of the department. 
(2)  The chief shall determine the number and kind of companies of which the fire department is to be composed and shall determine the response of such companies to alarms. 
(3)  The fire department shall be composed of two classes of membership: 
a.  Full-time and part-time paid employees of the department; and 
b.  Volunteer members. 
(4)  No person may at the same time be in both classes of membership. Both classes of membership shall be subject to the authority of the fire chief as delegated and assigned by this article. 
(b)  Appointment, tenure and qualifications of chief. The chief shall be appointed by the city manager, and his tenure of office shall depend upon his good conduct and efficiency. The chief shall be technically qualified by training and experience and shall have the ability to command and hold the respect and confidence of other persons. No future ordinance, rule or regulation shall alter, amend, modify or change the provisions of this section unless by specific reference to this section. 
(c)  Members; physical qualifications. The membership of the fire department, including paid members and volunteers, shall consist of such persons as may be appointed by the chief, subject to the approval of the city manager, and shall be able-bodied citizens. Determination of whether candidates for appointment are able-bodied shall be made by the chief after a medical and physical examination has been made in a manner prescribed by the chief and approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, §§ 8-41-8-44; Code 1993, § 6-22) 
State Law reference- Qualifications for appointive office, G.S. 160A-60; appointment of firefighters, G.S. 160A-291. 
Sec. 14-24. - Assistance by peace officers. 
    It is hereby made the special duty of the chief of police and other peace officers who may be on duty and available for duty to respond and assist the department when requested in the protection of life and property, in regulating traffic, maintaining order and in enforcing observance of all sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 6-23) 
Sec. 14-25. - Chain of command. 
    The fire chief shall be held accountable to the city manager only, and shall make written and verbal reports thereto as the city manager may require. All other department and company officers and members shall be accountable to their superiors in the department. 
(Code 1973, § 8-46; Code 1993, § 6-24) 
Sec. 14-26. - Appointment and accountability of members; removal. 
    The deputy chiefs, assistant chiefs and all other fire department and company officers and members shall be appointed by the chief, subject to the approval of the city manager. Such officers and members shall be subject to removal by the chief and/or the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 8-47; Code 1993, § 6-25) 
Sec. 14-27. - Departmental rules and regulations; formulation. 
    The chief shall formulate a set of rules and regulations to govern each class of membership of the fire department and shall be responsible to the city manager for the personnel, morale and general efficiency of the department. Such rules and regulations, and all proposed amendments thereto, shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 8-50; Code 1993, § 6-28) 
Sec. 14-28. - Other duties of chief. 
    The chief of the fire department shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 8-52; Code 1993, § 6-30) 
Sec. 14-29. - Records. 
    The chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections, apparatus and minor equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the fire department. 
(Code 1973, § 8-53; Code 1993, § 6-31) 
State Law reference- Investigation of fires and inspection of premises, G.S. 69-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-30. - Equipment. 
(a)  Provision of apparatus; maintenance. The fire department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire. 
(b)  Housing to be safe and convenient places as designated; entry by nonmembers. 
(1)  All equipment of the fire department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such places as may be designated by the city council. 
(2)  No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized member of the department. 
(c)  Using without authority; concealing. No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority take away or conceal any article used in any way by the fire department. 
(d)  Taking out of city; use for other than firefighting. No fire engine, fire truck or other fire apparatus of the city shall leave the city without the consent of the fire chief or his designee, and no fire apparatus shall be used for other than fire purposes without the consent of the chief of the fire department or his designee. 
(Code 1973, §§ 8-57-8-61; Code 1993, § 6-35) 
State Law reference- Authority to send firefighters beyond municipal limits, G.S. 69-40, 160A-293. 
Sec. 14-31. - Suppressing arson; investigation of fires. 
    The fire chief is hereby required to assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigation, or causing to be investigated, the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires. 
(Code 1973, § 8-65; Code 1993, § 6-36) 
State Law reference- Investigation of fires, G.S. 69-1; arrest for crime of arson, G.S. 69-2; punishment for arson, G.S. 14-58. 
Sec. 14-32. - Abatement of hazards. 
    The fire chief and his designated representatives are hereby empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any fire hazards that may be found. Any person served with such a notice shall comply therewith and promptly notify the chief or fire marshal. 
(Code 1973, §§ 8-66, 8-67; Code 1993, § 6-37) 
State Law reference- Investigation of premises, removal of dangerous material, G.S. 69-4. 
Sec. 14-33. - Interference with firefighters or apparatus; loitering about station. 
    No person shall interfere with a firefighter in the discharge of his/her duties, or hinder him/her in the performance of his/her duties; nor shall any person other than members of the fire department loiter about any fire station or change, handle or meddle in any manner with any fire engine or any other fire apparatus. 
(Code 1973, § 8-6; Code 1993, § 6-38) 
State Law reference- Interference with firefighters, G.S. 69-39. 
Sec. 14-34. - Unauthorized riding on apparatus. 
    No person other than a bona fide member of the fire department shall mount any fire engine, wagon or apparatus before it leaves the station or while on its way to or from a fire, or at any other time, unless by permission of the driver or officer in command of such engine, wagon or other apparatus. 
(Code 1973, § 8-7; Code 1993, § 6-39) 
Sec. 14-35. - Protection of hose. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way damage or mutilate any fire hose while in use at a fire or otherwise. 
(Code 1973, § 8-8; Code 1993, § 6-40) 
State Law reference- Driving over fire hose, G.S. 20-157. 
Sec. 14-36. - Obstructing hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any hydrant or fireplug in such manner as to interfere with or obstruct the easy approach to or the convenient use of the same by the fire department. A three-foot clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants except as otherwise required or approved. 
(Code 1973, § 8-9; Code 1993, § 6-41) 
Sec. 14-37. - Interference at fires. 
(a)  The fire department or the police may lay off, by rope or otherwise, such portions of the street and lots adjacent thereto as may be deemed necessary for fighting any fire, and it shall be unlawful for any person to cross over or enter such enclosure without the permission of the police or firefighters. 
(b)  No person shall stand or be in any street, alley or square where, or near where, a fire is in progress in such a way as to interfere with the duties of the fire department. 
(Code 1973, §§ 8-11, 8-12; Code 1993, § 6-42) 
State Law reference- Drivers of vehicles to remain one block from fire, G.S. 20-157. 
Secs. 14-38-14-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 14-62. - Volume V, Fire Prevention Code. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the "North Carolina State Building Code, Volume V, Fire Prevention," adopted as of July 1, 1992, or subsequently amended. 
(Code 1993, § 6-61; Ord. No. 1992-12, 9-29-1992) 
Sec. 14-63. - Schedule of inspections. 
    It is the intent of the city fire department to inspect all commercial buildings on an annual basis. If for some reason this cannot occur, the state's minimum schedule will be met. 
(Code 1993, § 6-62; Ord. No. 1992-12, 9-29-1992) 
Sec. 14-64. - Burning refuse; bonfires. 
    No person shall kindle or maintain a bonfire or open burning as defined by the North Carolina State Fire Code, or burn or cause to be burned any trash, refuse, shavings, paper, leaves, litter or other material of any kind outside any house, on or in any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or on any lot or yard within the city. 
(Code 1993, § 6-63; Ord. No. 1992-12, § 9-29-1992) 
State Law reference- Local air pollution control programs, G.S. 143-215.112. 
Sec. 14-65. - General penalty; enforcement of ordinances; continuing violations. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in the inspection fees and penalties schedule, violations of the provisions of this article shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of $100.00 for each violation. Any civil penalty, if not paid at the tax office for the town, 706 Arendell Street, within 15 days of the issuance of a citation, shall be doubled up to a maximum of $1,000.00 and may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt with interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date of the citation until paid, together with all costs and reasonable attorney's fees. Unless otherwise provided by a specific provision of this Code, such civil penalty shall be assessed for each violation. Each calendar day that any such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(b)  The fire prevention inspection fee and penalty schedule is in the most recent city fee schedule on file in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  The provisions of this article may also be enforced by any remedy provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, section 1-7(a), of this Code and by injunction or abatement. 
(Code 1993, § 6-64; Ord. No. 2013-07, 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 14-66. - Rapid entry key box system. 
(a)  The following structures shall be equipped with a "rapid entry key box" at or near the main entrance or such other location as required or approved by the fire chief or his designee: 
(1)  All new businesses. 
(2)  All new multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through locked doors and have a common corridor or stairs for access to the living units. 
(3)  All new construction and all structures required to have a lock box, and buildings or other wholly or partially enclosed structures being renovated or remodeled. 
(4)  Other properties or structures where fire department access would be significantly delayed as determined by the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have the key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  The fire chief or his designee shall designate the type of key lock box system to be implemented within the city and shall have authority to require all structures as outlined in this section to use the designated system. Unless the fire chief or his designee designates a different system, the city adopts the use of the "Supra's Rapid Entry Key Boxes" system. 
(d)  The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock box shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock box that will allow for access to the structure. 
(e)  The fire chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system. 
(f)  Box contents. The lock box shall contain keys or key cards for the following: 
(1)  The main entrance door. 
(2)  Fire alarm control room (if one exists). 
(3)  Mechanical rooms, sprinkler and riser control rooms. 
(4)  Fire alarm control panel. 
(5)  Electrical rooms. 
(6)  "Special" keys (if required) to restore pull-stations or other fire protection devices to the "normal operation" position following activation. 
(7)  Elevator keys, if required. 
(8)  All other rooms in new construction and buildings being renovated or remodeled as specified/identified by the plans review process. 
(g)  Any person who owns, occupies or operates a structure subject to this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 14-65 for any violation of this section. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the foregoing any building, structure or business may be exempted from the provisions of this section if the owner and each occupant, tenant and lessee: 
(1)  Executes a waiver and indemnity agreement provided by the fire department relieving the city and its employees, staff, officers and officials, including, without limitation, all members of the fire department, from any and all liability for loss or damage to property (real or personal) and injury to or death of any person which may result from the absence of a key lock box and agreeing to indemnify and save harmless the city and all of its employees, staff, officers and officials, including, without limitation, all members of the fire department, from all claims, demands, and actions for all expenses and costs, actually or allegedly resulting from the absence of a key lock box. This waiver and indemnity shall contain such other provisions as the fire chief may require; 
(2)  Notifies the insurance company providing any insurance coverage for the building, structure or business of this decision to refuse the placement of a key lock box and providing all such insurance companies with a copy of the waiver and indemnity agreement and furnishing the fire department with evidence of acknowledgement of the receipt of this notice by the insurance company or companies and a certification by each of coverage of casualty loss to the premises and business and liability coverage for loss or damage, including injury to and death of any person resulting from the absence of a key lock box; 
(3)  Agrees that upon notification from any member of the fire, police or planning and inspections department of the city that entry into the building, structure or business is necessary or advisable because of an alarm or detectible smoke, fire or damage, the signer of such waiver and indemnity agreement, or a representative with the means and authority to provide entry, will be on the site of the building, structure or business within 15 minutes of the notice. If such person does not arrive within 15 minutes, the fire department personnel on site may gain entry by any means possible without liability for damage. Any delay and damage and/or injury (including death) caused by the absence of a key lock box and/or waiting for a responsible person to arrive on scene shall be the sole responsibility of the owner, tenant and/or operator of the building, structure or business. 
Upon one failure to arrive within 15 minutes of notice, the waiver and indemnity agreement above described shall automatically be void. Thereupon, a key lock box shall be ordered on the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday and thereafter properly installed within 30 calendar days of such failure. Failure to install a key lock box within 30 days will constitute a violation and will be subject to the penalties set forth in section 14-65. 
(Code 1993, § 6-65; Ord. No. 2013-08, 2-12-2013) 
Chapter 16 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisance as subject of action, G.S. 1-539; public health, G.S. Ch. 130A; Health Care Facilities Finance Act, G.S. Ch. 131A; health care facilities and services, G.S. Ch. 131E; municipal authority to abate nuisances, G.S. 160A-193. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Health director. 
    The county health director and his assistants are authorized to act as agents for the city, to assist in the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter. When so authorized, their acts shall be of the same force and effect as regularly appointed and employed officials of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 10-1; Code 1993, § 7-1) 
Sec. 16-2. - Sanitary facilities for gatherings. 
    Any group or organization holding a tent meeting, or meeting of any sort, outdoors or indoors, whether business, fraternal, social or religious, where more than 100 persons are permitted to gather, shall furnish sanitary facilities to the groups assembled. Such sanitary facilities shall consist at a minimum of a type of toilet approved by the health authorities. 
(Code 1973, § 10-7; Code 1993, § 7-5) 
State Law reference- State regulation of assembly of more than 5,000 people, G.S. 130A-251 et seq.; local regulation of assemblies not covered by statute, G.S. 130A-258. 
Sec. 16-3. - Depositing dishwater, other slops into streets. 
    No person shall convey out of his kitchen any dishwater or other slops into any of the streets or alleys of the city. No person shall throw filth of any kind or conduct any such slops by drains into the streets, ditches or gutters of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 10-8; Code 1993, § 7-6) 
Sec. 16-4. - Depositing deleterious matter along shoreline or into Town Slough. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited on or along the shoreline (south side) of the city or in that body of water known as Town Slough, fish or fish offal or other foreign or deleterious matter, which deposit is forbidden by the sanitary regulations prescribed by the state commission for health services or other state authority with such jurisdiction. 
(Code 1973, § 10-9; Code 1993, § 7-7) 
State Law reference- Areas of environmental concern, G.S. 113A-113 et seq.; state sanitation program, G.S. 130A-227. 
Sec. 16-5. - Depositing fish offal around wharves. 
    It shall be unlawful to drop or throw fish offal of any kind upon the land or in the water about the wharves in front of the city where it will drift ashore or ebb out so as to become offensive. 
(Code 1973, § 10-10; Code 1993, § 7-8) 
State Law reference- Sanitation of scallops, shellfish and crustacea, G.S. 130A-230 et seq. 
Sec. 16-6. - Composting fish or fish offal. 
    It shall be unlawful to compost fish or fish offal in the corporate limits. 
(Code 1973, § 10-11; Code 1993, § 7-9) 
State Law reference- Soil additives, G.S. 106-50.28 et seq.; commercial fertilizers, G.S. 106-655 et seq. 
Sec. 16-7. - Expectorating on sidewalks, other public ways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate upon any paved sidewalk, public platform or on the floor or steps of any public building or on the walks around any of the churches or passenger stations in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 10-12; Code 1993, § 7-10) 
Sec. 16-8. - Smoking in municipal buildings and vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Smoking means the inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or other combustible tobacco product. The term "smoking" also means the use of vaping devices and e-cigarettes, devices which do not use tobacco. 
(b)  Smoking regulated in municipal buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any building or facility or portion of a building or facility now or hereafter owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the city, except in specially designated smoking areas. The city manager shall have the authority to designate smoking areas within each city building or facility. An area within any building or facility may be designated as a smoking area only if the ventilation of such area is sufficient, any adverse impact on municipal employees and members of the public is minimal and no fire or other safety hazard will be created by smoking in such area. 
(c)  Smoking prohibited in municipal vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any vehicle now or hereafter owned or leased by the city except as so designated by the city manager. The city manager shall have the authority to prohibit smoking in such vehicles based upon the degree of ventilation of such vehicle, any adverse impact on municipal employees and members of the public is minimal and no fire or other safety hazard will be created by smoking in such vehicle. 
(d)  Exemptions. (Reserved for future use.) 
(e)  Penalty. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with G.S. 14-4. 
(f)  Conflict of laws. If any portion of this section or the enforcement thereof is found to be pre-empted by state or federal law, such pre-emption shall not operate to invalidate the rest of the section and the same shall remain in full force and effect. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1993, § 7-12; Ord. No. 1993-39, 10-12-1993) 
Sec. 16-9. - Sanitary facility requirement for businesses operating from a permanent (established) location. 
(a)  No place of business shall operate, be open for business or be open for customers, clients or employees, nor shall the owner, tenant, lessee, manager or operator of such place allow the same to be operated, open for business or be open for customers, clients, members or employees until such place shall provide operable sanitary facilities. The minimum facilities required under this section shall be one restroom containing an operable toilet and a wash basin or sink. This section shall not apply to itinerant merchants/transient merchants/itinerant vendors. For purposes of this section, the term "operable" shall mean connected to an approved water and sewer system and maintaining an active service to the facility. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall exempt a business from providing the minimum number of operating sanitary facilities as required by the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the building inspector of the city, once notified, to investigate and take necessary actions to remedy a business from operating without proper necessary sanitary facilities by first notifying the property owner, business owner, or manager of the violation and allowing ten days for the correction to be made. If not corrected the inspector shall revoke the certificate of occupancy/compliance and have the electrical service terminated. 
(Code 1993, § 7-13; Ord. No. 2000-46, 12-12-2000) 
Secs. 16-10-16-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 16-37. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of these regulations to control and reduce the mosquito population of the city by removing, draining, treating, altering, or otherwise eliminating all breeding sources for mosquitoes. The city public works department shall establish an effective program of mosquito control, including, but not limited to, elimination or treatment of breeding sources for mosquitoes, elimination of identified mosquito populations, and alleviation of all other such conditions found to be conducive to the reproduction or continued existence of mosquitoes. This shall be accomplished through the processes of education and public information, conference, conciliation, and these having failed, by administrative and judicial proceedings for the explicit purpose of controlling the breeding of mosquitoes, the presence of which constitute a danger to the public health, impair the comfort and convenience of the residents, and jeopardize enjoyment of life and property. 
(Code 1993, § 7-31; Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1, 4-22-2004) 
Sec. 16-38. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Artificial container means any bucket, barrel, tire, bottle, tub, tank, gutter, bird bath, swimming pool, ornamental pond, flower pot, jar or, any other such manmade items capable of collecting water. 
    Breeding source means any area capable of sustaining the reproduction of mosquitoes. 
    Director means the public services director for the city. The term "director" also means the authorized representative of the director. 
    Evidence of mosquito breeding means the natural presence of mosquito larva, pupa, or their remains. 
    Insecticide means a chemical agent which kills or prevents the reproduction of insects. 
    Larva means the immature, fully aquatic stage of mosquito development in which the insect appears as a small, wingless, worm-like form. 
    Larvicide means a chemical agent which kills or prevents the reproduction of mosquito larvae. 
    Mosquito means a small, long-legged, two-winged insect of the family Culicidae, in which the female of the species is distinguished by a long proboscis for sucking blood. 
    Occupant means the person who has the use of or occupies any building or any part thereof or who has the use or possession, actual or constructive, of the premises whether the owner or tenant. In the case of vacant buildings or vacant portions of a building, or in the case of occupancy in whole or in part by the owner, the owner of the building shall be deemed to be, and shall have the responsibility of an occupant of such building. 
    Owner means the person owning the building or premises. 
    Person means individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, public or private institutions, political subdivisions of the state, governmental agencies or public or private corporations. 
    Premises means a parcel of real property, including all buildings and structures located thereon. 
    Pupa means the immature, fully aquatic stage of mosquito development immediately following the larval stage and preceding the adult form in which the insect appears as a small, wingless, worm-like shape with a greatly enlarged head. 
    Town council means the Town of Morehead City Council. 
(Code 1993, § 7-32; Ord. No. 2004-14, § 2, 4-22-2004) 
Sec. 16-39. - General provisions. 
    All premises within the city shall be maintained inasmuch as possible to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes on the premises. Artificial containers, ditches, streams, flooded areas, and all other such sources of standing water or other liquid where mosquitoes are breeding, must be removed, drained, treated, altered, maintained, or otherwise eliminated by the occupant/owner of the premises, in such a manner as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. Where there is evidence of mosquito breeding, effective methods of eliminating and treating mosquito breeding sources shall be instigated within 48 hours after discovering or being informed of the evidence of mosquito breeding on the premises. 
(Code 1993, § 7-33; Ord. No. 2004-14, § 3, 4-22-2004) 
Sec. 16-40. - Methods of eliminating and treating mosquito breeding sources. 
    Breeding sources for mosquitoes shall be eliminated or treated by one or more of the following methods as shall be approved by the director: 
(1)  Filling, draining, removing, or otherwise eliminating the breeding source. 
(2)  Completely emptying the breeding source of all water at least every seven days, or as approved by the director. Where an artificial container is a water basin (e.g. swimming pool) designed to hold water, such containers shall be maintained or altered to prevent mosquito breeding or be removed. 
(3)  Treating the breeding source with an effective insecticide and/or larvicide approved by the director. 
(4)  Completely emptying artificial containers of all liquid and storing in an enclosed structure which is constructed in such a manner as to prevent the permanent collection of liquid in said containers. 
(5)  Maintain all natural or manmade storm or surface water drainways in a manner to prevent the ponding of water sufficient to provide breeding for mosquitoes. 
(6)  Other methods proven to be effective in controlling mosquitoes and as approved by the director. 
(Code 1993, § 7-34; Ord. No. 2004-14, § 4, 4-22-2004) 
Sec. 16-41. - Right of entry; inspection. 
    The director shall have the right of entry upon any premises where entry is necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. If consent for entry is not given or obtained, an administrative search and inspection warrant shall be obtained pursuant to G.S. 15-27.2. However, if an imminent hazard exists, no warrant shall be required for entry upon the premises. 
(Code 1993, § 7-35; Ord. No. 2004-14, § 5, 4-22-2004) 
Sec. 16-42. - Penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Any owner/occupant who violates any provision of this article shall be provided written notification of such violation by the director and shall be given three days to comply. If the person in violation shall fail to remedy the offending condition upon the premises within five days of such notification, the owner and occupant shall be jointly and severally subject to a civil fine not to exceed $500.00, each day after written notice that the offending condition shall continue to exist upon the premises being a separate offense. Such fines may be collected by the city in an action to collect a debt. 
(b)  After three days written notice of violation as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the director may bring a civil proceeding in the Carteret County Superior Court requesting an order of abatement of the offending condition, or in the alternative, the director may enter upon the premises of the owner/occupant and summarily remove, abate or remedy the offending condition pursuant to the city's authority under G.S. 160A-193. Any costs associated with such removal, abatement or remedy and/or the costs of any court action, including reasonable attorney's fees, shall be payable by the owner and occupant and shall be a lien upon the premises, said lien being in the nature of unpaid ad valorem taxes. 
(c)  The remedies available herein shall be cumulative. 
(Code 1993, § 7-36; Ord. No. 2004-14, § 6, 4-22-2004) 
Chapter 18 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Obstructing justice, G.S. 14-221 et seq.; arrest, G.S. 15A-401 et seq.; police processing and duties upon arrest, G.S. 15A-501 et seq.; removal of law enforcement officers, G.S. 128-16 et seq.; municipal law enforcement, G.S. 160A-281 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Organization of department; familiarization with laws. 
    The police organization shall consist of the chief of police and as many police officers as the city council shall from time to time provide. It shall be their duty to immediately acquaint themselves with the laws and ordinances of the city when notified of their election or appointment. 
(Code 1973, § 16-1; Code 1993, § 13-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Control of department. 
    The chief of police shall have general control of the police department and may at any time, for cause, suspend from duty any member of the police force. 
(Code 1973, § 16-2; Code 1993, § 13-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Duties of chief. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to: 
(1)  Have charge of the police force and as such, assign such duties to the police officers as he thinks best for the good order of the city; 
(2)  Preserve the peace by suppression of all disturbances and apprehension of all offenders; 
(3)  Serve such processes as may be issued to him from a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(4)  Collect all fines and costs imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(5)  Pass through the streets and public places at reasonable intervals and give his attention to the enforcement of the ordinances; 
(6)  Superintend the work which may be ordered for securing and promoting the health, convenience or ornament of the city; 
(7)  Attend the meetings of the town council; 
(8)  Such other and further duties as may be assigned to him by the town council. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3; Code 1993, § 13-3) 
Sec. 18-4. - Duties of officers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police to suppress all disturbances of the quiet and good order of the city and to arrest all offenders against the same; to prevent as far as possible injury to the city property and to the streets and sidewalks, and to report any repairs needed; and to report any complaints of any disorderly houses or houses of ill-fame. 
(b)  Upon the occurrence of fire, a police officer shall be present to preserve order and protect property. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4; Code 1993, § 13-4) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of policemen generally, G.S. 160A-285. 
Sec. 18-5. - Auxiliary police division established. 
    There is hereby established within the city police department, as a division thereof, an auxiliary police division. The auxiliary police division shall be a volunteer organization, whose members shall serve without compensation, composed of as many members as may from time to time be determined by the chief of police and approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6; Code 1993, § 13-6; Ord. No. 2003-45, 11-20-2003) 
State Law reference- Auxiliary law enforcement personnel, G.S. 160A-282. 
Sec. 18-6. - Designation of police officers as agents of property owners or tenants to enforce trespassing regulations. 
    The present and future members of the police department (including auxiliary police officers) are authorized to act as agents for property owners and tenants to enforce regulations against trespassing on private property located within the corporate limits of the city upon specific request by such property owners or tenants and shall be made in accordance with the terms of an agency agreement. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8; Ord. No. 1991-18, § 1, 9-10-1991) 
Sec. 18-7. - Police authority regarding criminal history information for applicants for ABC permits. 
    The police department shall be authorized to seek state access to SBI/DCI criminal history record information to obtain criminal history information on all persons applying for ABC permits for proposed locations within the city. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9; Ord. No. 2014-09, 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 18-8. - Personnel rules and regulations adopted. 
(a)  The rules and regulations of the Morehead City Police Department Policy Manual, which is on file in the office of the chief of police, shall govern the conduct and discipline of the members of the police department. 
(b)  All members of the police department shall comply with and be guided by these rules and regulations. 
(c)  The chief of police may issue changes and additions to the general rules and regulations of the policy manual hereby adopted and will file a copy of any such changes or additions with the city manager. Any changes or additions to any other part of the policy manual shall be made only by ordinance duly adopted by the city council. 
(d)  The chief of police may adopt and enforce departmental policies and procedures implementing the section hereby adopted and furthering the management and efficiency of the police department. 
(Code 1973, § 16-7; Code 1993, § 13-7) 
Chapter 20 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Criminal law, G.S. Ch. 14; violation of local ordinances as misdemeanor, G.S. 14-4; general ordinance-making power, G.S. 160A-174. 

Sec. 20-1. - Interfering, etc., with police or other officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, oppose, resist or in any manner abuse an officer of the city or member of the police while in the discharge of his duties. Speech-only communications intended to assert rights, clarify misunderstandings, or gain information in a peaceable or orderly manner, without conduct, shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 13-5; Code 1993, § 10-4) 
State Law reference- Assault with a firearm or other deadly weapon upon law enforcement officer, fireman or emergency medical services personal, G.S. 14-34.2. 
Sec. 20-2. - Security of crime scenes. 
(a)  Police officers shall have the authority to establish perimeter boundaries of a crime scene by setting up signs, ropes, police lines, vehicles or other necessary means around the scene and such adjacent roadways as necessary to protect themselves and the public from harm or to ensure the security of evidence or to prevent the interference by nonpolice personnel with the police in the performance of their duties. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person not a police officer or person not authorized by law or police authority to enter into, intrude upon, cross over or trespass within or upon a boundary of a designated crime scene. 
(Code 1973, § 13-5.1; Code 1993, § 10-5) 
Sec. 20-3. - Breach of peace; riotous or disorderly conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit a breach of the peace or engage in riotous or disorderly conduct within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 13-7; Code 1993, § 10-6) 
State Law reference- Assaults, G.S. 14-28 et seq.; riots and civil disorders, G.S. 14-288.1 et seq.; disorderly conduct, G.S. 14-288.4. 
Sec. 20-4. - Weapons; use; sale. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge or use any slingshot or air rifle; or to sell or offer for sale any slingshot; or to fire guns, rifles or pistols within the corporate limits. This section shall not apply to law enforcement officers while discharging their duties. 
(Code 1973, § 13-8; Code 1993, § 10-7; Ord. No. 2014-28, 7-8-2014) 
State Law reference- Discharging certain barreled weapons or a firearm into occupied property, G.S. 14-34.1; carrying concealed weapons, G.S. 14-269. 
Sec. 20-5. - Indecent exposure; obscenity. 
    It shall be unlawful to expose one's genitals in any place where the general public has access or which may be viewed by the general public or to shout or write obscene language or make obscene marks or drawings on any fence or wall in any public place or a place open to view by the public. For purposes of this section, the term "obscene" shall be defined as provided by section 14-190.1 of the General Statutes of North Carolina (G.S. 14-190.1). 
(Code 1993, § 10-8) 
Sec. 20-6. - Congregating or loitering to obstruct passage. 
    It shall be unlawful for persons to assemble or loiter upon the streets in sufficient number or in such manner as to be an obstruction to the streets, sidewalks or crossings or in such manner as to interfere with the free passage into or out of any business enterprise or private property. 
(Code 1973, § 13-28; Code 1993, § 10-12) 
State Law reference- Demonstrations or assemblies of persons kneeling or lying down in public buildings, G.S. 14-132.1. 
Sec. 20-7. - Loitering at schools. 
    It shall be unlawful to loiter in or around any school within 100 feet of the outermost boundary of the school property, between sunset and sunrise. 
(Code 1973, § 13-15; Code 1993, § 10-13) 
State Law reference- Care of school property, G.S. 115C-523. 
Sec. 20-8. - Disturbing public meetings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be disorderly at any exhibition or public meeting, at any public hall, at any church or place of worship, or any other place, or in any way disturb the audience. 
(Code 1973, § 13-16; Code 1993, § 10-14) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, G.S. 14-288.4. 
Sec. 20-9. - Damage to property. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful to injure, deface, paint, carve or mutilate in any way whatsoever any sign, post, lamppost, wire, apparatus, building, residence, wall or fence. 
(b)  Water, sewer or alarm system. No person shall injure or interfere with any valve, valve box, meter, meter box, storm or sanitary sewer manhole cover, storm sewer catch basin cover, fire hydrant, police or fire alarm box, traffic signal or any other property used in the city water, sanitary or storm sewer, or police or fire alarm system. 
(c)  Water and sewer pipes. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, break or destroy, or in any manner interfere with any of the water pipes, mains or other appliances used in connection with the water or sewerage plants of the city, whether the same shall be laid in the streets or connected with any private or public lot. It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon any exposed water and sewer pipe or appurtenance thereof. 
(d)  Electric utility and fire alarm facility. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, cut, break, damage or destroy any of the electric lights, poles, wires or other fixtures or appliances used in connection with the electric light plant or fire alarm system, whether the same is the property of the city or any person, and whether the same is located on public or private property. 
(e)  School property. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface or destroy any property owned, occupied or used by or for any of the public schools. 
(Code 1973, §§ 13-17-13-21; Code 1993, § 10-15) 
State Law reference- Injury to real property, G.S. 14-127; injury to public buildings, G.S. 14-132; injury to personal property, G.S. 14-160; injuring houses, etc., G.S. 14-144; injuring bridges, G.S. 14-146; injuring buildings or fences, G.S. 14-159; interfering with or damaging utility property, G.S. 14-151 et seq. 
Sec. 20-10. - Illegal use of whistles, horns, sirens. 
    No person, without special authority from the police department or fire department, shall carry or use any whistle, horn or siren similar in appearance or sound to the whistles, horns or sirens used by the police department, fire department, ambulances or rescue squad emergency service vehicles. 
(Code 1973, § 13-22; Code 1993, § 10-16) 
State Law reference- Approach of emergency vehicles, G.S. 20-157. 
Sec. 20-11. - Public trees; landscaping improvements. 
    It shall be unlawful to remove, destroy, cut, prune, trim, disfigure or cause herbicide to be placed or sprayed in or around trees, shrubbery, bushes, hedges, and/or landscaping, either planted or naturally occurring, within the public areas of the city including, but not limited to, street rights-of-way, cemeteries, parks, public accesses, bikeways and properties belonging to the city. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from pruning, cutting, or removing trees and landscaping as a part of its maintenance and construction activities. Each tree, bush, hedge plant, landscaping plant removed, destroyed, pruned, trimmed, disfigured or on, in or around which any herbicide has been placed or sprayed shall be a separate offense and every day that this section is violated again shall be a separate offense. In addition to criminal and civil penalties and remedies for violation of this section, the violator shall be liable to the city for the value of the tree or plant which is the subject of the violation and the cost associated with its replacement. 
(Code 1993, § 10-17; Ord. No. 2006-25, 4-12-2006) 
Sec. 20-12. - Begging. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggressive manner means and includes the following conduct: 
    Beg, solicit, or ask means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. The begging, solicitation, or asking may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching the other person in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is intended to or is likely to cause a person to fear bodily contact or imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon or contact with property in the person's possession; or is intended to or is likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person asking the solicitation; 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures; or using words or gestures intended to or likely to intimidate the person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(5)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to or is likely to cause a person to fear bodily contact or imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon or contact with property in the person's possession; or is intended to or is likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; or 
(6)  Continuing to solicit from a person after such person has given a negative response to such solicitation. 
    Automated teller machine means any device or machine, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments, and includes an automated banking device as defined by G.S. 14-113.8(1a). 
    Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one or more automated teller machine, and any adjacent space which is made available to customers of such machines during and after regular business hours. 
    False or misleading solicitation means and includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Stating that a donation is needed to meet a specific need, when the solicitor already has sufficient funds to meet that need and does not disclose that fact; 
(2)  Stating that the donation is needed to meet a need which does not exist; 
(3)  Stating the solicitor is from out of town and stranded when that is not true; 
(4)  Wearing a military uniform or other indication of military service, when the solicitor is neither a present nor former member of the service indicated; 
(5)  Wearing or displaying an indication of physical or mental disability, when the solicitor does not suffer the disability indicated; 
(6)  Use of any makeup or device to simulate any deformity; or 
(7)  Stating that the solicitor is homeless, when he is not. 
    Intimidate means any conduct which would cause a person to fear bodily contact or imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon or contact with property in the person's possession, and which may cause such person to do something he would not have otherwise done. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to beg, solicit, or ask for money or other things of value, to exhibit oneself for the purpose of begging, soliciting, or asking for money or other things of value, or to solicit or otherwise offer the sale of goods or services: 
(1)  In an aggressive or intimidating manner; 
(2)  In a manner that impedes pedestrians; 
(3)  Within 20 feet of any crosswalk; 
(4)  In or on cemetery grounds; 
(5)  Within any areas adjacent to or near any public, private, or parochial schools and/or community college, college or university property; 
(6)  In any public park or water access point; 
(7)  Approaching within three feet of a person being solicited unless that person has indicated that he wishes to make a donation; 
(8)  Within 50 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or financial institution, or within 50 feet of any automated teller machine without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities; provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(9)  While the person being solicited is standing in line waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment; 
(10)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(11)  From any operator or passenger of a motor vehicle that is on a public street; 
(12)  At any sidewalk cafe permitted under article 11-1 and in accordance with section 12-2.5(D) of the Unified Development Ordinance, provided such areas are in active use at the time; 
(13)  While under the influence of alcohol or after having illegally used any controlled substance as defined in the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act; 
(14)  In a group of two or more persons; 
(15)  By knowingly making any false or misleading representation in the course of soliciting or begging; or 
(16)  At any location between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following persons or firms are exempt from the provisions of this article: Section 20-12 (b): 
(1)  A street performer as defined in section 28-164 performing in compliance with chapter 28, article VI; 
(2)  Any person requesting donations for any church, religious, charitable organization, school, school boosters club, or an organization tax exempt under the provision of Section 501(c)(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, which person has permission to do so from an organization designated in this subsection; or 
(3)  Any person, business or organization taking part in any festival or other activity under a permit or other approval granted by the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in G.S. 14-4 for each violation, and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a maximum fine not to exceed $50.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. 
(Code 1973, § 13-24; Code 1993, § 10-18; Ord. No. 2010-29, 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-13. - Noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to create or assist in creating any unreasonably loud, disturbing noise in the city. Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the public health, welfare and peace is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are hereby declared to be loud, disturbing noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device for an unreasonable period of time, or the use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle; 
(2)  Playing or allowing to be played any radio, phonograph, television, loudspeaker, drum, amplifier or musical instrument or anything else in such manner or with such volume, during the hours from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, provided, however, that during festivals and other special events authorized by the city council the hours wherein this subsection will apply will be from 12:00 midnight to 7:00 a.m.; 
(3)  The keeping of any animal or bird that, by causing frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity; 
(4)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud grating, grinding, rattling or other noise; 
(5)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler or engine, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger; 
(6)  The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises that disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof; 
(7)  The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or service station in any residential area so as to cause loud or offensive noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or on Sundays; 
(8)  The creation of any excessive noises on any street adjacent to any school or institution of learning, while the same is in session, that unreasonably and unnecessarily interfere with the working of such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the area is a school area; 
(9)  The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street adjacent to any church, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street; 
(10)  The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or less while the emergency continues; 
(11)  The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced; 
(12)  The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors, which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood; 
(13)  The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise, except during festivals or other special events authorized by city council action. This subsection shall not apply to loudspeakers or public address systems during sports events at schools, parks, ball fields, and such other public venues as shall be authorized by the city council; 
(14)  The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes; 
(15)  Shouting, fighting or creating noise through loud or boisterous speech or singing so as to be audible off of the premises upon which such activities and noises occur if so loud as to disturb the peace and tranquility of persons occupying residences, motels, hotels, rest homes, nursing homes or hospitals in the vicinity; 
(16)  Idling or running of diesel engines or running refrigeration motors or compressors on or in motor vehicles between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day in any location within 400 feet of any residence or residential district as established by the zoning ordinance. Residential districts shall include all R districts and PD and MF districts. This subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles or trains while in transit over the streets of the city or railroad tracks in the city in a normal manner at a lawful speed nor to delivery vehicles while making deliveries. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00 and/or imprisonment of up to 30 days. Additionally, such violation shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of $100.00 for each violation, to be recovered by the city in a civil action if not paid within ten days after citation of the offender for the violation. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate and distinct offense, and it shall not be necessary to issue a citation each day. This section may also be enforced by injunction or order of abatement, or both. This section may be enforced by one, all or a combination of the remedies authorized herein. 
(Code 1973, § 13-37; Code 1993, § 10-32; Ord. No. 1987-03, 4-14-1987; Ord. No. 2012-34, 8-14-2012) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate loud noises, G.S. 160A-184. 
Sec. 20-14. - Nuisances. 
    The following conditions or actions, in addition to others, are declared to be nuisances and are unlawful: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, business or enterprise to utilize any town-owned litter receptacle that is placed solely for the purpose of receiving litter from the general pedestrian public for their primary solid waste storage container and collection service or to supplement their regular solid waste storage container and collection service. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, business or enterprise to place into or next to any town-owned litter receptacle, placed solely for the purpose of receiving litter from the general pedestrian public, any swill, slops or offal or any waste oil or any material that is classified as hazardous by any state or federal regulatory agency. 
(Code 1973, § 13-39; Code 1993, § 10-33; Ord. No. 1992-22, 11-24-1992; Ord. No. 1998-24, 6-9-1998) 
Sec. 20-15. - Electrified fences. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any fence to a source of electrical power or to connect any uninsulated wire positioned within 15 feet of ground level to a source of electric power within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 13-41; Code 1993, § 10-35) 
Sec. 20-16. - Failure to pay fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except persons entitled to free transportation, to ride upon any motor bus, taxicab or other public conveyance without paying therefor the fare prescribed or allowed by law. 
(Code 1973, § 41/2-12; Code 1993, § 10-37) 
Sec. 20-17. - Consumption and possession of malt beverages and unfortified wine on public property prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess any malt beverage or unfortified wine, as defined by G.S. 18B-300(c), on any property or in any place owned or occupied by the city including, without limitation, any public street, highway, sidewalk, or alley, any town wharf, park, fire station, police station, cemetery or town hall. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Malt beverage means beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter, and any other brewed or fermented beverage containing at least one-half of one percent, and not more than six percent alcohol by volume. (G.S. 18B-101(9)) 
    Open container means a container whose seal has been broken or a container other than the manufacturer's unopened original container (G.S. 18B-300(c)) 
    Public street means any highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, alley, bridge or other way within and/or under the control of the city and open to public use, including the sidewalks of any such street. 
    Unfortified wine means wine that has an alcoholic content produced only by natural fermentation or by the addition of pure cane, beet, or dextrose sugar, and that has an alcoholic content of not more than 17 percent alcohol by volume. (G.S. 18B-101(15)) 
(c)  Consumption on the public streets and on city property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on the public streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied, or controlled by the city including, but not limited to, public buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto, city parking lots, public parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, tennis courts, and other athletic fields. 
(d)  Possession of open containers on the public streets and on municipal property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on the public streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied, or controlled by the city including, but not limited to, public buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto, city parking lots, public parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, tennis courts, and other athletic fields. 
(e)  Possession during special events prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on the public streets, alleys, or parking lots which are temporarily closed to regular traffic for special events, unless the town council adopts a resolution making other provisions for the possession of malt beverages and/or unfortified wine at the special event. 
(f)  Exemptions. Possession and consumption of malt beverages and/or unfortified wine shall be permitted within a building or premises on town-owned property where appropriate permits have been obtained as required by law for possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages for the period of time permitted thereunder. 
(g)  Penalty. For violation of this article, punishment shall be a $50.00 fine or 30 days imprisonment, or both. 
(Code 1993, § 10-38; Ord. No. 1990-11, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 1995-35, 11-14-1995) 
Chapter 22 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2000-36, adopted October 10, 2000, amended Ch. 11 to read as herein set out. Prior to said amendment, Ch. 11 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1973, §§ 14-1-14-13 and Ordinance No. 1988-12, adopted May 26, 1988. 
State Law reference- Boating and water safety, G.S. Ch. 75A; conservation of marine and estuarine and wildlife resources, G.S. 113-127 et seq.; state parks and recreation council, G.S. 143B-311 et seq.; municipal parks and recreation, G.S. 160A-350 et seq.; town may create parks and recreation commission to operate system, G.S. 160A-354; local government may establish parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities, G.S. 160A-353. 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the parks and recreation department. 
    Governing body means, for the purpose of this chapter, means the town council of Morehead City. 
    Recreation means, for the purpose of this chapter, those activities which fall within the general classification areas of the arts, drama, crafts, athletics, sports and games, dance, hobbies, music, nature and outings, reading, writing, linguistics, social recreation, special community events and special activities, volunteer services, and recreation travel. 
    Structures and areas means, for the purpose of this chapter, the outdoor and indoor areas and structures on or in which people derive opportunity for the pursuit of happiness through recreation, whether or not these areas and structures are owned, leased, borrowed, controlled, or operated within or outside of the corporate limits or boundary of the city. 
    Unit means, for the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Morehead City. 
(Code 1993, § 11-1; Ord. No. 2000-36, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 22-2. - Parks and recreation department. 
(a)  The parks and recreation department is hereby established for the city. 
(b)  The functions of the parks and recreation department are to provide opportunities for wholesome year-round public recreation services for each age group and to develop and maintain in an attractive and safe manner the recreation areas and facilities of the city and to ensure that such facilities are suitable for a wide variety of recreation purposes. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to supervise the parks and recreation department. He may delegate these duties to the appropriate department head. 
(d)  Staff/employees are hired by the parks and recreation department director. 
(Code 1993, § 11-3; Ord. No. 2000-36, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 22-3. - Yard sales in city parks. 
    There shall be no yard sales conducted in any city park. 
(Code 1993, § 11-4; Ord. No. 2000-36, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 22-4. - Hours of operation for recreation center. 
    The recreation center operating hours will be established on a published schedule by the director of the parks and recreation department. 
(Code 1993, § 11-5; Ord. No. 2000-36, 10-10-2000; Ord. No. 2010-14, 4-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-5. - Permits for use of parks and recreation center facilities. 
    Permits are necessary for use of parks and the recreation center and can be obtained from the parks and recreation department at the recreation center. Fees are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1993, § 11-6; Ord. No. 2000-36, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 22-6. - Establishment of a pier head line. 
    The pier head line for the Morehead City Yacht Basin, specifically defined as the body of water lying south of Calico Creek Channel, north of Highway 70, west of the N.C. Port Property and east of property now or formerly owned by Edward Bagrowski (Tax PIN #638620911638) and property now or formerly owned by the North Carolina Railroad (Tax PIN #638620911461), shall be located 52 feet from the southern boundary of the federally maintained Calico Creek Channel. No pier located in this basin may extend closer than 52 feet to the Calico Creek Channel. 
(Code 1993, § 11-7; Ord. No. 2002-31, 8-13-2002) 
Sec. 22-7. - Park facility (city parks, athletic fields, sports courts and playgrounds) rules. 
(a)  Pets must be leashed at all times and are restricted to trail usage only. Owners must pick up and dispose of pet waste. 
(b)  The fines for pet infractions are as follows: 
(1)  Leash law infraction: $50.00. 
(2)  Pets on athletic field areas/playgrounds: $50.00. 
(3)  Failure to remove pet waste: $50.00. 
(c)  Parks are open from dawn to dusk each day unless otherwise reserved by citizens for private functions or for recreation activities permitted by the recreation department or town council. Parks with lighted athletic fields or courts remain open for the duration of the game or practice activity as scheduled by the parks and recreation department. 
(d)  No golfing is allowed on park property. 
(e)  Motorized vehicles are restricted to roads and designated parking areas. 
(f)  Athletic fields are closed for play when the park gates are secured. 
(Code 1993, § 11-8; Ord. No. 2010-14, 4-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-8. - Concealed handguns and other weapons. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall carry, use, or possess firearms or other dangerous weapons of any kind (such as, but not limited to, bowie knives, daggers, dirks, razors, stun guns, sling shots, loaded canes, metallic knuckles, shurikins, bows and arrows and crossbows) within any city park and/or city venues for sports, games or exercises, except for law enforcement officers engaged in the discharge of their duties. Archery activities, such as archery competitive events and/or classes, are permitted only by special permission of the city manager or his designee or under the auspices of the city. 
(b)  Due to preemptive provisions of state law, the carrying of concealed handguns in town parks and athletic venues is prohibited at the following recreational facilities only: playgrounds (including all areas containing play equipment), athletic fields (including soccer fields, baseball and softball fields, football fields, and other sports fields), and athletic facilities (including basketball courts, tennis courts, exercise and walking trails, volleyball courts, skateboarding areas, recreation centers, and similar sports, games and exercise facilities). 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall maintain lists and/or maps identifying those recreational facilities on which the carrying of concealed handguns is prohibited. The lists or maps shall also be filed with the city clerk. These facilities shall include the following parks or recreational areas with playgrounds, athletic facilities or fields: 
(1)  Big Rock Stadium. 
(2)  Martin Luther King, Jr., City Park. 
(3)  Mitchell Village Park. 
(4)  Piney Park. 
(5)  Recreation Center. 
(6)  Rotary Park. 
(7)  Shevans Park. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee shall post, as soon as practicable, information in the affected locations that specifically identifies those areas in which the carrying of concealed handguns is prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 11-9; Ord. No. 2012-32, 9-11-2012) 
Chapter 24 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The subject matter of the former Planning and Development chapter is now incorporated into the Unified Development Ordinance set out in part IV of this volume. 

Chapter 26 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Control of litter, G.S. 14-399 et seq.; radioactive waste, G.S. 104E-1 et seq.; solid waste management, G.S. 130A-290 et seq.; location of garbage collection containers on state highway rights-of-way, G.S. 136-18.3; placing glass, etc., or injurious obstructions in road, G.S. 136-91; municipal regulation of trash and garbage, G.S. 160A-192; municipal abatement of public health and public safety nuisances, G.S. 160A-193; regulation of the placing of trash, refuse and garbage within municipal limits, G.S. 160A-303.1; public enterprises, G.S. 160A-311 et seq.; municipal power to require use of solid waste services and to regulate accordingly, G.S. 160A-317(b); requirements for municipal solid waste landfill facilities, 15A N.C. Admin. Code 13B.1601 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning indicated as follows: 
    Ashes means those service locations generating waste products from coal, wood and other fuels used for cooking and heating. 
    Bag (bagged, boxed) means to securely contain in a quantity of city solid waste, refuse, garbage, construction and demolition debris or yard trash in a manner to prevent spillage during collection. Each bag or box shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight. 
    Bulky waste means household furniture, mattresses, bedding, plumbing fixtures, ceramics, carpet and large cardboard. 
    Bundle means an easily handled package not over four feet long, 18 inches in diameter or over 50 pounds in weight. 
    CRSWMA means the Coastal Regional Solid Waste Management Authority. 
    Construction and demolition debris (C&D) means trees and limbs over six inches in diameter and solid waste that is the direct by-product of construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations performed by or on behalf of the resident or owner of buildings or other structures. 
    Contractor means and includes the person, corporation or partnership performing collection, transport, process and marketing of materials under this contract with the town. 
    Curbside means that ten-foot portion of the right-of-way immediately adjacent to the paved or traveled roadway of a public street passable by the contractor's equipment. 
    Dead animals means and includes animals (dogs and cats) or portions thereof that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for human use. 
    DEHNR means the department of environment, health and natural resources or any successor department or agency performing the same or similar duties for the state. 
    Environmental law means any federal, state, county, or local statute, law, regulation, rule, ordinance, code, directive, policy, license or permit, or any agreement imposing liability or standards of conduct or responsibility concerning or otherwise relating to environmental or health and safety matters, as amended from time to time and all as now or at any time hereafter may be in effect. 
    Excluded waste means any waste excluded by any applicable environmental law or excluded by any of the terms and conditions of any permits, licenses or approvals. This term shall also include such other waste material (excluding solid waste) which poses an unreasonable risk or danger to the operation or safety of the contractor or the environment due to chemical or physical characteristics of such waste. 
    Garbage means dead animals not over ten pounds in weight and all putrescible animal and plant material resulting from the handling, preparation, processing, consumption, packing, canning, storage, transportation, cooking and consumption of food, including animal and vegetable matter, and a minimum amount of liquid necessarily incident thereto, except (in all cases) sewage, septage, human waste or any matter included by any other definition. 
    Hazardous waste means all materials or substances defined or characterized as hazardous waste by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state department of environment, health and natural resources, or any other agency pursuant to any environmental law and all current and future amendments thereto, and all other regulations promulgated hereunder. 
    Inert debris means bricks, blocks, uncontaminated dirt, concrete, stones or other solid waste which consist of material that is virtually inert and is likely to retain its physical and chemical structures under expected conditions of disposal. 
    Infectious waste means solid waste capable of producing an infectious disease. The types of waste designated as infectious are microbiological waste, pathological waste, blood products and "sharps." 
    Land clearing debris means solid waste which is generated solely from land-clearing activities and shall include the removal of all trees and stumps in excess of 12 inches in diameter, regardless of whether such trees and stumps are removed by an independent contractor or the property owner/occupant. 
    Medical waste means any solid waste which is generated in the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto or in the testing or production of biologicals, but does not include any hazardous waste as defined in 40 Code of Federal Regulations 261.4. 
    Municipal solid waste (MSW) means metal items and any solid waste resulting from the day to day operation of residential, commercial, governmental or institutional establishments which may be disposed of in sanitary landfills. MSW does not include special waste, excluded waste, yard trash, C&D waste, hazardous waste, sludge, mining, agricultural, infectious or medical waste. 
    Public street means one which is open to and used by the public. 
    Public works director means the public works director of the city or such successor position as shall be established. 
    Recyclable materials means those materials which are capable of being recycled and which would otherwise become solid waste, and are collected, separated or processed, and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
    Recycle bins means containers provided by the city made of plastic or like materials to be used for the purpose of the resident or business storing recyclable materials for collection. 
    Refuse means and includes MSW, garbage and other nonputrescible waste materials resulting directly from normal day to day operation of a residence or commercial establishment utilizing rollout carts. 
    Rollout carts means and includes rollout containers not to exceed 90 gallons in capacity, made of plastic or like material, on wheels, and so constructed that it can be handled (dumped) by the contractor's equipment used for collection. 
    Septage means solid waste that is a fluid mixture of untreated and partially treated sewage solids, liquids and sludge of human or domestic origin. 
    Service location means and includes a residential dwelling unit or a commercial establishment authorized by the public works director to utilize rollout carts. 
    Sludge means any solid, semi-solid or liquid waste generated from a city, commercial, institutional or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, or any other waste having similar characteristics and effects. 
    Solid waste disposal facility means and includes a depository, including, but not limited to, sanitary landfills, transfer stations, incinerators and waste processing/separation centers licensed, permitted or approved to receive for processing or final disposal of refuse, municipal solid waste, garbage, yard trash or construction and demolition debris by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction and requiring such license, permits or approvals. 
    Special waste means any waste which requires special or exceptional handling or requires approval from the department of environment, health and natural resources for disposal, including, without limitation, any material other than that which is typically found in household, commercial or municipal refuse; industrial waste; medical waste; ashes; sludge; residue from incineration; tires and asbestos. This term excludes nuclear and hazardous waste. 
    White goods means inoperative or discarded refrigerators, ranges, water heaters, freezers, washers, dryers and other similar domestic appliances or parts thereof resulting from the normal maintenance of a service location. 
    Yard trash means vegetative matter resulting from normal noncontracted landscaping maintenance of service locations, such as leaves, grass, trimmings, twigs, shrubbery, plant bedding, limbs, etc., of service locations using a rollout cart. 
(Code 1993, § 14-1; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 26-2. - Containers; placement of refuse in. 
(a)  Generally. All residences and small businesses shall have the rollout carts as defined in this chapter in order to receive city refuse service. 
(1)  Except as hereinafter provided, every residence within the city where solid waste or refuse is generated shall be initially provided by the city with a rollout cart that is compatible with refuse collection equipment currently in use by the city's contractor. Additional carts may be purchased by the resident or business owner up to a maximum of three carts per stop. 
(2)  The owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the location shall be responsible to the city for the proper care and use of the cart and shall be billed for damages to the cart caused by neglect or abusive use. 
(3)  If the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the location utilizing a rollout cart shall vacate the premises, then said person shall notify the city for cart pickup prior to their departure. 
(4)  All refuse that readily fits into the cart (solid waste, refuse, cold ashes, etc.) shall be placed within it. Pet litter and diapers must be further protected by wrapping or by plastic bags. 
(5)  Materials such as inert debris, yardwaste, flammable liquids, hot ashes, excluded waste, hazardous waste, infectious waste, special waste, sludge, septage, etc., shall not be placed in a rollout cart. 
(b)  Apartments, condominiums, trailer parks, townhouses, etc. Every apartment, condominium, etc., (whether one or more buildings) having more than four units shall have provided by the owner thereof or the owner's association a bulk container not less than three cubic yards nor more than eight cubic yards for disposal of garbage, trash and refuse. Where the aforementioned locations are individually metered for water and sewer for each unit contained in the complex and each tenant may be billed individually for solid waste, and if the owner or the owner's association provides rollout carts for all units in the complex at its own expense, then upon written request from the owner, the city may allow for the use of rollout carts. 
(c)  Crushing boxes. All empty cardboard boxes shall be crushed flat before collection. 
(d)  Unauthorized containers. No wooden boxes, pails or other wooden or cardboard containers shall be used for garbage and refuse in lieu of authorized containers. 
(e)  Draining. All garbage and refuse shall have any liquid drained therefrom before being placed in the rollout cart for collection. 
(Code 1993, § 14-2; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 26-3. - Collection; frequency of and responsibility for. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except in case of an emergency arising from an act of God or under circumstances over which the city has no control, the city will provide for the collection and disposal of certain solid waste as follows: 
(1)  Number of collections. For locations with rollout carts, the city will provide one collection per week for the following items: household solid waste, bulk trash, yard waste, C&D, white goods and recycling. 
(2)  Industrial and commercial waste. Industrial and commercial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the operator of the factory, plant, enterprise or business creating or causing said waste. 
(3)  Construction and demolition debris (C&D). Building debris shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the contractor or builder or, upon their failure, by the owner of the property. Repairs made exclusively by the property owner may be collected by the city's solid waste contractor in amounts to be determined by policy or contract. 
(4)  Land clearing debris. Land-clearing debris shall be collected and disposed of by the property owner. 
(5)  Automotive waste. Major automotive parts shall not be placed in rollout carts nor shall they be handled as bulk trash. Such waste shall be disposed of at an appropriate automotive salvage yard. 
(Code 1993, § 14-3; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2000-28, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 26-4. - Route placement requirements. 
(a)  Where a rollout cart is used, the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises shall be responsible for the placement of the cart at the curb or side of the street, but not in the traveled portion of the road. Such location shall be readily accessible for collection crews. Collection from alleys will not be provided. 
(b)  Carts shall be placed for collection, at the curb or street side no earlier than 7:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection, and shall be removed not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection. The city manager is authorized to vary the requirements of this section for persons physically unable to place the rollout cart at the curb. A doctor's certificate may be required. 
(c)  No collection shall be made from vacant lots, nor shall any large rocks, tree trunks over 12 inches in diameter, tree stumps or other heavy objects be collected except as a result of special cleanup periods designated by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 14-4; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 26-5. - Permit required. 
    No person or firm shall engage in the business of collecting, hauling or transporting any waste in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 14-5; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 26-6. - Transportation of swill, etc. 
    No swill, slops, garbage, bones, offal, kitchen waste or refuse shall be carried through the streets of the city except in watertight metal or substantial plastic watertight containers. All containers shall have watertight fitting covers. 
(Code 1993, § 14-6; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 26-7. - Sanitary landfills. 
    The sanitary landfill is operated by the Coastal Regional Solid Waste Management Authority which has a transfer station located at Hibbs Road. No dumping of refuse or garbage shall occur at any location within the city limits. 
(Code 1993, § 14-7; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 26-8. - Fees. 
    All developed and occupied property within the city limits shall be billed for collection of solid waste. Fees shall be based upon an amount to be determined by the city council, not to exceed the actual cost for all aspects of providing solid waste services. Fees shall be commensurate with the number of rollout carts located at each service location each month. The same fee shall be billed per unit to multi-residential and multi-commercial locations that are served through one meter. Locations which have contracted with a permitted, private solid waste hauler may be excluded from these fees. 
(Code 1993, § 14-8; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 26-9. - Littering prohibited-Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk or any yard or premises, public or private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, rubbish, bottles, glass or any other form of litter or waste matter. 
(Code 1993, § 14-9; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998) 
State Law reference- Control of litter, G.S. 14-399 et seq. 
Sec. 26-10. - Same-Duty of business owners, occupants. 
(a)  Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated within the city shall exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep the business premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, packaging and other used or waste materials thrown or left on the premises by the customers thereof, or anyone else, and shall take reasonable measures to prevent such items from drifting or blowing to adjoining premises. 
(b)  Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed by the business owner on the premises, accessible to the customers of such business, for the purpose of placing therein trash, garbage, etc. 
(c)  Signs. Each business shall have placed upon its premises in conspicuous places and in close proximity to such receptacles, signs which shall convey to customers and other occupants a request that they use such receptacles for the disposal of waste material. 
(Code 1993, § 14-10; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 26-11. - Same-Duty of customer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person going upon the premises of another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, packages, containers or other used waste materials except in receptacles provided for such purposes. 
(Code 1993, § 14-11; Ord. No. 1998-15, 4-28-1998) 
Chapter 28 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public works, G.S. Ch. 133; roads and highways, G.S. Ch. 136; special assessments, G.S. 160A-216 et seq.; municipal streets, G.S. 160A-296 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Planting trees between sidewalk and street-Authority; supervision. 
    The citizens may plant trees in front of their lots on the line dividing the sidewalks from the streets by obtaining authority from the city. The planting of such trees shall be under the supervision of the city manager. No person shall remove, destroy, cut or disfigure such trees without permission from the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 17-1; Code 1993, § 15-1) 
Sec. 28-2. - Same-Height restrictions near intersections. 
    No plantings or obstructions more than 30 inches high shall be planted or erected on the right-of-way between the curb and sidewalk within 50 feet from the corner of intersections. 
(Code 1973, § 17-2; Code 1993, § 15-2) 
Sec. 28-3. - Nuisances. 
    The following conditions are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety and are prohibited: 
(1)  All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 12 hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited thereon; 
(2)  All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent any person from having a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection from cross streets in sufficient time to bring a motor vehicle driven at a reasonable speed to a full stop before the intersection is reached; 
(3)  All limbs of trees which are less than eight feet above the surface of any public sidewalk or nine feet above the surface of any street; 
(4)  All wires which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the ground; 
(5)  Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the streets and sidewalks; 
(6)  Allowing rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk; 
(7)  All barbed-wire fences which are located within three feet of any public sidewalk; 
(8)  All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any place or so situated or operated on private property as to constitute a danger to the public using the public thoroughfares; 
(9)  All other conditions or things which are liable to cause injury to the person or property of anyone using the public thoroughfares. 
(Code 1973, § 17-3; Code 1993, § 15-3) 
Sec. 28-4. - Exhibition shows-Generally. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or commence any exhibition show in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place in the city unless a permit is first obtained from the city manager. No person may conduct or otherwise participate in any exhibition show except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(b)  Sponsor of show to be nonprofit organization. No permit shall be issued unless the exhibition show is conducted solely by a nonprofit organization with the proceeds from the exhibition show being used for charitable, educational or religious purposes. No sale of arts, crafts, food or other tangible items shall be permitted within the street or sidewalk area during the exhibition show except under the auspices and control of the organization receiving the permit. Such organization shall be fully responsible for compliance with rules, regulations and ordinances of the city with respect to the exhibition show being conducted pursuant to a permit issued thereunder. 
(c)  Application. Application for a permit for an exhibition show shall be filed with the city manager on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by payment of the most current adopted permit fee, kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for an exhibition show permit shall be filed with the city manager not less than 21 days before the proposed time to conduct the exhibition show. 
(2)  Contents. The application for an exhibition show shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the organization applying for a permit; 
b.  The names and addresses of its principal officers and management; 
c.  The purpose for which any receipts derived from such exhibition show are to be used; 
d.  The name and address of the person who will be in direct charge of the exhibition show and be present at such show; 
e.  A description of the type of exhibition show and the hours of operation; 
f.  The amount of any special wages, fees, commissions, or expenses to be expended or paid to any person in connection with the exhibition show; 
g.  A statement of the character and extent of the charitable, religious or educational work being done by the applicant organization within the city; 
h.  The name and portions of the street to be closed for the purpose of displays and conducting the exhibition show or the name and area of any city park or other public place in which the exhibition show is to be conducted; 
i.  A copy of a security and traffic-control plan approved by the chief of police; and 
j.  Any additional information which the city manager shall find reasonable and necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(d)  Standards for issuance. The city manager shall issue a permit for an exhibition show upon a finding that the application meets the requirements of this section, that the exhibition will not unduly inconvenience or interfere with the orderly movement of traffic in the area involved, that property owners in the area are not unduly deprived of access to their property, that the exhibition will not unduly interfere with normal business activity within the area of the street occupied by the exhibition, that emergency vehicles will not be denied access to any person or property, and that adequate cleanup arrangements have been made. In addition, if the exhibition show is to be located in a park or other public place, the city manager shall be satisfied that adequate provisions and accommodations can be made for conducting such exhibition show. 
(e)  Notice of denial or withdrawal of permit. The city manager shall act upon the application for an exhibition show permit within ten days after the filing thereof. If the city manager disapproves the application, he shall notify the applicant, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit, and the permit fee shall not be refunded. A permit issued under this section may be withdrawn in the event of any violation of conditions, misstatement of fact in the application or in instances where the health or safety of the citizens will be adversely affected. 
(f)  Duration. Where the exhibition show is to be conducted pursuant to a permit issued hereunder, such exhibition show may not extend for more than seven successive days without an intervening period of at least one week. 
(g)  Vendor's permit not required. No vendor's permit shall be required for any exhibitor or vendor participating in an exhibition show permitted by this section, nor, in order to avoid the interruption of the exhibition show, shall any vendor's permit issued pursuant to this section be valid in the areas of such an exhibition show unless he is a participant therein. 
(Code 1993, § 15-4; Ord. No. 1987-21, § 1, 9-8-1987) 
Sec. 28-5. - Same-Animals prohibited. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, no animal, except for appropriately restrained service animals for the disabled, shall be permitted on any street or sidewalk area closed for an exhibition show pursuant to this article unless such animal is part of a bona fide exhibit being operated at the exhibition show. 
(Code 1993, § 15-5; Ord. No. 1987-21, § 2, 9-8-1987) 
Sec. 28-6. - Same-Sound amplification equipment. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, no portable radios, tape recorders or other sound equipment, other than such equipment being operated as part of a bona fide exhibit of the exhibition show, shall be operated in any street or sidewalk area closed for an exhibition show pursuant to this article, unless such equipment is being operated so that the sound from such equipment may be heard only through earphones. 
(Code 1993, § 15-6; Ord. No. 1987-21, § 3, 9-8-1987) 
Secs. 28-7-28-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 28-31. - Petition to pave required. 
    Except as provided in section 28-41, the city council will consider the paving of any street or sidewalk only when a petition is submitted to it, on forms provided by the city, signed by a majority of the owners of property to be assessed who represent a majority of the linear footage on the street proposed to be improved, requesting that the total cost of such improvement be assessed against the abutting property owners as stipulated in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 17-20; Code 1993, § 15-21) 
State Law reference- Petition for street or sidewalk improvements, G.S. 160A-217; municipal powers as to streets, etc., G.S. 160A-296. 
Sec. 28-32. - Street widths. 
    The city council shall not accept a petition or consider the paving of any street which does not meet the minimum width requirements according to the widths prescribed for street classifications as follows: 
(1)  Street definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cul-de-sac. A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being permanently or temporarily terminated, in which a vehicle turnaround is provided. 
    Local residential street. Culs-de-sac, loop streets and streets less than 2,500 feet in length, or streets less than one mile in length that do not connect thoroughfares or serve major traffic generators and do not collect traffic from more than 100 dwelling units. 
    Major thoroughfare street. Major streets that provide for the expeditious movement of volumes of traffic within and through urban areas. 
    Minor thoroughfare street. A street which performs the function of collecting traffic from local access streets and carrying it to the major thoroughfare system. It may supplement the major thoroughfare system by facilitating minor through-traffic movement and may also serve abutting property. 
    Residential collector street. A local access street which serves as a connector street between local residential streets and the thoroughfare system. Residential collector streets typically collect traffic from 100 to 400 dwelling units. 
(2)  Minimum standards. 
a.  Local residential street. 
1.  Minimum pavement width: 27 feet (back of curb to back of curb). 
2.  Minimum right-of-way width: 45 feet exclusive of utility easements; 60 feet including utility easements. 
3.  Sidewalks required: One side, five feet wide. 
4.  Curb type permitted: Valley/rollback/standard. 
5.  Minimum travel lane width: 11 feet. 
b.  Residential collector street. 
1.  Minimum pavement width: 31 feet (back of curb to back of curb). 
2.  Minimum right-of-way width: 50 feet exclusive of utility easements; 60 feet inclusive of utility easements. 
3.  Sidewalks required: One side, five feet wide. 
4.  Curb type permitted: Valley/rollback/standard. 
5.  Minimum travel lane width: 11 feet. 
c.  Minor thoroughfare street. 
1.  Minimum pavement width: 39 feet (back of curb to back of curb). 
2.  Minimum right-of-way width: 60 feet exclusive of utility easements; 70 feet inclusive of utility easements. 
3.  Sidewalks required: One side, five feet wide. 
4.  Curb type permitted: Valley/rollback/standard. 
5.  Minimum travel lane width: 14 feet. 
d.  Major thoroughfare street. 
1.  Minimum pavement width: 49 feet (back of curb to back of curb). 
2.  Minimum right-of-way width: 80 feet exclusive of utility easements; 100 feet inclusive of utility easements. 
3.  Sidewalks required: Two sides, five feet wide per side. 
4.  Curb type permitted: Valley/rollback/standard. 
5.  Minimum travel lane width: 12 feet. 
e.  Culs-de-sac. 
1.  Residential minimum pavement diameter: 80 feet (84 feet back of curb to back of curb). 
2.  Residential minimum right-of-way diameter: 90 feet. 
3.  Commercial minimum pavement diameter: 90 feet (94 feet back of curb to back of curb). 
4.  Commercial minimum right-of-way diameter: 100 feet. 
f.  Commercial and industrial streets. 
1.  Minimum pavement width: 31 feet. 
2.  Minimum right-of-way width: 50 feet exclusive of utility easements; 60 feet inclusive of utility easements. 
3.  Sidewalks required: One side, five feet wide. 
4.  Curb type permitted: Valley/rollback/standard. 
5.  Minimum travel lane width: 11 feet. 
(Code 1973, § 17-21; Code 1993, § 15-22; Ord. No. 2009-07, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 28-33. - Scope of street improvements. 
(a)  Street improvements for all streets which shall be included in the property owners' petition, the cost of which shall be assessed against the abutting property owners, shall include the following: 
(1)  Curbs and gutters as required by city specifications; 
(2)  Storm sewer drainage facilities, inlets and other necessary incidentals as may be required under streets; 
(3)  Engineering cost; 
(4)  Grading for a width of 31 feet on those streets which were open prior to May 23, 1968, and which need to be graded prior to improvements; 
(5)  Base course material for the full width of the street to be constructed in accordance with city specifications; 
(6)  Street surfacing according to city specifications for a full width of the street to be constructed. 
(b)  The improvement costs for street widths in excess of 31 feet, back of curb to back of curb, and the total cost of all improvements at street intersections shall not be assessed against the abutting property owners and shall be paid for by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 17-22; Code 1993, § 15-23) 
Sec. 28-34. - Cost assessment policy-Streets. 
    Street improvements designated in section 28-33 to be assessed against property owners will be assessed in the amount of 70 percent of the cost of the front foot benefit. This assessment shall be broken down to an equal share on either side of the street. The city shall assume the cost for 30 percent of the improvements in addition to those otherwise stipulated in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 17-23; Code 1993, § 15-24) 
Sec. 28-35. - Same-Sidewalks. 
    Petitions for street improvements may include requests for new sidewalk improvements in accordance with city specifications, which sidewalk improvements may be constructed as part of the street improvement project and in the same manner, in conformity with the following formula: 
(1)  On sidewalks constructed within one-half mile of a public school, property owners shall be assessed 90 percent of the total cost. 
(2)  On sidewalks constructed beyond the one-half-mile zone of a public school, property owners shall be assessed 100 percent of the total cost. 
(Code 1973, § 17-24; Code 1993, § 15-25) 
Sec. 28-36. - Project procedure; deposits. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a petition for street improvements, the clerk shall examine the petition and certify as to its sufficiency to the city council. No petition shall be considered for street improvements where streets have been opened after May 23, 1968, if they are in violation of the subdivision regulations, and no petition shall be considered for a street less than one normal block in length. 
(b)  No street or street and sidewalk involved in any petition shall be constructed unless and until the persons who have signed the petition shall have deposited with the city the minimum amount in cash, or as much above the minimum amount as the property owner desires, at the time of signing the petition as per the schedule of fees, and relevant criteria, as established from time to time. 
(c)  When the required amount has been deposited with the city, the street improvement assessment procedure as authorized in G.S. 160A-223 through 160A-229 shall be followed and assessments shall be made against the properties abutting upon such improvement according to an equal rate per front foot. Property owners who have made a cash deposit in advance as required in this section shall be credited for such payments on the assessment rolls. In accordance with the requirements of the general statutes, property owners not paying any assessments in cash in advance or those with partial advance payments shall pay their assessments in ten equal annual installments which shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum. 
(d)  If the actual cost of improvements is less than the estimated cost, the excess shall be refunded to the property owners. If the actual cost exceeds the estimated cost, the property owners will be assessed for this amount or may pay such amount in cash in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1973, § 17-25; Code 1993, § 15-26) 
Sec. 28-37. - Installation of utilities. 
    The city council, prior to approving any project or authorizing any street improvement, shall determine if water and sanitary sewer facilities have been installed within that portion of the street located between curbs. If such facilities have not been installed, or if facilities are inadequate and will have to be replaced, the city council shall postpone the street improvement project pending the installation of such facilities. 
(Code 1973, § 17-26; Code 1993, § 15-27) 
Sec. 28-38. - Responsibility of property owners as to driveways, grass areas, drainage, and tree removal. 
(a)  Property owners along streets which are surfaced and have curbs and gutters shall be responsible for replacing any driveway or walkway within the street right-of-way as a result of new street construction improvements. Driveway entrances and aprons at the curbline shall be constructed by the city at the location designated by the property owner and the total cost thereof shall be included in the cost assessed for street improvements. 
(b)  Property owners shall be responsible for seeding, landscaping or otherwise improving the area between curbs and the property line as they may desire, provided no walls or other permanent structures are located within the street right-of-way. Drainage pipes and other material on the right-of-way at the time of construction which were purchased by the property owner shall be removed and placed on the lot of the owner for his disposition. The city shall haul away such items if requested by the owner and with the owner's permission. 
(c)  Catch basins, manholes and storm sewer pipes shall be designed and installed in a way to drain the project and not change the natural flow of water. As nearly as possible, streets shall be designed to pick up stormwater at the point where it leaves private property, carry the water in the gutters or pipes through the project and discharge it on private property at the same point it was discharged before the project began. Where street drainage is discharged on private property, the city will pipe the water, provided the property owners buy the necessary materials. Under this policy, the city shall perform the work necessary to design and install the pipe and thus pay approximately half the total cost. 
(d)  During the construction, it may be necessary to remove all trees and shrubs that fall in the area of construction, and any such trees or shrubs that the property owner wishes to transplant should be removed from the area before construction starts. At the owner's request, large trees or shrubs will be dug up with power grading equipment and placed on the front of the property for the owner's disposal. Since the contractor is not trained or equipped for this work, small shrubs or flowers must be moved by the owner if they are to be saved. 
(Code 1973, § 17-27; Code 1993, § 15-28) 
Sec. 28-39. - Compliance with specifications; supervision. 
    All street grading, base course preparation, storm drainage, surfacing, curbs and gutters and other improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the written specifications of the city which have been approved by the city council. All work shall be done under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 17-28; Code 1993, § 15-29) 
Sec. 28-40. - Resurfacing. 
    Whenever it is necessary to resurface any street which has been surfaced under the policy as established in this article, the city will undertake such resurfacing when funds are appropriated and shall bear the entire cost for such work. 
(Code 1973, § 17-29; Code 1993, § 15-30) 
Sec. 28-41. - Opening and improving streets without petition. 
    When in the opinion of the city council a new street should be opened and improved and no petition is filed asking for the assessment of the cost thereof, and when the city council is of the opinion that the public benefit will be greater than the benefit to abutting property owners, it may direct that such improvement be made and the entire cost thereof is paid by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 17-30; Code 1993, § 15-31) 
Secs. 28-42-28-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET TREES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Planting, trimming and removing trees on state roads and highways, G.S. 136-93. 

Sec. 28-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park trees means trees or the parts of trees which overhang in city public parks. 
    Publicly owned trees means trees or the parts of trees which overhang within public rights-of-way or city property. 
    Street trees means those trees and large shrubs lying wholly or partly within rights-of-way on all streets, alleys, avenues or public ways and parts of all trees which overhang rights-of-way on all streets, alleys, avenues or public ways. 
    Topping means severe cutting or pruning, down to stubs larger than three inches in diameter, within the tree crown, to the extent of removing the normal canopy and disfiguring the tree. 
(Code 1973, § 17-42; Code 1993, § 15-51) 
Sec. 28-72. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Notices of violations. Any law enforcement officer, or city administrative or code enforcement official may advise, verbally or in writing, any person or city department apparently violating this article or the requirements of this article. Such notice shall not, however, be a prerequisite to enforcement action. 
(b)  Enforcement. Enforcement of this article shall primarily be the responsibility of the police department. Citizens who are not law enforcement officers may also swear out complaints of violations. 
(c)  Penalties. Failure to comply with the official planting list, the public tree care regulations, lawfully issued decisions, or other requirements of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $50.00, or imprisonment for 30 days, or both. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, this article may be enforced by equitable remedies issued by a court of competent jurisdiction including injunction, abatement, mandatory injunction and prohibitory injunction. In addition, each violation of section 28-74(b), (c) or (f) shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of $100.00 and each violation of section 28-74(d) or (e) shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of $500.00. 
(Code 1973, § 17-43; Code 1993, § 15-52) 
Sec. 28-73. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to create and preserve a better living environment in the community by encouraging the planting, growth, and protection of appropriate street trees throughout the city. This article seeks to protect the public health and welfare by encouraging development of a good tree cover in the community and securing for the city residents the following benefits of a healthy urban forest: oxygen production, noise dampening, glare reduction, air pollution reduction, wind movement slowdown, shade from the sun, cooling of summer heat, and a more attractive community appearance. 
(b)  This article is not intended to unreasonably impede healthful, necessary or imperative trimming or removal of trees on public property or rights-of-way in order to protect public safety, public or private property, the operation of utilities or public services, or tree care and growth. 
(Code 1973, § 17-41; Code 1993, § 15-53) 
Sec. 28-74. - Public tree care. 
(a)  Generally. The regulations of this section shall apply to all street and park trees within the city. 
(b)  Planting. Street and park trees may be planted only in accordance with the species list and guidelines of the city. Planting at variance with the list or guidelines requires special permission of the city. 
(c)  Pruning. City departments and public utilities and their agents may undertake pruning of trees to protect public safety, protect utilities facilities and public improvements, and enhance the beauty of street trees and/or public grounds, provided that pruning personnel have attended an instructional workshop provided of the city or can present proof of similar acceptable instruction in the proper care and pruning of trees. City departments, public utilities and their agents, and other persons conducting major trimming of street or park trees shall notify the city manager of their plans before beginning work. 
(d)  Topping. No person or city department shall top any publicly owned tree, park tree, or street tree on a public right-of-way or public property unless necessary to eliminate an imminent threat to property or to public safety. Topping of trees which are severely damaged by storms or other causes or which threaten utilities, property or public safety may be authorized by the city when other pruning practices would be impractical or ineffectual. 
(e)  Removal. No person or city department shall remove, fell or otherwise destroy any publicly owned tree, park tree or street tree on a public right-of-way or public property unless necessary to eliminate an imminent threat to property or to public safety. This provision shall not prevent prompt removal of fallen trees from public rights-of-way or property. The city may authorize or cause to be removed any publicly owned tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition, which threatens private property, public facilities or public safety, or which is affected by injurious insects, fungi or pests. 
(f)  Stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed so that the top of the stump does not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Code 1973, §§ 17-71-17-76; Code 1993, § 15-55) 
Secs. 28-75-28-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES 

Sec. 28-92. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the Town of Morehead City. 
    Parade means any march, foot race, demonstration, procession or motorcade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, upon the streets, parks or other public grounds within the city with an intent of attracting public attention that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets, parks or other public grounds. 
    Parade or public assembly permit means a permit as required by this article. 
    Person means any persons, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Public assembly means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of more than 25 persons for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or occupies any public area in a place open to the general public. 
    Sidewalk means any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved. 
    Street means any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-of-way, or median strip thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 15-76; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-93. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; and 
(4)  Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge within three days of such public assembly, provided that the organizer thereof gives written notice to the city at least 24 hours prior to such parade or public assembly. 
(Code 1993, § 15-77; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-94. - Application for permit. 
(a)  A person seeking a parade or public assembly permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer, and the application shall be signed by the applicant under oath. 
(b)  For single, nonrecurring parades or public assemblies, an application for a permit shall be filed with the chief of police at least ten days and not more than 180 days before the parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The chief of police may waive the minimum ten-day filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place, and nature of the parade or public assembly, the anticipated number of participants, and the city services required in connection with the event, the chief of police determines that the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety. 
(c)  For parades or public assemblies held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for a permit covering all such parades or assemblies during that calendar year may be filed with the chief of police at least 60 and not more than 180 days before the date and time at which the first such parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The chief of police may waive the minimum 60-day period after due consideration of the factors specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade or public assembly; 
(2)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the headquarters of the organization for which the parade or public assembly is to be conducted, if any, and the authorized and responsible heads of the organization; 
(3)  The requested date of the parade or public assembly; 
(4)  The route to be traveled, including the starting point and the termination point; 
(5)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade or public assembly, and the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(6)  The hours when such parade or public assembly will start and terminate; 
(7)  A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(8)  The location, by street, of any assembly areas for such parade or public assembly; 
(9)  The time at which units of the parade or public assembly will begin to assemble at any such area; 
(10)  The intervals of space to be maintained between units of such parade or public assembly; 
(11)  If the parade or public assembly is designed to be held by, or on behalf of, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file a letter from that person with the chief of police authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(12)  The type of public assembly, including a description of activities planned during the event; 
(13)  A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, banners, signs, or other attention-getting devices to be used in connection with the parade or public assembly; 
(14)  The approximate number of participants (spectators are by definition not participants); 
(15)  The approximate number of spectators; 
(16)  A designation of any public facilities or equipment to be utilized; 
(17)  Whether persons less than 18 years of age are expected to participate; and 
(18)  Any additional information that the chief of police finds reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(Code 1993, § 15-78; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-95. - Fees. 
(a)  A nonrefundable fee as established from time to time to cover administrative costs of processing the permit shall be paid to the city by the applicant when the application is filed. 
(b)  If the application is for the use of any city property or if any city services shall be required for the parade or public assembly, the applicant shall pay, prior to the issuance of a permit, the charges for those services in accordance with a schedule of service costs approved by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1993, § 15-79; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-96. - Police protection. 
(a)  The chief of police shall determine whether and to what extent additional police protection is reasonably necessary for the parade or public assembly for traffic-control and public safety. The chief of police shall base this decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the event, the expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections blocked, and the need to detour or pre-empt citizen travel and use of the streets and sidewalks. The speech content of the event shall not be a factor in determining the amount of police protection necessary. If possible, without disruption of ordinary police services or compromise of public safety, regularly scheduled on-duty personnel will police the event. If additional police protection for the public assembly is deemed necessary by the chief of police, he shall so inform the applicant for the permit. The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police protection deemed necessary by the chief of police at the sole expense of the applicant. 
(b)  Persons engaging in parades or public assemblies conducted for the sole purpose of public issue speech protected under the First Amendment are not required to pay for any police protection provided by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 15-80; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-97. - Issuance of permits. 
    The application is expressly included as part of any permit granted. A permit shall be issued on a form supplied by the chief of police to the person who signed the application. Such person shall be required to accompany the parade or demonstration, and the permit shall be invalid unless in his possession. The permit shall be deemed issued under the terms and for the purposes stated in the application only, unless otherwise noted. The permit may prescribe the portions or areas of streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places to be used, and may impose such other reasonable requirements necessary for the control and free movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and to protect the safety and property rights of participants and the general public. 
(1)  The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for herein when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
a.  The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous to its route or location; 
b.  The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not require the diversion of so great a number of city police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection of the city; 
c.  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at public assembly points of the parade or public assembly will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such public assembly areas; 
d.  The conduct of the parade or public assembly is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
e.  The parade or public assembly is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
f.  Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas; 
g.  There are sufficient parking places near the site of the parade or public assembly to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected; 
h.  The applicant has secured the police protection, if any, required under section 28-96; 
i.  Such parade or public assembly is not for the primary purpose of advertising any product, goods or event that is primarily for private profit, and the parade itself is not primarily for profit. The prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the parade; 
j.  No parade or public assembly permit application for the same time and location is already granted or has been received and will be granted; 
k.  No parade or public assembly permit application for the same time but different location is already granted or has been received and will be granted, and the police resources required for that prior parade or public assembly are so great that in combination with the subsequent proposed application, the resulting deployment of police services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property; 
l.  No event is scheduled elsewhere in the city where the police resources required for the event are so great that the deployment of police services for the proposed parade or public assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property; 
m.  No parade or public assembly shall be held except after 8:00 a.m. and before dark except that water-borne parades may be held during hours of darkness; 
n.  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of law enforcement personnel of the city to properly police the line of movement of the parade and of contiguous areas that adequate police protection cannot be provided to the remainder of the city; 
o.  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not substantially interfere with adequate police and fire protection of, or ambulance and rescue service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
p.  The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment to such an extent that adequate fire protection cannot be provided to the city; and 
q.  The parade or public assembly is not for the purpose of teaching or advocating the confiscation of private property without just compensation, the violent overthrow of the government of the United States of America, the State of North Carolina or any political subdivision of North Carolina, or the depriving of any person of his liberty or property without due process of law. 
(2)  No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or placement of any structure, whether permanent or temporary, on a city street, sidewalk, or right-of-way unless advance approval for the erection or placement of the structure is obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 15-81; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-98. - Nondiscrimination. 
    The chief of police shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying permits under this article based upon political, religious, ethnic, race, disabilities, sexual orientation or gender related grounds. 
(Code 1993, § 15-82; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-99. - Notice of denial of application. 
    The chief of police shall act promptly upon a timely filed application for a parade or public assembly permit but in no event shall grant or deny a permit less than 48 hours prior to the event. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall notify the applicant either by personal delivery or certified mail at least 48 hours prior to the event of his action and state the reasons for denial. 
(Code 1993, § 15-83; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-100. - Alternative permit. 
(a)  The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade or public assembly permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade or public assembly at a date, time, location, or route different from that named by the applicant; provided, however, that the alternative authorized shall not reduce substantially the public exposure of the parade or assembly. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. 
(b)  An alternate parade or public assembly permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade or public assembly permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1993, § 15-84; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-101. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or public assembly permit to the city council. The denied applicant shall make the appeal within five days after receipt of the denial by filing a written notice with the chief of police and a copy of the notice with the city clerk. The city council shall act upon the appeal at the next scheduled meeting following receipt of the notice of the appeal. 
(b)  In the event that the city council rejects an applicant's appeal, the applicant may file an immediate request for review with a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1993, § 15-85; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-102. - Notice to city and other officials. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The city manager; 
(2)  The fire chief; 
(3)  The director of the department of public services; and 
(4)  The manager or responsible head of each public transportation utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed parade or public assembly. 
(Code 1993, § 15-86; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-103. - Contents of permit. 
    Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting and approximate ending time; 
(2)  Minimum speed of parade units; 
(3)  Maximum speed of parade units; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between parade units; 
(5)  The portions of the streets that may be occupied by the parade or public assembly; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  The location of the public assembly or route of the parade; and 
(8)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 15-87; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-104. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade or public assembly chairman or other person heading such activity shall carry the parade or public assembly permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade or public assembly. 
(Code 1993, § 15-88; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-105. - Prohibitions. 
    The following prohibitions shall apply to all parades and public assemblies: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any parade or public assembly without first having obtained a permit as herein provided; 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or public assembly for which the person knows a permit has not been granted; 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for the conduct of, a duly licensed parade or public assembly to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the permit; 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any parade or public assembly activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property; 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person participating in a parade or public assembly to carry or possess any length of metal, lumber, wood, or similar material for purposes of displaying a sign, poster, plaque or notice, unless such object is one-fourth inch or less in thickness and two inches or less in width, or if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed three-fourths inch in its thickest dimension; 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any sign, poster, plaque, or notice, whether or not mounted on a length of material as specified in subsection (5) of this section, unless such sign, poster, plaque, or notice is constructed or made of a cloth, paper, or cardboard material; 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person participating in a parade or public assembly to utilize sound amplification equipment at decibel levels that exceed those limits imposed by city ordinance or Code section; 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be ridden or driven any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street, unless specifically authorized by the permit; 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess on or about his person any firearm or have within immediate access any firearm or dangerous weapon of any kind while participating in a parade or public assembly or while within 500 feet of any parade or public assembly if the possessor is on any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property. Dangerous weapons shall mean any device or substance capable of being used to inflict serious injury to persons or property including, but not limited to, firearms, airguns, BB guns, pellet guns, knives or razors with a blade more than three inches long, metallic knuckles, clubs, blackjacks, night sticks, dynamite cartridges, bombs, grenades, explosives, Molotov cocktails, swords, and sword canes. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement officers nor to members of the armed forces or National Guard; 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any person participating in a parade to distribute any candy, prizes or favors of any kind; 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person participating in a parade or public assembly to allow any vicious animal to accompany the parade or public assembly or to proceed along the parade route or to be brought to or allowed to remain at any place of public assembly. 
(Code 1993, § 15-89; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-106. - Public conduct during parades or public assemblies. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade or public assembly. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade or public assembly when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly. 
(c)  The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street constituting a part of the route of a parade or public assembly. The chief of police shall post signs to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 15-90; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-107. - Revocation of permit. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade or public assembly permit instantly upon violation of the conditions or standards for issuance as set forth in this article or when a public emergency arises where the police resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment of police services for the parade or public assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property. 
(Code 1993, § 15-91; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Sec. 28-108. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by fine not to exceed $500.00, or imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Code 1993, § 15-92; Ord. No. 1998-30, 6-30-1998) 
Secs. 28-109-28-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LOITERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ENGAGING IN DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY 

Sec. 28-130. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller means a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 90, Article 5 of the North Carolina General Statutes (G.S. 90-5), or has been convicted of any violation of any substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state or of federal law. 
    Public place means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility, or the doorway and entranceways to any building which fronts or any of those places, or a motor vehicle in or on any of those places, or any property owned by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 15-101; Ord. No. 1991-16, §§ (a), (b), 8-22-1991) 
Sec. 28-131. - Prohibition on certain activities; circumstances manifesting activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander about in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting a purpose to engage in a violation of any subdivision of the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 90, Article 5 (G.S. 90-5). Such circumstances include: 
(1)  Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping, or attempting to stop passersby, or repeatedly attempting to engage passersby in conversation; or 
(2)  Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles; or 
(3)  Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other persons; or 
(4)  Such person repeatedly and knowingly loiters about with another person who is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller while such known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller is engaged in any of the activities set out in this section; or 
(5)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he is about to engage in or is engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity; or 
(6)  Such person repeatedly passes to or receives from passersby, whether on foot or in a vehicle, money or objects; or 
(7)  Such person takes flight upon the approach or appearance of a police officer; or 
(8)  Such person is at a location that he knows, or has been informed, is frequented by persons who use, possess, or sell drugs; or 
(9)  Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or is known to be, or to have been involved in drug-related activities. 
(Code 1993, § 15-102; Ord. No. 1991-16, § (c), 8-33-1991) 
Sec. 28-132. - Penalty. 
    A violation of any provisions of this article shall subject the offender to a fine of $500.00, or imprisonment for 30 days, or both. 
(Code 1993, § 15-103; Ord. No. 1991-16, § (d), 8-22-1991) 
Secs. 28-133-28-162. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STREET PERFORMERS 

Sec. 28-163. - General. 
    It is the intent of the city to facilitate street performers to perform in certain locations, in balance with the needs of pedestrian and vehicular traffic for access in the downtown area along Arendell Street from 4th to 11th Streets, along Evans Street from 4th to 9th Streets and along Shepard Street from 7th to 9th Streets subject to the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 15-110; Ord. No. 2009-16, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 28-164. - Standards. 
    For purposes of this article, the term "street performers" is defined as those persons who perform outdoors for public audiences on public property. For street performances to be permitted within downtown public spaces, all of the following standards must be met: 
(1)  Location. 
a.  Street performances shall be limited to the downtown area along Arendell Street from 4th to 11th Streets, along Evans Street from 4th to 9th Streets and along Shepard Street from 7th to 9th Streets. 
b.  A minimum four-foot wide pedestrian corridor must be maintained on the sidewalk past a performance area at all times. Where existing obstructions are present (i.e., fire hydrants, benches, waste receptacles, planters, etc.) the corridor can be measured to go around these obstructions. The following restrictions apply to performance areas: 
1.  Performers must not perform in locations that obstruct the visibility of motorists. 
2.  Performers shall not block access to any public benches, waste receptacles or other public amenities. 
3.  Performers must perform at a minimum distance of five feet from the edge of any driveway, alley, edge of a crosswalk, utility box or handicapped ramp. 
4.  Not more than two street performers shall be permitted per block, a minimum of 50 feet apart. However, if two performers are performing together, this shall not apply. 
5.  Street performances are excluded in public areas that are within: 
(i)  Construction areas; 
(ii)  400 feet of the boundary of any designated special events area without the granted written permission from the event sponsor/coordinator; 
(iii)  A five-foot radius of any building corner adjacent to a street intersection; or 
(iv)  Vehicular areas of public streets. 
(2)  Operation. The following provisions shall apply to street performers: 
a.  A performer may passively accept donations by putting out an instrument case or other receptacle with a sign requesting that patrons contribute. Active solicitation shall not be permitted. 
b.  Noise levels must not exceed city ordinance. All brass instruments and saxophones shall be muted. No drums shall be allowed. 
c.  Performers who wish to offer items for sale shall first obtain a peddler's license. 
d.  Street performers are limited to the following hours in all public areas: 
1.  Monday through Thursday, between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; 
2.  Friday and Saturday, between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight; and 
3.  Sunday, between 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. 
e.  A performer must not completely block or significantly impede pedestrian access through a public area. If a crowd blocks public access through a public area, a police officer may disperse the portion of the crowd blocking pedestrian traffic. 
f.  A performer must not obstruct access to private property without prior written permission from the property owner. A copy of the agreement must be filed with the permit application. 
g.  A performer must not consume or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances while performing. 
h.  A performer must not use power, electrical cords or fire during performances. 
i.  A performer must not leave performance equipment unattended on the permitted space for more than ten minutes, unless during an emergency. 
j.  Permits are not transferable or assignable. 
k.  A performer must not use any device or sharp objects that may pose a threat of physical injury or become a public safety hazard. 
l.  No seating, except for the performer, shall be provided by or at the direction of the performer without prior written consent of the city. 
m.  No performance shall contain any racist, sexist, lewd, indecent or offensive material or dress. 
n.  Performers shall post no signs. 
o.  No animal shall be used by the performers as part of performances. 
p.  Performers must daily remove all items and materials that they brought or had brought to the site for performances. 
q.  After each performance, the performer is responsible for removing from the performance area all debris, trash, or litter associated with the performance or left by spectators in the performance area. 
(Code 1993, § 15-111; Ord. No. 2009-16, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 28-165. - Permits; general. 
(a)  Application requirements. Requiring permits serves the city's significant interests in reducing territorial disputes among performers, deterring harassment of patrons, and identifying performers. Applications for street performer permits are obtained from the planning and inspections department. To be processed, each permit application must include: 
(1)  A completed application; and 
(2)  Application fee as specified in the city's fee schedule. 
(b)  Group permit. If two or more street entertainers are performing as a group, one permit, listing each member of the group, may be issued. The city reserves the right to deny a group license based on the number of performers in the group as well as the number of instruments. 
(c)  Minors. Any person under the age of 18 must have a parent or guardian present when applying for a permit. The parent or guardian must provide a written statement: 
(1)  Assuming full responsibility for the minor's performance; and 
(2)  Agreeing to hold and save harmless the city, its agents, employees, and offices, harmless for any and all liability arising out of or in connection with the minor's performance. 
(d)  Display of permit. Street entertainers must display their permits while performing. If they do not, it will be assumed that the person is not licensed and the police or staff will require the person to cease performing. 
(e)  Signing of permit. By signing the permit, the licensee acknowledges understanding that: 
(1)  They have read and agree to abide with the rules and regulations and with any town ordinances that may govern street performers; 
(2)  Having a city street performer's permit in no way protects them from the enforcement of any relevant rule, regulation or ordinance of the city or state; 
(3)  The right to act as a street entertainer in the city is a privilege; and 
(4)  His activities as a street entertainer must not constitute a nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 15-112; Ord. No. 2009-16, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 28-166. - Permit provisions. 
(a)  Permits are valid for one year (from July 1 through June 30) regardless of when the performer receives his permit. Permit fees will not be prorated. 
(b)  All permit renewal applications must be submitted by June 30 to the planning and inspections department. 
(c)  Special event permits supersede street performance permits. During a special event approved by the city, annual street performance permits are temporarily suspended in the area of the special event. Street performance written permission is obtained from the special event coordinator to perform within the designated special event area. The street performance permit holder is responsible for keeping track of upcoming special events and the designated boundaries that may affect their performance. 
(d)  Permit holders shall be required to remove private materials or accessories, temporarily, to allow: 
(1)  Street, sidewalk or utility access for maintenance operations; or 
(2)  During approved special events if the materials or accessories are within the special events area. 
(Code 1993, § 15-113; Ord. No. 2009-16, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 28-167. - Unauthorized use of Jaycee Park Boat Docks; penalties. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nontrailerable recreational vessels means motorized boats 26 feet or more in length manufactured for and operated primarily for pleasure, including vessels leased, rented, or chartered to another person for his pleasure. 
    Tie-up facilities means facilities that transient nontrailerable recreational vessels occupy temporarily, not to exceed ten consecutive days. 
    Transient means passing through or by a place, staying ten days or less. 
These definitions reflect those promulgated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and shall conform to and be superseded by amendments made by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to those definitions as they shall occur from time to time. 
(b)  Unauthorized use prohibited. Only a transient nontrailerable recreational vessel shall be allowed to make use of the Jaycee Park Boat Docks. Use by any other boat, ship, or vessel shall be unlawful. In addition, only persons that are the owners of, or the guests, servants, employees, agents, contractors, or lessees of the owners of a nontrailerable recreational vessel shall have access to and use of any boat slips, dock, ramp, walkway, or other facilities serving these areas at the Jaycee Park Boat Docks. There shall be no fishing, swimming, or any other public activity allowed upon or near the slips, docks, ramps, walkways, or other facilities. 
(c)  Length of stay. Nontrailerable recreational vessels shall not use the tie-up facilities of the Jaycee Park Boat Docks for a period of more than ten days. Any partial day of use shall be considered a full day. 
(d)  Authorization. A transient nontrailerable recreational vessel must obtain a written permit from the town's designated representative to use the tie-up facilities or other facilities of the Jaycee Park Boat Docks. Signage will be posted at the docks providing direction on how and from whom to obtain the necessary permit. 
(e)  Penalties. Violation of this section shall subject the boat owner or other offender to a civil penalty of $150.00 per occurrence. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense. If the civil fine is not paid within 48 hours of the violation, the violation shall be a criminal misdemeanor punishable as provided by G.S. 14-4. Civil penalties shall be paid to the chief of police or his designee. 
(Code 1993, § 10-20A; Ord. No. 2008-42, 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 28-168. - Unauthorized use of tie-up facilities; penalties. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Recreational vessels means boats or other floating conveyances manufactured for and/or operated primarily for pleasure, including vessels leased, rented, or chartered to another person for his pleasure. 
    Tie-up facilities means all docking facilities owned or leased by the city which are provided for public use, including, but not limited to, those located at the end of the South 6th Street, Conch Point, South 8th Street, North 7th Street, and Ottis Landing, etc. The facilities referred to shall include the slips, pilings, docks, piers, walkways, and all associated amenities which are for use by recreational vessels on a temporary basis, not to exceed four hours. 
(b)  Unauthorized use prohibited. Only a recreational vessel of less than 26 feet shall be allowed to make use of the tie-up facilities from 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Overnight use of the tie-up facilities shall be unlawful. Use by any larger boat, ship, or vessel, or any other use not specifically allowed herein, shall be unlawful. Vessels used for commercial purposes are prohibited. In addition, there shall be no fishing, swimming, or any other public activity allowed upon or near the slips, docks, ramps, walkways, or other facilities. 
(c)  Length of stay. Recreational vessels of less than 26 feet shall use the tie-up facilities for a period of no more than four hours in any single day, and only between 5:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. each day. Overnight use of the tie-up facilities is unlawful. 
(d)  Penalties. Violation of this section shall subject the boat owner or other offender to a civil penalty of $50.00 per occurrence. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense. If the civil fine is not paid within 48 hours of the violation, the violation shall be deemed a criminal misdemeanor punishable as provided by state law. Civil penalties shall be paid to the chief of police or the chief's designee. 
(Code 1993, § 10-20B; Ord. No. 2015-39, § 10-20.B, 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 28-169. - Obstruction of streets and other thoroughfares-Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed any obstruction of any nature in any street, alley or thoroughfare or upon any sidewalk; provided, building materials for present and immediate use may be allowed to be placed upon the streets or sidewalks with the city manager's written permission and under such restrictions as he may prescribe. In case such obstructions are allowed by written permission, the person so obstructing shall cause to be built a wall completely surrounding such obstruction and shall also cause to be built a suitable and sufficient sidewalk or footpath around such obstruction; however, such person shall in no way cause or allow any such obstruction, either to a sidewalk or street, unless suitable lights are displayed on and around such obstruction at sunset and maintained there until sunrise for each night such obstruction exists. Immediately upon the completion of the work being done or to be done, all obstructions shall be removed and the street and sidewalk left in as good condition as before such obstruction existed or was allowed. No provision of this section shall have the effect of prohibiting the city manager, in his discretion, from withdrawing any written permission when it shall appear to him that the obstruction is being unnecessarily maintained. 
(Code 1973, § 13-27; Code 1993, § 10-21) 
Sec. 28-170. - Same-Encroachment. 
    It shall be unlawful to encroach upon the streets or sidewalks by erecting thereon any fence, piazza, balcony, porch, stoop, step, paling or chimney or other obstruction whatever. 
(Code 1973, § 13-29; Code 1993, § 10-22) 
Sec. 28-171. - Same-Railroad tracks. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any brickbat, rock, torpedo, cartridge or other obstruction upon any railroad track. 
(Code 1973, § 13-30; Code 1993, § 10-23) 
Sec. 28-172. - Adjacent property owners to keep sidewalks, gutters clear; change of sidewalk. 
    Every occupant of a lot adjacent to any street shall keep the sidewalk clean and the gutter open and free from obstruction as far as such lot extends along the street, and no change of sidewalk shall be made without the authority and under the supervision of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 13-31; Code 1993, § 10-24) 
Sec. 28-173. - Launching boats from street; moorings; use of street ends. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to launch, retrieve or trailer boats by use of a motor vehicle or other motorized (electrical or fossil fuel) device at any town street end. Hand launching of small boats may be permitted at town street ends where there are no improvements. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 28-168, it shall be unlawful for boats to moor, tether or otherwise use any town pier or dock for purposes other than the noncommercial, temporary loading and unloading of passengers, personal equipment and other related gear, not to exceed 90 minutes in duration. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any boat to moor, tether, or otherwise attach, permanently or temporarily, to any town bulkhead. 
(d)  Except as may be otherwise provided by town ordinances and/or by town posting of signage making specific exceptions, it shall be unlawful to allow any boat, vehicle or launching apparatus to remain on any city street end or alley way after sunset and before sunrise. 
(e)  Violation of this section shall subject the boat owner or other offender to a civil penalty of $50.00 per occurrence. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense. If the civil fine is not paid within 48 hours of the violation, the violation shall be deemed a criminal misdemeanor punishable as provided by state law, civil penalties shall be paid to the chief of police or his designee. 
(Code 1993, § 10-25; Ord. No. 2015-39, § 10-25, 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 28-174. - Shoeshine stands. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any shoeshine stand on any sidewalk so as to obstruct passage of the public. 
(Code 1973, § 13-32; Code 1993, § 10-26) 
Sec. 28-175. - Advertising on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to mark or deface upon any sidewalk any advertisement. 
(Code 1973, § 13-33; Code 1993, § 10-27) 
Sec. 28-176. - Posting bills-Within public rights-of-way. 
(a)  No person shall tack or post any sign, bill, advertisement, placard or poster on any traffic-control sign or signpost, street identification sign or signpost, telephone pole, utility pole, telegraph pole, real property, trees, shrubbery, buildings, walls or other structures located within the right-of-way of any public street or alley. 
(b)  Any sign, bill, advertisement, placard or poster described above that is placed within the prohibited areas in violation of this section shall be removed by the city and destroyed. 
(Code 1973, § 13-34; Code 1993, § 10-28) 
Sec. 28-177. - Same-On private property. 
    No person shall tack or post any sign, bill, advertisement, placard or poster on any real property, telegraph pole, telephone pole, utility pole, tree, shrubbery, building, wall or other structure without first obtaining the written permission of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 13-34.1; Code 1993, § 10-29) 
Sec. 28-178. - Scattering handbills. 
    No person shall promiscuously distribute handbills or advertisements of any kind by placing or throwing the same on any street or lot or otherwise. Handbills or advertisements shall be enclosed in an envelope or clipped, and placed under or in the door of each house where such advertising matter is left. 
(Code 1973, § 13-35; Code 1993, § 10-30) 
State Law reference- Littering, G.S. 14-399. 
Sec. 28-179. - Fishing from wooden boardwalk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fish from the wooden boardwalks located adjacent to the North 20th Street bridge and along the perimeter of Calico Creek adjacent to Bayview Cemetery. 
(Code 1973, § 13-40; Code 1993, § 10-34; Ord. No. 2001-32, 8-4-2001) 
Chapter 30 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles, G.S. Ch. 20; operation of vehicles, rules of the road, G.S. 20-138.1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, G.S. 20-169; municipal control of traffic and parking, G.S. 160A-300 et seq.; cities may adopt ordinances for civil enforcement by means of traffic-control photographic system, G.S. 160A-300.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and such ambulances designated or authorized by the chief of police. 
    Block means a portion of any street located between the two intersections next adjacent to each other. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway when 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business. 
    Camper means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and is not permanently attached thereto, and is designed to provide facilities for human habitation, or for camping. 
    Commercial vehicle means any vehicle that is designed, used or maintained to carry freight, property, merchandise or passengers for a fee, in promotion of a commercial enterprise. 
    Crosswalk means: 
(1)  That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections. 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Driver means a person in actual physical control of a vehicle which is in motion or which has the engine running. The terms "operator" and "driver" and their cognates are synonymous. 
    Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral edge of roadway lines of two or more streets which join one another at any angle whether or not one such street crosses the other. 
    Median strips means a paved or planted strip dividing a street, road or highway into lanes according to direction of travel and provided within designated locations to allow for crossings. 
    Moped means vehicles having two or three wheels and operable pedals and equipped with a motor which does not exceed 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement and cannot propel the vehicle at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour on a level surface. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle designed to run upon the streets which is pulled by a self-propelled vehicle. This shall not include mopeds as defined in this section. 
    Official traffic-control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of the governing body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Official traffic signals means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Oversized vehicle means any vehicle, recreational vehicle, boat or trailer, which exceeds a length of 22 feet, or a height of seven feet, or a width of eight feet including fixtures, accessories, freight or cargo, excluding antennae. Boat trailers in direct tow by a passenger vehicle or light truck are excluded from this definition. 
    Park means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Police officer means every officer of the city police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway means every road or driveway not open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular traffic. 
    Public conveyance means any vehicle, other than a taxicab or railroad train, for transporting for fare. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle with or without motive power, which is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal or emergency purposes; any camper mounted upon a motor vehicle. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with dwellings and buildings in use for residences. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the road. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within the roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Standing means any stopping of a vehicle whether occupied or not. 
    Stop, when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
    Stop or stopping, when prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks; provided that, for the purpose of this chapter, a bicycle or a ridden animal shall be deemed a vehicle and every rider of a bicycle or a ridden animal upon a highway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1973, § 19-1; Code 1993, § 9-1; Ord. No. 1996-63, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2008-03, 1-8-2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 20-4.01. 
Sec. 30-2. - Drivers of government vehicles. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Code 1973, § 19-3; Code 1993, § 9-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 20-168. 
Sec. 30-3. - Persons propelling pushcarts or riding bicycles or animals. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1973, § 19-4; Code 1993, § 9-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 20-171. 
Sec. 30-4. - Applicability to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles. A driver, when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may: 
(1)  Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the posted speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; and 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(b)  The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(Code 1973, § 19-5; Code 1993, § 9-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 20-156. 
Sec. 30-5. - Direction of traffic by police. 
    In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 19-6; Code 1993, § 9-5) 
Sec. 30-6. - Playing ball; throwing missiles on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful to play ball on the streets or sidewalks or throw missiles on the streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 1973, § 19-19; Code 1993, § 9-8) 
Sec. 30-7. - Coasters, roller skates and similar devices. 
    No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street at a crosswalk or intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 19-20; Code 1993, § 9-9) 
Sec. 30-8. - Clinging to or molesting occupant of moving vehicle. 
    Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any public conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway. It shall be unlawful for any person to hang on to, mount or dismount, place any obstruction before or in any way interfere with any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle of any description, or pester any occupant thereof, while moving through the streets. 
(Code 1973, § 19-21; Code 1993, § 9-10) 
State Law reference- Operation of bicycles, G.S. 20-171.1 et seq. 
Sec. 30-9. - Boarding or alighting while vehicle in motion. 
    No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other vehicle while such conveyance or vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1973, § 19-24; Code 1993, § 9-13) 
Sec. 30-10. - Riding on handlebars, etc., of bicycle or motorcycle. 
    The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not carry any person upon any handlebars, frame or tank of any such vehicle, nor shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 19-29; Code 1993, § 9-15) 
State Law reference- Number of persons riding on motorcycles, G.S. 20-140.4. 
Sec. 30-11. - Signs distracting motorists. 
    No sign shall be so located or illuminated that it will shine in the eyes of a motorist or distract the attention of a motorist away from the road because of flashing, flickering, oscillating, pulsating or moving lights; except Christmas lights and decorations. 
(Code 1973, § 161/2-1; Code 1993, § 9-16; Ord. No. 1992-23, 11-24-1992) 
Sec. 30-12. - Lighting of signs visible from street or highway. 
    To prevent lighting of signs in such manner as to be a safety hazard, signs visible from any street or highway and within 50 feet thereof may be illuminated only by interior lighting or by exterior lights of a fixed and steady beam, shaded so as to prevent the light therefrom from shining upon any street or highway. 
(Code 1973, § 161/2-2; Code 1993, § 9-17) 
Secs. 30-13-30-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local signaling devices, G.S. 20-169. 

Sec. 30-43. - Obedience to; legibility, etc. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(b)  No provisions of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being placed to give notice thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 19-40; Code 1993, § 9-36) 
Sec. 30-44. - Semaphores and manually operated devices. 
    It shall be unlawful to fail to obey mechanical or manually operated semaphores or stop and go signs within the corporate limits, when operated by any police officer or member of the school student patrol, so designated and authorized by school officials, and when such school student patrol member is in authorized uniform. 
(Code 1973, § 19-41; Code 1993, § 9-37) 
Secs. 30-45-30-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of vehicles, and rules of the road, G.S. 20-138.1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-62. - Turning at intersections. 
(a)  Right and left turns prohibited. 
(1)  No vehicle shall make a left turn at any street intersections described in schedule XII, section 30-249. 
(2)  No vehicle shall make a right turn at any intersection described in schedule XIII, section 30-250. 
(b)  Right turn on red light. No vehicle shall make a right turn, when faced by a red light, at any intersection appropriately identified. 
(c)  Left turn as indicated. In making left turns at the street intersections described in schedule XI, section 30-248, all traffic shall travel to the left of the center of such intersections as may be indicated by buttons, markers or other directing signs. 
(d)  Complete turns authorized. No driver shall turn any vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction in the business district except at street intersections. No vehicle shall make such a turn even at street intersections in the streets or portions of streets appropriately identified. 
(Code 1973, §§ 19-51-19-53; Code 1993, § 9-51) 
State Law reference- Turning at intersections, G.S. 20-153. 
Sec. 30-63. - Backing. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection or over a crosswalk and shall not, in any event or at any place, back a vehicle unless such a movement can be made in safety after he shall have given ample warning to those who may be behind by hand and horn or other signal. 
(Code 1973, § 19-54; Code 1993, § 9-52) 
Sec. 30-64. - Riding bicycles, motorcycles without hands on handlebars. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without having his hands upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1973, § 19-57; Code 1993, § 9-53; Ord. No. 2009-09, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 30-65. - Leaving parked position. 
    Vehicles parked shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are parked at an angle with the curb they shall back out on that angle until they have cleared the other cars and shall proceed in the direction they are most nearly headed in. 
(Code 1973, § 19-58; Code 1993, § 9-54) 
Sec. 30-66. - Scratching off. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle operator, either from a standing position or while the vehicle is in forward or backward motion, to suddenly accelerate the motor vehicle to the extent that same is caused to rapidly gain speed, whereby, during such maneuver, the driving wheels are caused to spin, squealing the tires or throwing rocks or other objects in the road to the rear. Such maneuver is commonly known as scratching off and shall be expressly prohibited as a public nuisance and driving hazard, and in violation of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 19-59; Code 1993, § 9-55) 
Sec. 30-67. - Breaking city drains. 
    It shall be unlawful to run a vehicle so close to the drains of the city as to cut them or break down their margins. 
(Code 1973, § 19-61; Code 1993, § 9-57) 
Sec. 30-68. - Quiet zone. 
    Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating a zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency. 
(Code 1973, § 19-62; Code 1993, § 9-58) 
State Law reference- Horns and warning devices, G.S. 20-125. 
Sec. 30-69. - One-way streets. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets described in schedule VIII, section 30-245, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 19-63; Code 1993, § 9-59) 
Sec. 30-70. - Heavy vehicles-Injurious tires prohibited on paved streets. 
    No tractor, steam shovel or other vehicle heavy enough to injure the pavement, or any vehicle which is equipped with cleats, angle irons or other projections on its wheels, unless such cleats, angle irons or projections shall be covered with pads or bands, shall be operated over any paved street. 
(Code 1973, § 19-64; Code 1993, § 9-60) 
State Law reference- Tire equipment, G.S. 20-122 et seq. 
Sec. 30-71. - Speed limits generally. 
    A vehicle may be operated on any street designated in schedule XXII, section 30-256, at a rate of speed not exceeding that indicated in such schedule; provided, however, that at no time shall the speed be greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1973, § 19-68; Code 1993, § 9-64) 
State Law reference- Speed restrictions, G.S. 20-141. 
Secs. 30-72-30-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping and parking G.S. 20-161 et seq. 

Sec. 30-103. - Penalties for illegal parking. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, for the violation of any parking ordinance of the city, there shall be a civil penalty assessed in the amount of $50.00. If this penalty is not paid within 48 hours of the violation, then the criminal penalty for such violation shall be not more than $50.00. Civil penalties shall be paid to the chief of police or his designee. A civil fine of $50.00 shall be imposed for parking or leaving standing any vehicle in violation of section 30-129(e). Violations of the provisions of section 30-129 shall subject the offender to civil penalties only. 
(Code 1973, § 19-105; Code 1993, § 9-81; Ord. No. 1993-36, 10-12-1993; Ord. No. 1997-35, 9-9-1997; Ord. No. 2008-03, 1-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-20, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
State Law reference- Penalty for misdemeanor or infraction, G.S. 20-176. 
Sec. 30-104. - Stopping traffic lanes generally. 
    No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of parking as prescribed in this chapter, unless such stop is made necessary by the approach of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other procession which is given the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the lowering of railway gates, by the giving of traffic signals, the passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian or by some emergency; and in any case covered by these exceptions such vehicles shall not stop so as to obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing or street intersection if it can be avoided. 
(Code 1973, § 19-80; Code 1993, § 9-82) 
Sec. 30-105. - Standing in traffic lanes. 
    No vehicle shall stand on any street so as to interrupt or interfere with the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles. 
(Code 1973, § 19-81; Code 1993, § 9-83) 
Sec. 30-106. - Stop required-Entering through street. 
(a)  Those streets and parts of streets described in schedule IX, section 30-246, are hereby declared to be through-streets for the purpose of this section. 
(b)  When stop signs are placed, erected or installed upon highways intersecting a through-street at the entrances thereto or at the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to such signs before entering the intersection and shall not proceed into or across the through-street until he has first determined that no conflict with traffic will be involved. 
(Code 1973, § 19-82; Code 1993, § 9-84) 
Sec. 30-107. - Same-Certain other intersections. 
    Those intersections described in schedule X, section 30-247, are hereby declared to be stop intersections when entered from the streets first named; and when stop signs are placed, erected or installed at such intersections, every driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to such signs before entering the intersection and shall not proceed into or across the cross street until it has first been determined that no conflict with traffic will be involved. In addition, when stop signs are placed, erected or installed on all street legs and are marked by a supplementary plate marked "3-Way" or "4-Way" immediately under the stop sign, every driver of every vehicle in all directions shall stop in obedience to such signs before entering the intersection and shall not proceed into or across the street intersection until it has first been determined that no conflict with traffic will be involved. Right-of-way shall be extended to the vehicle first arriving and entering a 3-way or 4-way stop intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 19-83; Code 1993, § 9-85; Ord. No. 1996-48, 12-10-1996) 
Sec. 30-108. - Same-Emerging from alley or private driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 19-84; Code 1993, § 9-86) 
Sec. 30-109. - Same-When traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1973, § 19-85; Code 1993, § 9-87) 
Sec. 30-110. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
    When lawfully parked at night upon a street of the city in accordance with this chapter, a vehicle shall not be required to exhibit lights where there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a distance of 200 feet upon such street. No person parking or leaving standing a vehicle at night on any street or on a side road or alley entering into a street shall permit the bright lights of the vehicle to continue burning. 
(Code 1973, § 19-86; Code 1993, § 9-88) 
State Law reference- Lights on parked vehicles, G.S. 20-134. 
Sec. 30-111. - Parking prohibited at all times. 
    When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof or the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of such signs, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described in schedule I, section 30-238. 
(Code 1973, § 19-87; Code 1993, § 9-89) 
Sec. 30-112. - Parking prohibited during certain hours. 
    Where signs are placed, erected or installed on each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours indicated upon any of the streets described in schedule II, section 30-239. 
(Code 1973, § 19-88; Code 1993, § 9-90) 
Sec. 30-113. - Parking time limited to two hours. 
    When signs are erected, placed or installed on each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours during the hours indicated on any day except Sunday and public holidays, upon any of the streets described in schedule III, section 30-240. The changing of the position of a vehicle from one point directly to another point within the same block shall be deemed one continuous parking period. 
(Code 1973, § 19-89; Code 1993, § 9-91) 
Sec. 30-114. - Parking time limited to one hour. 
    When signs are erected, placed or installed on each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than one hour during the hours indicated on any day, except Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the streets described in schedule IV, section 30-241. The changing of the position of a vehicle from one point directly to another point within the same block shall be deemed one continuous parking period. 
(Code 1973, § 19-90; Code 1993, § 9-92) 
Sec. 30-115. - Parking time limited to fifteen minutes. 
    When signs are erected, placed or installed on each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than 15 minutes during the hours indicated on any day, upon any streets described in schedule V, section 30-243. The changing of the position of a vehicle from one point directly to another point within the same block shall be deemed as one continuous parking period. 
(Code 1973, § 19-91; Code 1993, § 9-93) 
Sec. 30-116. - Taxicab, etc., and police vehicle stands. 
    Those streets or parts of streets described in schedule VII, section 30-244, shall be reserved as stands for the specific purpose and at the exact locations named therein. No vehicle shall park therein except those for which the space or stand has been designated. 
(Code 1973, § 19-93; Code 1993, § 9-94) 
Sec. 30-117. - Parking restrictions for certain types of vehicles. 
(a)  Taxicabs. Not more than two taxicabs owned by the same company shall be parked in one block at the same time except such taxicabs as may be parked in established taxicab stands as set out in section 30-116. 
(b)  Commercial vehicles. Not more than two commercial vehicles owned by the same company shall be parked in one block at the same time. 
(c)  Oversized vehicles. The parking of oversized vehicles, including oversized commercial vehicles shall be prohibited on any public street, road, highway, lane, avenue, etc. This section shall not apply to any oversized vehicle parked for the purpose of, and while being, loaded or unloaded for a maximum period not to exceed 30 minutes or if the vehicle is in service during a wedding or funeral service. 
(d)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall not be parked upon any street, road, highway, lane, avenue, etc. within the city's jurisdiction for a period of more than 24 hours in a seven-day period. 
(Code 1973, § 19-94; Code 1993, § 9-95; Ord. No. 2008-03, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-118. - Parallel parking. 
    Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter and where the street is not marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall park parallel, right side to the curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom. 
(Code 1973, § 19-95; Code 1993, § 9-96; Ord. No. 2008-03, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-119. - Vehicles backed to curb. 
    In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to the curb except when actually loading or unloading. 
(Code 1973, § 19-96; Code 1993, § 9-97) 
Sec. 30-120. - Parking position within lines. 
    On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces for vehicles, the same shall be parked between such lines. 
(Code 1973, § 19-98; Code 1993, § 9-99) 
Sec. 30-121. - Unlawful purposes of parking. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(3)  Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when such storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of such vehicles; 
(4)  Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been disconnected or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another; 
(5)  For the primary purpose of advertising. 
(Code 1973, § 19-99; Code 1993, § 9-100) 
Sec. 30-122. - Prohibited in specified places. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the following places: 
(1)  On the sidewalk; 
(2)  Within an intersection; 
(3)  On a crosswalk; 
(4)  Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a street or roadway; 
(5)  At grade crossing approaches, no vehicle shall park on either side of any street approaching a grade crossing within 50 feet of the closest rail; provided, where existing permanent structures are located along the street and closer than 50 feet, parking may be permitted in front of such structures, unless prohibited, if the parking does not interfere with the view in either direction of an approaching locomotive or train; 
(6)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping or standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(7)  Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel, theater, hospital, sanitarium or any public building; 
(8)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(9)  Any place designated as a fire lane by an official sign, a curb that is painted yellow or any pavement marking identifying an area as a fire lane; 
(10)  Nearer than 15 feet of any fire hydrant; 
(11)  On any unpaved area between the existing curb and existing sidewalk; 
(12)  At any place prohibited by the schedules in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 19-100; Code 1993, § 9-101; Ord. No. 2008-03, 1-8-2008) 
State Law reference- Parking in front of private driveway, fire hydrant, fire station, intersection of curblines or fire lane, G.S. 20-162. 
Sec. 30-123. - Obstructing fire lanes; stopping or parking in fire lanes. 
    It shall be unlawful to stop or park a motor vehicle in or otherwise to obstruct any of the areas designated as fire lanes by the ordinances of the city; provided, however, persons loading or unloading supplies or merchandise may park temporarily in a fire lane located in a shopping center or mall parking lot as long as the vehicle is not left unattended. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00. 
(Code 1973, §§ 19-100.1, 19-108; Code 1993, § 9-102; Ord. No. 2008-03, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-124. - Parking in alleys. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be parked in any of the public alleys which have been opened and are in use as such public alleys, or to be parked in the end of the same or so near thereto as to obstruct traffic passing through such alleys, except, however, the foregoing shall not apply to service vehicles for such reasonable periods of time as may be necessary to serve the properties or homes abutting upon such alleys. 
(Code 1973, § 19-101; Code 1993, § 9-103) 
Sec. 30-125. - Trucks containing gasoline, fuel oil and other flammables or other petroleum products. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, driver or operator of any truck or other motor vehicle which contains any gasoline, diesel fuel, fuel oil, flammable or other petroleum products (other than that necessary to run the engine of the truck or motor vehicle) to permit the vehicle to be parked or stopped, other than temporarily while loading or unloading, upon the public streets, in any public parking lot, in any public alleyway, upon the public sidewalks, or upon any other public property of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-103; Code 1993, § 9-105) 
Sec. 30-126. - Towing away of illegally parked vehicle. 
(a)  In addition to all other fines, penalties and forfeitures provided by law, and any other ordinances, for violation of any law or ordinance prohibiting parking in portions of the streets and alleys of the city, or for violation of any parking time limits, it is hereby ordained that any motor vehicle (as defined in G.S. 160A-303(b)) parked or left unattended in any area prohibited for parking, or parked or left unattended beyond the parking time limit for the area or space in which it is parked, may be removed to a storage garage or area and any person who seeks to recover possession of such vehicle shall pay all costs incidental to its removal and storage as well as all fines, penalties or forfeitures otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(b)  Vehicles parked in designated towaway zones as may be from time to time set out in schedule XVIII shall be towed away at the owners' expense and may be removed to a storage garage or other area, and any person who seeks to recover the possession of such vehicle shall pay all costs incidental to its removal and storage as well as all fines, penalties or forfeitures otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(c)  No vehicles may be towed for a violation of any part of this section or of schedule XVIII unless the area in which the vehicle is parked is plainly marked as a towaway zone; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to vehicles parked in alleys or the main-traveled portion of any street (other than in allowed parking areas), vehicles at the scene of any emergency (such as fire, crime scene or accident scene) or vehicles endangered by some immediate hazard. 
(Code 1973, § 19-104; Code 1993, § 9-106) 
Sec. 30-127. - Manner of designating no-parking areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor vehicle adjacent to any curb painted yellow, or in any area designated as a no-parking area by a yellow rectangle painted on the pavement of the traveled portion of the road with the words "No Parking" in the rectangle. 
(Code 1973, § 19-106; Code 1993, § 9-107) 
Sec. 30-128. - Certain other parking offenses. 
(a)  No parking prohibited by schedule XVI. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on a side of the street prohibited by schedule XVI, section 30-251. 
(b)  Entering certain streets on school days prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle and enter upon any street where prohibited. 
(c)  Parking in towaway zones. Towaway zones as may be from time to time set out in schedule XVIII, section 30-252 are hereby established. Any motor vehicle parked in any such towaway zones may be removed upon the order of any police officer of the city. It may be taken to a place of storage or safekeeping. Prior to the owner or other person obtaining possession of such a towed vehicle, such person shall pay all costs and expenses incurred in moving or storing the vehicle, including, without limitation, towing charges and storage charges. 
(d)  No parking prohibited by schedule XIX. It shall be illegal to park any vehicle in any area prohibited under schedule XIX, section 30-253. 
(e)  No parking in handicap parking zones. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in a space designated for physically handicapped persons when such vehicle does not display the distinguishing license plate or placard provided by state law, and where appropriate aboveground signs or symbols and words giving notice thereof are erected marking the designated parking space. 
(f)  Parking in loading zones. It shall be illegal for any person to park any motor vehicle in a loading zone as designated by schedule XXI, section 30-255, unless such person is actually then engaged in the loading or unloading of goods, merchandise, materials, seafood or farm products, in which case such vehicle may be parked in the loading zone for a period not to exceed 30 minutes; provided, however, that in loading zones on Evens and Shepard Streets such person may also be engaged in loading fishing gear and ice chests. 
(g)  Limited time parking. It shall be illegal to park any motor vehicle for a period longer than allowed by sections 30-240-30-243. 
(h)  Parking prohibited on certain part of Evans Street; penalty. It shall be illegal for any person to park any motor vehicle for any reason on the brick-paved sidewalk area on the south side of Evans Street between 3rd and 9th Streets. 
(i)  Parking in area designated as taxi parking zone. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in an area designated and marked as a taxi parking zone unless such vehicle is a taxicab operated under the authority of a valid certificate of convenience and necessity issued by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-107; Code 1993, § 9-108; Ord. No. 1994-43, 10-25-1994; Ord. No. 1997-34, 9-9-1997; Ord. No. 2012-20, §§ 2, 3, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 30-129. - Stopping or parking of vehicles prohibited under certain conditions of imminent peril. 
(a)  Prohibited stopping or parking. No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle, whether attended or not: 
(1)  Upon the paved or main-traveled portion of any street (except in permitted parking spaces or areas) unless the vehicle is disabled to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping temporarily; 
(2)  At any police investigation scene; 
(3)  When ordered to keep moving by any police officer; 
(4)  Within 400 feet of the scene of a fire; 
(5)  Within 200 feet of the scene of an accident; 
(6)  In such manner as to interfere with any emergency evacuation, rescue squad, ambulance or civil defense operation; 
(7)  For more than 48 continuous hours on the right-of-way of any street; 
(8)  In front of a private driveway. 
(b)  City officers deemed agents of owner. The owner or operator of any vehicle left standing in violation of section 30-123 or this section, or left standing in a position of imminent peril, shall be deemed to have appointed any city police officer or auxiliary officer assisting a police officer or his agent for the purpose of: 
(1)  Removing the vehicle to the shoulder of the street or to some other suitable place; and 
(2)  Arranging for the transportation and safe storage of such vehicle, in which case the officer shall be deemed to be a legal possessor of the vehicle within the meaning of G.S. 44A-2(d). 
(c)  Temporary/momentary stoppage. A mere temporary or momentary stoppage on a street when there is no intent to break the continuity of the travel is not "parking" or "leaving standing" as used in this section if the temporary or momentary stoppage is for a necessary purpose. 
(d)  Application to police vehicles. This section shall not apply to police vehicles. 
(e)  Indemnity of officers. No officer removing a vehicle under the provisions of this section shall be held criminally or civilly liable in any way for any acts or omissions arising out of or caused by carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this section unless the conduct of the officer amounts to wanton conduct or intentional wrongdoing. 
(Code 1973, §§ 19-92, 19-108; Code 1993, § 9-109) 
State Law reference- Liability for removal and disposal of junked and abandoned motor vehicles, G.S. 160A-303(f). 
Sec. 30-130. - Parking on privately owned property upon request of owner. 
(a)  Regulations authorized. Upon the written request of the owner or person in general charge of the operation and control of any parking areas or driveways of a privately owned hospital, shopping center, apartment house, condominium complex or commercial area, as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(32), the city council may regulate or prohibit during specified hours the stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles. 
(b)  Application. The owner or person in general charge of the operation and control of the property must submit for regulations in writing, on application forms available from the city clerk. 
(c)  Signs. The cost of erecting, placing or installing signs, and the cost of all necessary signs as determined by the chief of police, shall be paid by the person requesting regulations. All signs erected must be approved prior to placement, or the applicant may request that the city place the signs upon payment by the applicant of all costs. 
(d)  Regulations adopted. No person shall stop, leave standing or park a motor vehicle in violation of posted signs, when signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice that stoppage, standing or parking is regulated, prohibited or prohibited during certain hours in that area. 
(e)  Enforcement and penalty. The provisions of this section shall be enforceable in the same manner as is used to enforce other parking regulations and ordinances, and penalties shall be the same as for the corresponding violation on publicly owned or controlled streets or property. 
(Code 1993, § 9-110; Ord. No. 1991-19, §§ 1-5, 9-10-1991) 
Secs. 30-131-30-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to regulate abandoned, nuisance and junked motor vehicles, G.S. 160A-193, 160A-303, 160A-303.2. 

Sec. 30-161. - Administration. 
    The police department and city building inspector shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The police department shall be responsible for administrating the removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the public streets and highways within the city and on property owned by the city. The city building inspector shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of "abandoned," "nuisance" or "junked motor vehicles" located on private property. The city may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this article and applicable state laws. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the city police department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties. 
(Code 1993, § 9-126; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 1, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-162. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means as authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303, an abandoned motor vehicle is one that: 
(1)  Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or 
(2)  Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven days; or 
(3)  Is left on property owned or operated by the city for longer than 24 hours; or 
(4)  Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two hours. 
    Authorizing official means the supervisory employee of the police department or the city building inspector, respectively, designated to authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this article. 
    Junked motor vehicle means as authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303.2, the term, junked motor vehicle means a vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle, and: 
(1)  Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or 
(2)  Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it originally was intended to move; or 
(3)  Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $100.00. 
    Motor vehicle or vehicle means all machines designed or intended to travel over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle. 
    Nuisance vehicle. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, or unlawful, including a vehicle found to be: 
(1)  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or other pests; or 
(2)  A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight inches in height; or 
(3)  A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or 
(4)  A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor; or 
(5)  One which has areas which cannot be operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods, etc.; or 
(6)  So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning over; or 
(7)  One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; or 
(8)  One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or 
(9)  One used by vagrants or others as a shelter or rendezvous; or 
(10)  Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public nuisance by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 9-127; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 2, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-163. - Abandoned vehicles unlawful; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the term is defined in section 30-162. 
(b)  Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the city may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed. 
(Code 1993, § 9-128; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 3, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-164. - Nuisance vehicles unlawful; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle. 
(b)  Upon investigation, the city building inspector may determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as defined in section 30-162, and order the vehicle removed. 
(Code 1993, § 9-129; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 4, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-165. - Junked motor vehicles regulated; removal authorized. 
(a)  Except as authorized in this section, it shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered removed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor vehicle, as defined herein, on the premises of public or private property. Single, permitted junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location and concealment requirements of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to comply with the locational requirements or the concealment requirements of this section. 
(d)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (e), upon investigation, the city building inspector may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle as defined in this article after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following among other relevant factors may be considered: 
(1)  Protection of property values; 
(2)  Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities; 
(3)  Indirect protection of public health and safety; 
(4)  Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and 
(5)  Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area residents. 
(e)  Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicle: 
(1)  One junked motor vehicle, in its entirely, can be located in the rear yard as defined by the city's zoning ordinance if the junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public street and from abutting premises by an acceptable covering. 
(2)  The city building inspector has the authority to determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to deteriorate. The covering or enclosure must be compatible with the objectives stated in the preamble of Ordinance No. 1991-14 and must comply with all provisions of the zoning provisions of the UDO. 
(3)  More than one junked motor vehicle. Any other junked motor vehicle must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle cannot be seen from a public street or abutting property. A garage or building structure means either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been constructed in accordance with all zoning and building code regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 9-130; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 5, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-166. - Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice requirements. 
(a)  Except as set forth in section 30-167, an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail. The person who mails the notice shall retain a written record to show the name and address to which mailed, and the date mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be affixed on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle. The notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time. 
(b)  With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of the junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be made to the city council in writing, heard at a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided. 
(Code 1993, § 9-131; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 6, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-167. - Exceptions to prior notice requirement. 
    The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice include: 
(1)  Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, the city council hereby determines that immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are: 
a.  Obstructing traffic; 
b.  Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking; 
c.  Parked in a no-stopping or no-standing zone; 
d.  Parked in loading zones; 
e.  Parked in bus zones; or 
f.  Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions. 
(2)  Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on city-owned property other than the streets and highways, and on private property such vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard and vehicles causing damage to public or private property. 
(Code 1993, § 9-132; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 7, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-168. - Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements. 
(a)  Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed may, as directed by the city, be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracted to perform such services for the city. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing city official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, such notice to include the following: 
(1)  The description of the removed vehicle; 
(2)  The location where the vehicle is stored; 
(3)  The violation with which the owner is charged, if any; 
(4)  The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and 
(5)  The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the removal. 
(b)  The city shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his agent. 
(c)  If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle. 
(d)  Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the authorizing city official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 9-133; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 8, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-169. - Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicle. 
    After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court judge to receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 219-11, as amended. 
(Code 1993, § 9-134; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 9, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-170. - Redemption of vehicle during proceedings. 
    At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violations of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 9-135; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 10, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-171. - Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles. 
    Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the city and in accordance with Article 1 of Chapter 44A of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(Code 1993, § 9-136; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 11, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-172. - Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property. 
    As a general policy, the city will not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the city from private property without a written request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by the city building inspector. The city may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the city against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal, storage, or sale thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 9-137; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 12, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-173. - Protection against criminal or civil liability. 
    No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 9-138; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 13, 7-25-1991) 
Sec. 30-174. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall apply to any vehicle: 
(1)  Which is located in a bona fide "automobile graveyard" or "junkyard" as defined in G.S. 136-143, in accordance with the "Junkyard Control Act," G.S. 136-141 et seq.; 
(2)  Which is in an enclosed building; 
(3)  Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the enterprise; 
(4)  Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city; or 
(5)  Which is a junked motor vehicle, used on a regular basis for business or personal use as a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 9-139; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 14, 7-25-1991; Ord. of 8-22-1991, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-06, 4-28-1992) 
Sec. 30-175. - Unlawful removal of impounded vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility designated by the city any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Code unless and until all towing and impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid. 
(Code 1993, § 9-140; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 15, 7-25-1991) 
Secs. 30-176-30-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 30-204. - Placing of cars on siding; permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or other common carrier to place or cause to be placed, for the purpose of loading or unloading or for any other purpose, any car on any track or siding lying or extending in and along Arendell Street west of Fourth Street, and each hour any car so placed in violation of this section shall remain on the track or siding shall constitute a separate offense; provided, however, the city manager shall, whenever such unusual circumstances present themselves as in his opinion shall justify on the part of the public good, be authorized to grant, in writing, the placing of such cars and, when so placed, such cars shall not be held to be in violation of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 19-125; Code 1993, § 9-146) 
Sec. 30-205. - Right-of-way to be maintained. 
    All railroad companies having ditches along their rights-of-way and along Arendell Street are required to fill the same to a grade with the streets and to maintain such rights-of-way in a reasonable grade with such street as to render it in a condition that it can be crossed at all points with ease and safety. 
(Code 1973, § 19-127; Code 1993, § 9-148) 
Sec. 30-206. - Jumping on and off trains. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to jump on or off any moving train within the corporate limits for the purpose of riding upon such train without paying a fare; provided, this section shall not be construed to apply to bona fide passengers or employees. Persons seen on top of cars or clinging to the sides or steps or hiding or riding in freight or baggage cars shall be prima facie evidence of guilt. 
(Code 1973, § 19-130; Code 1993, § 9-149) 
Sec. 30-207. - Removal of weeds, etc., from right-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to allow the grass, weeds or bushes to grow higher than eight inches along its right-of-way, or to keep any grade crossing in such condition that it cannot be crossed at all times with ease and safety. 
(Code 1973, § 19-131; Code 1993, § 9-150) 
Secs. 30-208-30-237. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 

Sec. 30-238. - Schedule I-Parking prohibited at all times. 
(a)  Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following places: 
(1)  Arendell Street, north side, beginning at the intersection of 7th Street, northwest corner, westwardly 25 feet. 
(2)  Arendell Street, north side, beginning at the intersection of 8th Street, northeast corner, eastwardly 28 feet. 
(3)  Arendell Street, north side, beginning at the intersection of 9th Street, northeast corner, eastwardly 28 feet. 
(4)  Arendell Street, north side, beginning at the intersection of 9th Street, northwest corner, westwardly 28 feet. 
(5)  Arendell Street, north side, beginning at the intersection of 10th Street, northeast corner, eastwardly 25 feet. 
(6)  Arendell Street, north side, beginning at the intersection of 10th Street, northwest corner, westwardly 25 feet. 
(7)  Arendell Street, north side, beginning at the intersection of 16th Street, northwest corner, westwardly to the west city limits. 
(8)  Arendell Street, south side, beginning at the intersection of the west city limits, eastwardly to the intersection of 16th Street, southwest corner. 
(9)  Arendell Street, south side, beginning at the intersection of 7th Street, southeast corner, proceeding in an eastwardly direction, to the main gate of North Carolina State Port. 
(10)  Arendell Street, south side, beginning at the intersection of 8th Street, southeast corner, eastwardly 25 feet. 
(11)  Arendell Street, south side, beginning at the intersection of 9th Street, southeast corner, eastwardly 25 feet. 
(12)  Arendell Street, south side, beginning at the intersection of 10th Street, southwest corner, westwardly 25 feet. 
(13)  Arendell Street, on the grass median, both sides of railroad on Arendell Street, between 11th Street and the western city limits, except by special permit issued by the chief of police for funerals, weddings, church-related functions and emergencies. 
(14)  Bridges Street, south side, from the intersection of 8th Street, southwest corner, westwardly 166 feet. 
(15)  Bridges Street, south side, beginning 77 feet west of North 16th Street and continuing west 79 feet. 
(16)  Bridges Street, south side, from the western city limits eastwardly to a point 154 feet east of Bonner Avenue. 
(17)  Bridges Street, south side, 18 feet on either side of the driveway located at the west alley of the 800 Block, between Arendell Street and Bridges Street. 
(18)  Bryan Street, both sides, beginning at a point 309 feet south of the centerline of Chalk Street, then continuing 621 feet south through the Webb Street/Webb Court right-of-way. 
(19)  Evans Street, north side, from the west right-of-way of South 7th Street to a point 150 feet west. 
(20)  Evans Street, south side, from the east right-of-way of South 8th Street east 29 feet. 
(21)  Highway 70, both sides, beginning at the intersection of 4th Street, southeast corner, eastwardly to the east city limits. 
(22)  Mandy Lane, both sides, beginning at the intersection of North 35th Street, westerly 322 feet. 
(23)  Mansfield Parkway median strip, from Arendell Street to South Shore Drive. 
(24)  North 20th Street, both sides, from Arendell Street to Calico Drive except for an area on the west of 20th Street beginning ten feet north of the northernmost drive to Bayview West Cemetery and continuing north 80 feet. 
(25)  South Shore Drive, south side, from Savannah Avenue west to the city limits. 
(26)  24th Street, both sides, between Arendell Street and Bridges Street. 
(27)  28th Street, both sides, between Arendell Street and Bridges Street. 
(28)  35th Street, both sides, between Arendell Street and the northern city limits. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. 
(c)  No boats on or off trailers or boat trailers shall be parked on any street or in any alley. 
(Code 1973, § 19-141; Code 1993, § 9-166; Ord. No. 1987-22, 9-8-1987; Ord. No. 1996-49, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 1997-39, 9-30-1997; Ord. No. 1998-23, 6-9-1998; Ord. No. 2004-45, 12-14-2004) 
Sec. 30-239. - Schedule II-Parking prohibited during certain hours in designated places. 
    Parking shall be prohibited during certain hours in designated places, as follows: 
(1)  Glenn Drive, west side between Taylor Street and Bridges Street; east side beginning 390 feet north of the centerline of the intersection of Taylor Street and Glen Drive, and continuing north to Bridges Street, during regular school days from 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
(2)  Evans Street, south side, in front of St. Egbert's School during regularly scheduled school days from 8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
(3)  Taylor Street, west side between Arendell Street and Glen Drive, during regularly scheduled school days from 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
(4)  200 North 14th Street, both sides, between Bridges and Fisher Streets from 8:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1973, § 19-142; Code 1993, § 9-167; Ord. No. 1990-04, 3-13-1990; Ord. No. 1994-07, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 1998-01, 1-13-1998; Ord. No. 2004-32, 8-10-2004) 
Sec. 30-240. - Schedule III-Two-hour parking. 
    Parking shall be limited to two hours in the following places for the designated times: Monday through Saturday from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.; Sunday from 12:00 noon to 7:00 p.m., from April 1 through October 15 each year: 
(1)  Evans Street, north side, from western right-of-way of South 4th Street, west to the east right-of-way of South 7th Street. 
(2)  Evans Street, north side, from a point 150 feet west of South 7th Street, west to the east right-of-way of South 8th Street. 
(3)  Evans Street, south side, beginning 29 feet east of the easternmost right-of-way of South 8th Street and continuing to a point 221 feet east. 
(4)  Shepard Street, north side, beginning at the east right-of-way of South 8th Street east to the westernmost point of the intersection of Evans and Shepard Streets (Point of "Jib"). 
(5)  Shepard Street, south side, beginning eight spaces west of the west right-of-way of South 8th Street. 
(6)  South 4th Street, west side, from the south right-of-way of Arendell Street to the north right-of-way of Evans Street. 
(7)  South 5th Street, east side, from the south right-of-way of Arendell Street to the north right-of-way of Evans Street. 
(8)  South 6th Street, east side, from the south right-of-way of Arendell Street to the north right-of-way of Evans Street. 
(9)  South 7th Street, both sides, from the south right-of-way of Arendell Street to the north right-of-way of Evans Street. 
(10)  South 8th Street, west side from the south right-of-way of Arendell Street to the north right-of-way of Evans Street. 
(11)  South 8th Street, both sides, from the south right-of-way of Evans Street to the north right-of-way of Shepard Street. 
(12)  200 South 15th Street, west side, beginning at the southern margin of the Evans Street right-of-way south to the northern right-of-way margin of Shepard Street. 
(Code 1973, § 19-143; Code 1993, § 9-168; Ord. No. 1988-08, 4-12-1988; Ord. No. 1996-45, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2007-34, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 2012-35, 8-14-2012) 
Sec. 30-241. - Schedule IV-One-hour parking. 
    Parking shall be limited to one hour in the following places: None. 
(Code 1973, § 19-144; Code 1993, § 9-169) 
Sec. 30-242. - Schedule IV-A-Thirty-minute parking. 
    Parking shall be limited to 30 minutes in the following places: 
(1)  Evans Street, north side, beginning at the eastern most edge of the South 9th Street right-of-way and continuing east for 88 feet. 
(2)  North 10th Street, west side, the two parking spaces immediately south of the Bridges Street intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 19-144.1; Code 1993, § 9-170; Ord. No. 1992-07, 4-28-1992; Ord. No. 1996-59, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2006-43, 6-13-2006; Ord. No. 2007-36, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-243. - Schedule V-Fifteen-minute parking. 
    Parking shall be limited to 15 minutes in the following places: 
(1)  North 6th Street, east side, beginning at the northern most right-of-way of Arendell Street (U.S. 70) and continuing north for the first and second diagonal parking spaces (24 feet). 
(2)  South 9th Street, the first parking space from northeast corner of Evans Street. 
(Code 1973, § 19-145; Code 1993, § 9-171; Ord. No. 1996-50, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 1997-40, 9-30-1997; Ord. No. 2007-33, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 2010-41, 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 30-244. - Schedule VII-Taxicab, etc., and police vehicle stands. 
    The following shall be identified as a taxi stand: Evans Street, south side, along the concrete gutter edge, beginning 85 feet west of the western edge of the right-of-way margin of South 6th Street and continuing generally westward for 284 feet, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. on Friday, Saturday and holidays. 
(Code 1973, § 19-147; Code 1993, § 9-173; Ord. No. 2012-18, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 2012-52, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 30-245. - Schedule VIII-One-way streets. 
    The following streets shall be one-way streets, and vehicles shall move only in the direction indicated: 
(1)  Arendell Street, north side, between the beginning of the median on Arendell Street near the eastern city limits and the western city limits, traveling west. 
(2)  Arendell Street, south side, from the western city limits to the end of the median on Arendell Street near the eastern city limits, traveling east. 
(3)  Glenn Drive, between Taylor and Bridges Street, traveling north, from 7:30 a.m. until 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. until 3:30 p.m. on school days. 
(4)  Shepard Street, between South 9th Street and the intersection of Shepard and Evans Streets, traveling east. 
(5)  South 9th Street, between Arendell and Shepard Streets, traveling south. 
(6)  Taylor Street, between Arendell Street and Glenn Drive, traveling north, from 7:30 a.m. until 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. until 3:30 p.m. on school days. 
(7)  21st Street, east side, between Evans and Arendell Streets, traveling north. 
(8)  21st Street, west side, between Arendell and Evans Streets, traveling south. 
(9)  23rd Street, between Arendell and Bridges Streets, traveling north. 
(10)  23rd Street, from the southern city limits to Arendell Street. 
(Code 1973, § 19-148; Code 1993, § 9-174; Ord. No. 1987-05, 5-12-1987; Ord. No. 1996-51, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2003-23, 5-13-2003; Ord. No. 2004-31, 8-10-2004) 
Sec. 30-246. - Schedule IX-Through-streets. 
    The following streets shall be through-streets: None designated. 
(Code 1973, § 19-149; Code 1993, § 9-175) 
Sec. 30-247. - Schedule X-Stop intersections. 
(a)  Stop intersections shall be as designated by a regulation red octagonal sign bearing the word "STOP." 
(b)  Three-way or four-way stop intersections shall be designated by a regulation red octagonal sign bearing the word "STOP" and shall include a supplementary plate marked "3-Way" or "4-Way" immediately under the stop sign. 
(c)  Four-way stop intersections shall be as follows: 
(1)  South 8th Street and Evans Street. 
(2)  South 15th and 16th Streets at Evans Street and Shepard Street. 
(d)  Three-way stop intersections shall be as follows: South 9th Street and Evans Street. 
(Code 1973, § 19-150; Code 1993, § 9-176; Ord. No. 1996-52, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2015-24, 7-14-2015; Ord. No. 2015-26, 8-11-2015) 
Sec. 30-248. - Schedule XI-Left turn lanes. 
    Left turn lanes shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arendell Street, south side, in the east-bound lanes between 4th and 6th Streets as indicated by left turn pavement markings. 
(2)  35th Street, south of its intersection with Bridges Street, as directed by pavement markings. 
(Code 1973, § 19-151; Code 1993, § 9-177) 
Sec. 30-249. - Schedule XII-No left turn. 
    No person shall make a left turn in a vehicle in the following places: 
(1)  On Arendell Street, at the intersection of 7th Street, if proceeding east. 
(2)  On Arendell Street, at the intersection of 8th Street. 
(3)  On Arendell Street, at the intersection of 9th Street. 
(4)  On Arendell Street, at the intersection of 10th Street. 
(5)  On Arendell Street, at the intersection of 24th Street, if proceeding east. 
(6)  On Arendell Street, at the intersection of 30th Street, if proceeding west. 
(7)  On Evans Street, at the intersection of South 9th Street, if proceeding east. 
(8)  On Evans Street, at the intersection of Shepard Street and Evans Street, if proceeding west. 
(9)  On Shepard Street, at the intersection of South 9th Street, if proceeding east. 
(Code 1973, § 19-152; Code 1993, § 9-178; Ord. No. 1996-53, 12-10-1996) 
Sec. 30-250. - Schedule XIII-No right turn. 
    No person shall make a right turn in a vehicle in the following places: 
(1)  On Arendell Street, at the intersection of South 23rd Street, traveling east. 
(2)  On Evans Street, at the intersection of South 9th Street, if proceeding west. 
(3)  On Evans Street, at the intersection of Shepard Street and Evans Street, if proceeding east. 
(4)  On South 8th Street, at the intersection of Shepard Street. 
(Code 1973, § 19-153; Code 1993, § 9-179; Ord. No. 1996-54, 12-10-1996) 
Sec. 30-251. - Schedule XVI-No parking this side. 
    Except as otherwise provided within article VII, Traffic Schedules, no person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places: 
(1)  Bridges Street, north side, between 4th Street and where Bridges Street intersects with Arendell Street. 
(2)  Barbour Road, east side, between Bridges Street and the north side of the bridge crossing Calico Creek. 
(3)  Bonner Avenue, east side, beginning at the intersection of Bridges Street and Bonner Avenue, and continuing south for 338 feet. 
(4)  Evans Street, south side, from the east right-of-way of South 4th Street to the intersection of Shepard Street and Evans Street. 
(5)  Evans Street, north side, between 8th Street and 23rd Street, except as provided in section 30-242, Schedule IV-A-Thirty-minute parking. 
(6)  North 12th Street (#200), east side, beginning 147 feet north of the northernmost right-of-way of Bridges Street and continuing north to the intersection of North 12th Street with Bay Street. 
(7)  North 25th Street, west side, from Bridges Street north 384 feet. 
(8)  Shepard Street, south side, from the intersection of Evans Street and South 8th Street. 
(9)  4th Street, east side, between Arendell Street and Bridges Street. 
(10)  4th Street, east side, between Evans Street and Arendell Street. 
(11)  5th Street, west side, between Evans Street and Arendell Street. 
(12)  6th Street, west side, between Evans Street and Bridges Street. 
(13)  8th Street, east side, between Evans Street and Arendell Street. 
(14)  8th Street, west side, between Arendell Street and Fisher Street. 
(15)  9th Street, west side, between Arendell Street and Fisher Street, except parking will be allowed in this area from 8:45 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Sundays, from 5:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. on Wednesdays, and other times when permitted by the chief of police. 
(16)  10th Street, east side, between Evans Street and Bridges Street. 
(17)  11th Street, east side, between Arendell Street and Bridges Street. 
(18)  12th Street, east side, between Evans Street and Arendell Street. 
(19)  14th Street, east side, between Arendell Street and Bridges Street. 
(20)  14th Street, east side, between Evans Street and Arendell Street. 
(21)  16th Street, east side, between Bridges Street and Fisher Street. 
(22)  30th Street, west side, between Evans Street and Arendell Street. 
(Code 1973, § 19-156; Code 1993, § 9-182; Ord. No. 1994-30, 6-28-1994; Ord. No. 1996-57, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 1997-41, 9-30-1997; Ord. No. 2002-37, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2006-44, 6-13-2006; Ord. No. 2007-37, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 2011-08, 3-8-2011) 
Sec. 30-252. - Schedule XVIII-Towaway zones. 
    The following places shall be towaway zones: 
(1)  Arendell Street, north side, between the east and west alleys which run in a north-south direction and lie between 7th and 8th Streets. 
(2)  Bay Street, north side, between 13th Street and 15th Street. 
(Code 1973, § 19-158; Code 1993, § 9-184; Ord. No. 1991-17, 8-22-1991) 
Sec. 30-253. - Schedule XIX-No parking here to corner. 
    No person shall park a vehicle in the following places: 
(1)  Arendell Street, north side, from 13th Street eastwardly 45 feet. 
(2)  Arendell Street, south side, from 11th Street westwardly 100 feet. 
(3)  Bridges Street, north side, from 35th Street eastwardly 400 feet. 
(4)  Bridges Street, south side, from 7th Street eastwardly 25 feet. 
(5)  Bridges Street, south side, from 7th Street westwardly 25 feet. 
(6)  Bridges Street, south side, from 12th Street westwardly 60 feet. 
(7)  Bridges Street, south side, from 16th Street westwardly 25 feet. 
(8)  Bridges Street, south side, from 35th Street westwardly 400 feet. 
(9)  Evans Street, south side, from 8th Street westwardly 66 feet. 
(10)  Evans Street, south side, from 9th Street eastwardly 25 feet. 
(11)  Evans Street, south side, from 9th Street westwardly 25 feet. 
(12)  Evans Street, south side, from 24th Street eastwardly 45 feet. 
(13)  Evans Street, south side, from 24th Street westwardly 45 feet. 
(14)  Evans Street, south side, westwardly from the intersection of 4th street to the intersection of 7th Street. 
(15)  4th Street, east side, from Arendell Street southwardly 46 feet. 
(16)  7th Street, east side, from Evans Street northwardly 45 feet. 
(17)  9th Street, east side, from Evans Street southwardly 25 feet. 
(18)  15th Street, west side, from Bridges Street southwardly 115 feet. 
(19)  16th Street, west side, from Bridges Street southwardly 25 feet. 
(20)  30th Street, east side, from Arendell Street southwardly 74 feet. 
(Code 1973, § 19-159; Code 1993, § 9-185; Ord. No. 1994-31, 6-28-1994) 
Sec. 30-254. - Schedule XX-Handicapped parking. 
    The following places shall be handicapped parking zones: 
(1)  8th Street, west side, from Evans Street southwardly 67 feet. 
(2)  Any other areas designated by the chief of police as handicapped parking spaces and so marked by proper signs. 
(Code 1973, § 19-160; Code 1993, § 9-186) 
Sec. 30-255. - Schedule XXI-Loading zones. 
    The following places shall be loading zones: 
(1)  Arendell Street, north side, from 9th Street westwardly 45 feet. 
(2)  Arendell Street, south side, eastwardly for 45 feet from the east alley. 
(3)  Arendell Street, south side, from 10th Street 45 feet westwardly. 
(4)  Evans Street, south side, from 4th Street to the west right-of-way of South 7th Street. 
(5)  Evans Street, south side, from the intersection of South 7th Street to the intersection of Shepard Street, south side. 
(6)  Shepard Street, south side, from the intersection of Evans Street to South 8th Street. 
(7)  5th Street, west side, between Arendell Street and Bridges Street (one space). 
(8)  7th Street, west side, from Arendell Street 45 feet northwardly. 
(9)  8th Street, east side, from Arendell Street 45 feet northwardly. 
(10)  8th Street, west side, southwardly 45 feet from Arendell Street. 
(11)  Any other spaces on Evans Street and Shepard Street designated by the chief of police, provided that not more than one such space shall be designated in each block of Evans and Shepard Streets. 
(Code 1973, § 19-161; Code 1993, § 9-187; Ord. No. 1996-58, 12-10-1996) 
Sec. 30-256. - Schedule XXII-Speed limits. 
(a)  The maximum speed limits on the following streets shall be 15 miles per hour: Old Gate Court. 
(b)  The maximum speed limits on the following streets shall be 20 miles per hour: 
(1)  Evans Street from 4th Street westwardly to 10th Street. 
(2)  Shepard Street from 7th Street westwardly to 10th Street. 
(c)  The maximum speed limits on the following streets shall be 25 miles per hour: 
(1)  Abbot Morris Lane. 
(2)  Arctic Tern Court. 
(3)  Arvon Street. 
(4)  Atlantic Avenue. 
(5)  Avery Street. 
(6)  Bald Street. 
(7)  Banks Street. 
(8)  Barbour Road from 0.35 miles south of Mayberry Loop Road (SR 1241) northward 0.10 miles. 
(9)  Barnacle Lane. 
(10)  Bay Street. 
(11)  Bayview Avenue. 
(12)  Birch Court. 
(13)  Blair Avenue. 
(14)  Blair Pointe Road. 
(15)  Bonham Street. 
(16)  Bogue Avenue. 
(17)  Bonner Avenue. 
(18)  Bradford Street. 
(19)  Bridges Street from 3rd to 20th Streets. 
(20)  Brook Lane. 
(21)  Bryan Street. 
(22)  Calico Drive. 
(23)  Carolina Parkway. 
(24)  Cedar Street. 
(25)  Central Drive. 
(26)  Chalk Street. 
(27)  Church Street. 
(28)  Clubhouse Drive. 
(29)  Commerce Street. 
(30)  Coral Point Road. 
(31)  Country Club Run. 
(32)  Cove Court. 
(33)  Crepe Myrtle Street. 
(34)  Crystal Oaks Lane. 
(35)  Davis Place. 
(36)  Dill Creek Lane. 
(37)  Easy Street. 
(38)  Eaton Street. 
(39)  Elm Street. 
(40)  Emeline Place. 
(41)  Evans Street from 10th to 35th Streets. 
(42)  Facility Drive. 
(43)  Fathom Way. 
(44)  Ferabee Drive. 
(45)  Fisher Street. 
(46)  Florida Avenue. 
(47)  Galantis Street. 
(48)  Galley Circle. 
(49)  Georgia Avenue. 
(50)  Glenn Drive. 
(51)  Greenfield Drive. 
(52)  Guardian Avenue. 
(53)  Guthrie Street. 
(54)  Hamilton Drive. 
(55)  Harrell Drive. 
(56)  Hickory Drive. 
(57)  High Street. 
(58)  Hodges Street. 
(59)  Hogan Court. 
(60)  Holly Court. 
(61)  Holly Lane. 
(62)  Homes Drive. 
(63)  Ivory Gull Drive. 
(64)  Jacob Drive. 
(65)  Jody Lane. 
(66)  John Platt Drive. 
(67)  Justin Court. 
(68)  Knox Drive. 
(69)  Lake Avenue. 
(70)  Lake Pointe. 
(71)  Lantern Way. 
(72)  Larkin Avenue. 
(73)  Lockhart Road. 
(74)  Main Sail Road. 
(75)  Mandy Court. 
(76)  Mandy Lane Ext. 
(77)  Mansfield Parkway. 
(78)  Maple Lane. 
(79)  Marsh Pointe Road. 
(80)  Maryland Street. 
(81)  Mattie Street. 
(82)  Meadows. 
(83)  Meridian Boulevard. 
(84)  Miami Avenue. 
(85)  Mickelson Way. 
(86)  Midyette Avenue. 
(87)  Morris Lane. 
(88)  Myrtle Street. 
(89)  Navigation Way. 
(90)  Neuse Avenue. 
(91)  North Lockhart Street. 
(92)  Noyes Avenue. 
(93)  Oak Street. 
(94)  Oaksmith Boulevard. 
(95)  Old Farm Road. 
(96)  Otter Court. 
(97)  Oyster Cove. 
(98)  Pamlico Avenue. 
(99)  Panama Terr. 
(100)  Park Drive. 
(101)  Patterson Street. 
(102)  Penny Lane. 
(103)  Pensacola Avenue. 
(104)  Pine Street. 
(105)  Piney Park Circle. 
(106)  Pinnacle Point. 
(107)  Pittman Avenue. 
(108)  Plantation Drive. 
(109)  Player Lane. 
(110)  Player Way. 
(111)  Professional Circle. 
(112)  Razorbill Court. 
(113)  Raleigh Avenue. 
(114)  Razorbill Court. 
(115)  Red Fox Lane. 
(116)  Riverside Avenue. 
(117)  Roanoke Avenue. 
(118)  Rochelle Drive. 
(119)  Ryan Drive. 
(120)  Salem Avenue. 
(121)  San Juan Circle. 
(122)  Savannah Avenue. 
(123)  Shackleford Street. 
(124)  Shell Pointe. 
(125)  Shepard Street from 10th to 22nd Streets. 
(126)  Snead Street. 
(127)  Sound Drive. 
(128)  South Coral Drive. 
(129)  South Shore Drive. 
(130)  Strange Court. 
(131)  Sunset Boulevard. 
(132)  Sylvia Lane. 
(133)  Symi Circle. 
(134)  Taylor Circle. 
(135)  Taylor Street. 
(136)  Teal Court. 
(137)  Treatment Plant Road. 
(138)  Turner's Dairy Road. 
(139)  Vashti Drive. 
(140)  Virginia Avenue. 
(141)  Waldron Drive. 
(142)  Webb Court. 
(143)  Webb Street. 
(144)  White Drive. 
(145)  Widgeon Drive. 
(146)  Woods Court. 
(147)  Wood Duck Court. 
(148)  Worth Court. 
(149)  Worth Drive. 
(150)  Yaupon Terrace, North. 
(151)  Yaupon Terrace, South. 
(d)  The maximum speed limit on the following street shall be 30 miles per hour: Arendell Street from 7th Street, both north and south sides, to 10th Street. 
(e)  The maximum speed limits on the following streets shall be 35 miles per hour: 
(1)  Arendell Street from 3rd Street to 7th Street, both north and south sides. 
(2)  Arendell Street [US 70] from 10th Street to Rochelle Drive, both north and south sides. 
(3)  Barbour Road (SR 1243) from 0.16 miles south of Mayberry Loop Road (SR 1241) southward 0.19 miles, and from 0.45 miles south of Mayberry Loop Road (SR 1241) southward to Bridges Street. 
(4)  Bridges Street from the intersection of 20th Street in a westwardly direction to the intersection of Arendell Street. 
(5)  Bridges Street from the intersection of 20th Street westwardly to 35th Street. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Executive Drive. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Reserved. 
(10)  20th Street from Bridges Street northwardly to the northern city limits. 
(f)  The maximum speed limits on the following streets shall be 45 miles per hour: 
(1)  Arendell Street [US 70] from Rochelle Drive to Old Murdoch Road, both north and south sides. 
(2)  Arendell Street [US 70] between 4th Street and 0.418 mile west of SR 1175 [Radio Island Road]. 
(3)  Arendell Street [US 70] from 2nd Street to the eastern corporate limit, approximately 0.17 mile east of 1st Street. 
(g)  The maximum speed limits on the following street shall be 55 miles per hour: Arendell Street [US 70] from Old Murdoch Road to the western corporate limit, both north and south sides. 
(Code 1973, § 19-162; Code 1993, § 9-188; Ord. No. 1985-21, 11-26-1985; Ord. No. 1992-02, 3-10-1992; Ord. No. 1993-29, 8-10-1993; Ord. No. 1997-05, §§ 1, 2, 2-25-1997; Ord. No. 2006-24, 4-12-2006; Ord. No. 2007-15, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 2007-35, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 2009-21, 6-9-2009; Ord. No. 2009-43, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 2017-05, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-10, 6-18-2018) 
Sec. 30-257. - Schedule XXIII-One-hour parking and towaway zone. 
    The following places shall be one-hour parking and towaway zones: Arendell Street, both sides, from 6th Street to 11th Street from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Code 1993, § 9-189; Ord. No. 1987-20(a), 8-27-1987) 
Secs. 30-258-30-277. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MOREHEAD CITY ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM (MATS) REGULATIONS 

Sec. 30-278. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose. This article is adopted with the purpose of providing the use of the Multipurpose Trail, hereinafter referred to as the Morehead Alternative Transportation System (MATS), in such a manner and means as will maximize its use and enjoyment by the public, in a safe and orderly manner and to protect the property of the adjoining landowners. 
(b)  Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected hereby. 
(Code 1993, § 9-190; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-279. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the city public works director or the recreation director as the case may be, acting directly or through his designee. 
    Motorized vehicle means any motorized conveyance including, but not limited to, cars, trucks, motorcycles, tractors, farm machinery, four-by-fours, golf carts, minibikes, mopeds, go carts, dune buggies or ATVs. This shall not include motorized wheelchairs. 
    Nonmotorized vehicle means any nonmotorized conveyance including: bicycles, unicycles, roller blades, roller skates, skateboards, wheelchairs, wagons, bicycle trailers and motorized wheelchairs. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation or association. 
    Trail means all of the land contained within the area designated as MATS by resolution of the town council. 
    Trail pathway means that part of the trail constructed for travel. 
(Code 1993, § 9-191; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-280. - Approved uses; allowed vehicles. 
    Only those vehicles listed in the definition of nonmotorized vehicle in section 30-279 shall be allowed on MATS. 
(Code 1993, § 9-192; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-281. - Trail hours. 
    MATS shall be open year-round unless otherwise posted. Exception: MATS may be closed by order of the director for reasons of maintenance, repair or for safety or security reasons. 
(Code 1993, § 9-193; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-282. - Loitering. 
    It shall be unlawful for persons to assemble or loiter upon the trail in sufficient number or in such manner as to be an obstruction to the trail, boardwalk or crossings or in such manner as to interfere with the free passage of the trail by other trail users. 
(Code 1993, § 9-194; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-283. - Public safety. 
    No firearms or bow and arrows shall be discharged within the trail at any time. No firearm shall be discharged into, over or across the trail at any time. 
(Code 1993, § 9-195; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-284. - Environmental protection. 
(a)  Property. No person shall disturb, destroy, injure, damage or remove any property within trails including, but not limited to, vegetation, wildlife, signs or facilities. Collections for scientific and educational purposes may be made after obtaining a permit from the director. 
(b)  Refuse. No person shall burn or dispose of garbage, refuse, litter, sewerage or trash within a trail. If an appropriate receptacle has not been provided, the person who brought the item onto the trail must remove it for proper disposal. 
(Code 1993, § 9-196; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-285. - Fires. 
    Fires within the trail are not permitted. 
(Code 1993, § 9-197; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-286. - Domestic animals. 
(a)  Pets will be permitted on MATS. All pets shall be attended by a responsible adult and effectively restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet. Such pets shall not be permitted to deprive or disrupt the enjoyment or use of any area by any trail user. Pet owners are responsible for cleaning up any droppings left by their pet. 
(b)  Horses and ponies are not allowed on the trail. 
(Code 1993, § 9-198; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-287. - Traffic control; parking prohibited at all times; towaway zone. 
(a)  In general, subject to the limitations imposed by this article and other duly enacted statues, rules and ordinances, or unless specifically prohibited by the director, trails may be used for the following forms of nonmotorized transportation: hiking, bicycling, roller blading, roller skating and skateboarding. 
(b)  Parking shall be prohibited at all times on MATS for approved and unapproved vehicles. Unapproved vehicles parked on MATS shall be subject to towing. 
(c)  Trail signs shall be obeyed. 
(d)  When on a trail pathway, all trail users must stay on their right half of the trail pathway when meeting or being passed by another trail user. 
(e)  When passing another trail user traveling in the same direction, a trail user must pass on the left half of the trail pathway and may pass only when such left half is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safety of any trail user approaching from the opposite direction or any trail user overtaken. 
(f)  Any trail user who is about to enter onto or cross a trail pathway shall yield the right-of-way to any trail user already on the pathway to be entered or crossed. 
(g)  Safety. While being ridden or operated within a trail, allowed vehicles must be under control of the operator at all times. It is unlawful for any person to operate or halt any allowed vehicles within the trail carelessly or heedlessly in disregard of the rights of others, or in a manner that endangers or is likely to endanger any property or person, including the driver or passengers of the vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 9-199; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-288. - Protection from peddling and soliciting. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in or solicit business of any nature whatsoever within MATS. 
(b)  The placing of advertising, decoration, or any other device on the trail is prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 9-200; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-289. - Permits-Accessibility, repairs etc. 
(a)  As necessary, the public works director shall be required to issue access permits for the repair of utilities, maintenance of the trail, and for the temporary, short term ingress and egress of adjacent property owners. When the activity may be expected to cause damages to the trail, the director shall require a bond be posted. If damages occur because of the activity, the permittee shall have adequate time to repair the damages to city standards. Upon failure to repair the damages in a suitable time frame, the director shall cause the repairs to be made and shall utilize the bond to pay for said repairs. If repair costs exceed the amount of the bond then the permittee shall be invoiced for the difference. Unpaid amounts will be collected in the same manner as a bad debt. 
(b)  All persons claiming possession of a permit issued by the director must produce or exhibit it upon request from any authorized person who shall desire to inspect same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
(c)  A person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss or damage to trail property. The director may require proof of authority to act on behalf of any organization. 
(d)  The director shall have the authority to revoke any permit upon finding of a violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown. 
(e)  The director may refuse any permit when it is in the best interests of MATS. 
(Code 1993, § 9-201; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-290. - Same-Recreation; special events, etc. 
(a)  Persons, groups, organizations, etc. who wish to conduct a special event suitable for MATS may do so by application to the recreation director. 
(b)  All persons claiming possession of a permit issued by the director must produce or exhibit it upon request from any authorized person who shall desire to inspect same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
(c)  A person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss or damage to trail property. The director may require proof of authority to act on behalf of any organization. 
(d)  The director shall have the authority to revoke any permit upon finding of a violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown. 
(e)  The director may refuse any permit when it is in the best interests of MATS. 
(Code 1993, § 9-202; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 30-291. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, or who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, thereof, shall be punished by a fine of up to $100.00 or by imprisonment for up to 90 days or both. 
(b)  Enforcing authorities. It shall be the duty of the director and/or the police department to enforce their respective provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 9-203; Ord. No. 2005-21, 6-14-2005) 
ARTICLE IX. - GOLF CARTS 

Sec. 30-292. - Purpose, disclaimer, and assumption of risk. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish an ordinance within the town to promote the health, safety and welfare of golf cart drivers, passengers, and the general public. To this end the operation of golf carts must comply with applicable state laws and town regulations pertaining to the operation of traditional motor vehicles, and must also comply with the specific provisions included in this article. 
(b)  Golf carts are not designed for nor manufactured to be used on public streets and the town neither advocates nor endorses the golf cart as a safe means of travel on public streets. The town shall in no way be liable for accidents, injuries, or deaths involving or resulting from the operation of a golf cart. 
(c)  Any person who owns, operates, or rides on a golf cart on a public street within the town does so at his or her own risk and peril and assumes all liability resulting from the operation of the golf cart. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-23, 12-11-2018) 
Sec. 30-293. - Definitions. 
(a)  Golf cart: A vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of 20 mph. (G.S. 20-4.01(12b). 
(b)  Driver's license: A valid license issued to operate a motor vehicle issued by North Carolina or any other state. 
(c)  Golf cart operator: The individual driving or in physical control of a golf cart that is moving or has its key inserted and in the on position. 
(d)  Financial responsibility: Liability insurance coverage on a golf cart in an amount not less than required by North Carolina law for motor vehicles operated on public highways in the State of North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-23, 12-11-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-09, 4-9-2019) 
Sec. 30-294. - Rules and regulations for operation. 
(a)  No person may operate a golf cart unless that person is at least 18 years of age and is licensed to drive a motor vehicle upon the streets, roads, and highways of their home state. The operator must have the valid driver license in his/her possession while operating the golf cart. The operator must be a resident, property owner, authorized guest, or tenant of property with a physical address in the town. 
(b)  The operator of the golf cart will comply with all traffic rules and regulations adopted by the State of North Carolina and the Town of Morehead City governing the operation of motor vehicles and any additional rules and regulations specific to the operation of golf carts within the town. 
(c)  Operators of golf carts registered for limited use, i.e. for clear visibility day time use only, and lacking stop and turn signal indicators must follow G.S. 20-154 and use proper hand signals to indicate the intention to start, stop, or turn by extending the hand and arm from and beyond the left side of the vehicle as hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  Left turn-Hand and arm horizontal, forefinger pointing. 
(2)  Right turn-Hand and arm pointed upward. 
(3)  Stop-Hand and arm pointed downward. 
All hand and arm signals shall be given from the left side of the vehicle and all signals shall be maintained or given continuously for the last 100 feet traveled prior to stopping or making a turn. 
(d)  In no instance shall a golf cart be operated at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour. No golf cart may be operated at a speed greater than reasonable and prudent for the existing conditions. 
(e)  The operation of golf carts on public streets with a posted speed limit of 25 mph or less within the town and on property owned or leased by the town in compliance with the provisions of this article will be permitted. 
(f)  Golf carts will cross a road with a posted speed limit greater than 25 mph only at traffic light controlled intersections. 
(g)  Golf carts must cross all roads while staying in their lane of travel, i.e. no riding along a road or crossing at an angle. 
(h)  Golf carts will not be operated on any sidewalk or bicycle path. 
(i)  Golf carts must be operated at the right edge of the roadway and must yield to all vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(j)  Golf carts may not be used for the purpose of towing another cart, trailer or vehicle of any kind, including a person on roller skates, skateboard, or bicycle. 
(k)  Golf carts must abide by all parking rules and limits as they are set for all motor vehicles by the state or town. No parking on sidewalks or bicycle path is allowed. 
(l)  Golf carts may only park in handicapped parking spaces if the driver has a valid handicapped placard or sticker and the same is clearly posted or displayed in the golf cart. 
(m)  Any golf cart operator must adhere to all applicable state and local laws, regulations and ordinances, including but not limited to those banning the possession and use of alcoholic beverages, and all other illegal drugs. In addition, no golf cart containing any open container of alcohol shall be operated on public roads. 
(n)  An operator may not allow the number of people in the golf cart at any one time to exceed the maximum capacity specified by the manufacturer. The operator shall not allow passengers to ride on any part of a golf cart not designed to carry passengers, such as the part of the golf cart designed to carry golf bags. 
(o)  Both the golf cart operator and all passengers will wear seat belts in accordance with state law. Child safety seats will be used as necessary in accordance with state law as well. 
(p)  The operation of golf carts in the following circumstances is exempt, and is not subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The operation of golf carts on private property, with the consent of the owner, 
(2)  The operation of golf carts on private streets, 
(3)  The use of a golf cart in connection with a parade, a festival, or other special event provided the consent of the sponsor is obtained, the police department is notified, and provided the golf cart is only used during such event, and 
(4)  The use of golf carts by town personnel, other governmental agencies, and/or public service agencies on official business. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-23, 12-11-2018) 
Sec. 30-295. - Registration and permit requirements. 
(a)  No golf cart will be operated on any public street within the town or on any property owned or leased by the town unless the golf cart has first been permitted with the town as required herein. 
(b)  In order to register a golf cart and secure an annual permit for the town, the owner and golf cart must meet the following basic requirements: 
(1)  The owner must be at least 18 years old and possess a valid driver's license, 
(2)  The owner must possess and maintain liability insurance in an amount not less than required by state law for traditional motor vehicles operated on public streets in the state, 
(3)  The golf cart must not have been modified to exceed a speed of 20 mph, and 
(4)  The golf cart must have an identifiable identification number. 
(c)  In order to register a golf cart and secure an annual permit, a golf cart must have the following safety features installed: 
(1)  Two operating front headlights and turn signals, visible from a distance of at least 250 feet, 
(2)  Two operating tail lights, with brake lights and turn signals, visible from a distance of at least 250 feet, 
(3)  A rear vision mirror, 
(4)  At least one reflector per side, 
(5)  A parking brake, 
(6)  Seat belts for all seating positions on the golf cart, 
(7)  A windshield, and 
(8)  Must be limited to a maximum of three rows of seats. 
(d)  In order to register a golf cart and secure an annual permit to operate a golf cart during daylight hours and fair weather only, a golf cart must have the following safety features installed: 
(1)  A rear vision mirror, 
(2)  At least one reflector per side, 
(3)  A parking brake, 
(4)  Seat belts for all seating positions on the golf cart, 
(5)  A windshield, and 
(6)  Must be limited to a maximum of three rows of seats. 
(e)  Must pay the annual registration and permit fee for golf carts of $25.00, which may be amended as necessary and listed in the current Town of Morehead City Fee Schedule. 
(f)  All fees will be submitted to the police department prior to the issuance or renewal of the permit, along with the permit application itself. The golf cart shall be inspected by the police department for compliance with the provisions of this article. The registration and permit shall be renewed annually thereafter in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Prior to the issuance of an initial permit, the owner will attend a course providing an overview of this article. Prior to the issuance of an initial permit or annual renewal the owner and will also sign an acknowledgment that he/she has read, understands, and will abide by the provisions of this article. 
(h)  A golf cart must display a valid and current annual town registration decal mounted in a visible location on the rear of the golf cart. 
(i)  All-terrain vehicles, four-wheel utility vehicles, go-karts, and other similar utility vehicles which are not manufactured for operation on a golf course, and/or a golf cart which has been modified so that it no longer meets the definition of a golf cart may not be registered as a golf cart under this article nor shall such vehicles be operated on public streets within the town, unless such vehicles are registered and permitted under the motor vehicle laws of the state. 
(j)  Golf carts do not qualify as electric personal mobility devices designed to assist handicapped or elderly individuals. 
(k)  Golf carts registered to commercial establishments offering golf cart rentals will be offered for transportation purposes only, and not offered for short-term entertainment purposes. Thus, all golf cart rentals shall have a minimum rental period of one day. 
(l)  The chief of police will have the authority to establish the maximum number of rental golf carts to be permitted annually. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-23, 12-11-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-09, 4-9-2019) 
Sec. 30-296. - Penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Any person violating the motor vehicle laws of the state, which shall also apply to golf carts registered under this article, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in state law for any such violation. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly allows a driver less than 18 years of age to operate a golf cart shall be charged and subject to the penalties prescribed in state law for contributing to the delinquency of a minor. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this article or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be required to pay a civil violation in the amount of $50.00. 
(d)  Any person violating the town's parking ordinances shall be subject to the penalties outlined for parking violations in this chapter. 
(e)  Operating a golf cart under the influence of an impairing substance (i.e., alcohol or drugs) on a public street is a violation of state law, and is punishable as provided therein. 
(f)  The police department may refuse to register and issue a permit for the operation of a golf cart, or may immediately revoke a previously issued permit, if the registered golf cart and/or the owner of the golf cart is involved in three or more violations of this article and/or violations of state law within a three-year time period. Said revocation and/or denial of a permit shall be effective for one year. 
(g)  The police department may refuse to register and issue a permit for the operation of a golf cart, or may immediately revoke a previously issued permit, if the registered golf cart and/or the owner of the golf cart is charged with operating a golf cart under the influence of an impairing substance, aiding and abetting the operation of the golf cart under the influence of an impairing substance, or operating a golf cart in a careless and reckless manner. Said revocation and/or denial of a permit shall be effective for one year, unless the charge is dismissed or the owner and/or operator is acquitted, in which event the permit shall either be immediately reinstated or the application for the permit shall be approved if the conditions of the ordinance have been met. 
(h)  All revocation periods shall be effective from the date of the notification of revocation letter, provided that the revoked registration decal has been removed within 14 days of the date of notification. If the revoked registration decal is not removed within 14 days, then the revocation shall be effective, however the one year period shall not begin until the date the plate is surrendered to, or seized by, the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-23, 12-11-2018) 
Chapter 32 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public utilities, G.S. Ch. 62; health regulations as to sanitary sewage systems, G.S. 130A-333 et seq.; drinking water, G.S. 130A-311 et seq.; water and air resources, G.S. 143-211 et seq.; revenue bonds, G.S. 159-80 et seq.; municipal franchises, G.S. 160A-76, 160A-319; ordinances effective on municipal property outside limits, G.S. 160A-176; emission of pollutants or contaminants, G.S. 160A-185; abatement of public health and public safety nuisances, G.S. 160A-193; special assessments, G.S. 160A-216 et seq.; regulation of digging in streets, sidewalks and alleys and placing pipes, G.S. 160A-296. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Stoppage of sewer pipes-Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful to throw any substance into a municipal sewer pipe which causes a stoppage in the sewer. 
(Code 1973, § 21-1; Code 1993, § 16-1) 
Sec. 32-2. - Same-Causing by filling land. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner to fill his land or cause his land to be filled in such manner or way that any existing sanitary or storm sewer is affected thereby, except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Prior to filling or making any contract for filling, the owner shall obtain a permit from the city and shall post a bond guaranteeing to replace, repair or extend the storm or sanitary sewer, as the case may be, to the newly created waterline at the expense of the owner or adjoining owners, as the case may be, at the conclusion of the work. 
(2)  No owner shall at any time, individually or through a contractor, cause filling or spoil to be deposited upon any of the public areas (streets, alleys or other accessways) in which storm or sanitary sewer facilities are located without safeguarding such filling by direct contact with the superintendent of streets and sanitation to ensure the proper fall or relocation if necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 21-2; Code 1993, § 16-2) 
Sec. 32-3. - Illegal discharges into sewers-Generally. 
    No person shall pour, throw or discharge any substance, either solid or liquid, into any sanitary or storm sewer at any manhole or at any opening therein other than a sewer connection; nor shall any person discharge into any sanitary or storm sewer any substance likely to cause undue injury to the same or any substance of such high causticity or of a sufficiently acid nature to interfere materially with the equipment used in connection therewith. 
(Code 1973, § 21-3; Code 1993, § 16-3) 
Sec. 32-4. - Same-Rainwater from roofs; surface water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any rainwater from roofs of buildings, gutters or downspouts or any surface water entering any catch basin to drain into any part of the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-3.1; Code 1993, § 16-4) 
Sec. 32-5. - Sewer connections-Required. 
    Under and pursuant to the provisions of G.S. 160A-317, all owners of improved property in the city located upon or near any collecting line of the municipal sewerage system shall connect all water closets, bathtubs, lavatories, sinks or drains upon their respective properties or premises so that their contents shall empty into such sewerage system, and such owners shall further be required to pay the connection charges attendant thereupon. 
(Code 1973, § 10-6; Code 1993, § 16-5) 
Sec. 32-6. - Same-Procedures. 
(a)  Pertinent provisions of part of contracts. All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city furnishes sewer service to any person, or whereby the city makes any sewer connections or performs any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of sewer service. 
(b)  Made by city. The connection of the sewer pipes on any lot with sewer pipes in any street, and the necessary excavation therefor, shall be done only by the city. 
(c)  Made upon application; inspection. All persons wishing to connect with the public sewer system must file a written application with the clerk for a permit to connect with the public sewer lines. The clerk shall issue such permit to any duly licensed plumber after application is filed, which permit must state the location of the wye to which connection is to be made. After the connection is made, the ditch must be left open until final inspection is made by the city plumbing inspector who shall report on the back of the permit the result of his inspection. Such permit must be returned to the clerk by the inspector to be filed in the city records. 
(d)  Contents of application. Every application for a sewer connection shall state the name of the owner of the lot; the name of the street on which such lot is situated; the number of the house, if there is one on the lot or, if not, a description of the location of the lot; the number and kind of connections desired; and the character of the surface of the abutting street. Every such application shall be signed by the person making the application, shall be accompanied by the proper fee for making the connections applied for and shall be filed with the plumbing inspector. 
(e)  Made where openings provided. Every sewer connection made directly to a main shall be made at the wye provided for the lot to be served; if no such wye has been provided for such lot, then the connection may be made directly to the main at any convenient point. 
(f)  Sewer tap fees. All tap fees for connections to main sewer lines shall be in the amounts provided in the most current adopted schedule, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, §§ 21-4-21-9; Code 1993, § 16-6) 
Sec. 32-7. - Water reconnection charge after delinquency. 
    When any water service is discontinued to a customer served by the municipal system, and such discontinuance is occasioned by a delinquency in the payment of the water account, service shall not be reinstated unless and until the defaulting customer pays a service connection fee in the amount provided in the most current adopted schedule, on file in the office of the city clerk, in addition to the amount determined to be due for water furnished to date of the discontinuance. 
(Code 1973, § 21-10; Code 1993, § 16-7) 
Sec. 32-8. - Prevention of floodwater and/or groundwater infiltration. 
(a)  The water and sewer department of the city shall require new and replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwater and shall permit no new waste disposal systems. 
(b)  Sewer collection lines located on the customer's property shall be required to be replaced when excessive amounts of groundwater infiltration are determined to be present in the customer's piping. 
(Code 1973, § 21-11; Code 1993, § 16-8; Ord. No. 1999-19, 7-20-1999) 
Sec. 32-9. - Water lines and fire hydrants in mobile home parks. 
    Before the city will provide water to any trailer park not located within the corporate limits of the city, that trailer park (mobile home park) must have six-inch water mains and must have fire hydrants placed throughout the park in accordance with the fire and building codes applicable within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-13; Code 1993, § 16-10) 
Sec. 32-10. - Utility easements, alleys and rights-of-way. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide access for maintenance of utility lines which are located within alleys, rights-of-way and easements over private property. 
(b)  Utility lines located in easements located on private property, street rights-of-way and alleys shall remain free and clear of all buildings and structures and other improvements to allow for the maintenance of utility lines. 
(c)  No property owner shall be permitted to leave or store building materials and other miscellaneous items within the prescribed easement, alley or right-of-way that would prohibit access of town equipment. 
(d)  The city shall have the authority to remove structures, fences, gardens, trees, landscaping and debris located within the easements, street rights-of-way and alleys in order to maintain utility lines. The cost of removal of such items shall be the responsibility of the property owner and a lien may be placed against the property owner for the cost of removing such items by the town. 
(e)  Easements, alleys and rights-of-way that do not conform with these regulations prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be evaluated on an "as necessary" case-by-case basis and corrected action determined by the council. 
(f)  This section shall become effective upon the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and enforcement shall be in accordance with section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1993, § 16-11; Ord. No. 1995-19, 7-11-1995) 
Sec. 32-11. - Privies. 
    The owner of any house used for residential purposes, which house is not within the sewer district and is not required to have a septic tank, before such house shall be leased or rented for occupancy as a residence or if already rented for residential purposes, shall cause to be provided in connection with such occupancy, either prospective or present, a pit privy in conformity with the plans, specifications and other requirements of the state board of health. 
(Code 1973, § 10-4; Code 1993, § 16-12) 
Sec. 32-12. - System development fees. 
    System development fees shall be charged with respect to new development to fund costs of capital improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development, to recoup costs of existing facilities which serve such new development, or a combination of those costs. New development includes the subdivision of land, the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure which increases the number of service units, or any use or extension of the use of land which increases the number of service units, occurring after August 1, 2017 which is the date that the Town began the written analysis process required by NCGS 162A-205. 
(1)  Beginning on the effective date of this ordinance, system development fees shall apply to: 
a.  All new connections to the town's water or sewer system, except for irrigation and fire line connections; 
b.  Existing connections where new improvements require increased capacity or increased use of water or sewer from the town; 
c.  Change of use will require the owner/customer to pay the difference between the old use and the proposed new use, if there is an increase in usage. No refunds will be granted if the new usage is less than the old usage; 
(2)  System development fees shall not include and separate charges may be assessed for: 
a.  Administrative, plan review, or inspection costs associated with permits required for development. 
b.  Tap or hookup charges for the purpose of reimbursing the town for the actual costs of connecting the service unit to the system. 
c.  Availability charges. 
d.  Dedication of capital improvements onsite, adjacent, or ancillary to a development absent a written agreement providing credit or reimbursement to the developer pursuant to N.C.G.S. 160A-320, 160A-499 or Part 3D of Article 19, Chapter 160A as the same may be amended from time to time. 
e.  Reimbursement to the town for its expenses in constructing or providing for water or sewer utility capital improvements adjacent or ancillary to the development if the owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible for such expenses; however, such reimbursement shall be credited to any system development fee charged as set forth in N.C.G.S 162-207(c). 
(3)  System development fees will not be charged on buildings or other improvements constructed to replace like buildings provided that the replacement will not result in any increased capacity requirements over that required to serve the replaced building. System development fees are transferable between locations on different parcels of property as long as the parcels are contiguous or separated only by a street or alley and part of a single or multi-phased project shown on an approved site plan at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(4)  Any credits for demolition of a structure on the same or contiguous site pursuant to subsection (3) of this section which was connected to the water and sewer systems are limited to five years from the date of issuance of the first building permit. Proof of demolition is required from the owner. Owners/developers shall enter into an agreement with the city acknowledging the credit and the responsibility for the payment of the system development fees should the project not be fully developed in the manner shown in the site plan and should there be any outstanding system development fees due to the city at the end of the five-year period. 
(5)  For new development involving the subdivision of land, the system development fee shall be collected either at the time of plat recordation or when water or sewer service for the subdivision or other development is committed by the town. For all other new development, the system development fees are due at the time of application for connection of the individual unit of development to the service or facilities. System development fees for connections not listed in 15A NCAC 2T.0114 shall be established by the city manager after consultation with the Town staff. System development fees established in this manner may be appealed to the Town Council. 
(6)  Additions, alterations to or replacements or change in use of existing buildings shall be required to pay a system development fee based on the same rates that apply to new construction improvements. When a change in use occurs, the new use will pay the difference calculated between the existing use and the proposed use. 
(7)  Buildings that contain more than one use shall have the system development fee calculated from the sum of each use in the building, based upon the schedule of system development fee charges. 
(8)  The following system development fee shall be paid for connections to the Town of Morehead City municipal water and sewer systems based on the customer's calculated anticipated daily flow rate converted to Equivalent Residential Units (ERUs). The system development fee shall be the same regardless of the customer's location inside or outside the municipal limits of the town: 
Inside City Outside City Water $320 / ERU $320 / ERU Sewer $936 / ERU $936 / ERU  
    System development fees shall be based on the calculated gallon per day (GPD) flow rate of the anticipated use of the proposed structure, or increased use anticipated by an addition to the floor space of an existing structure. Flow rates shall be determined in accordance with the flow rates established in the North Carolina Administrative Code, 15A NCAC 2T.0114 (a), (b) and (c), as amended from time to time. Once flow for a new establishment has been estimated in accordance with N.C.A.C. 15A NCAC 02T.0114, the flow shall be converted to Equivalent Residential Units (ERUs) by dividing the total flow by 360 GPD, which is the design flow associated with an ERU. Table 1 below illustrates 15A NCAC 2T.0114 (a), (b) and (c) as of the approval date of this chapter: 
TABLE 1 
15A NCAC 02T .0114 WASTEWATER DESIGN FLOW RATES 
(a)  This rule shall be used to determine wastewater flow rates for all systems covered by this subchapter unless alternate criteria are provided by a program specific rule and for flow used for the purposes of 15A NCAC 02H.0105. These are minimum design daily flow rates for normal use and occupancy situations. Higher flow rates may be required where usage and occupancy are atypical, including, those in paragraph (e) of this rule. Wastewater flow calculations must take hours of operation and anticipated maximum occupancies/usage into account when calculating peak flows for design. 
(b)  In determining the volume of sewage from dwelling units, the flow rate shall be 120 gallons per day per bedroom. The minimum volume of sewage from each dwelling unit shall be 240 gallons per day and each additional bedroom above two bedrooms shall increase the volume by 120 gallons per day. Each bedroom or any other room or addition that can reasonably be expected to function as a bedroom shall be considered a bedroom for design purposes. When the occupancy of a dwelling unit exceeds two persons per bedroom, the volume of sewage shall be determined by the maximum occupancy at a rate of 60 gallons per person per day. 
(c)  The following table shall be used to determine the minimum allowable design daily flow of wastewater facilities. Design flow rates for establishments not identified below shall be determined using available flow data, water-using fixtures, occupancy or operation patterns, and other measured data. 
Type of Establishments Daily Flow for Design Barber and Beauty Shops Barber Shops 50 gal/chair Beauty Shops 125 gal/booth or bowl Businesses, offices and factories General business and office facilities 25 gal/employee/shift Factories, excluding industrial waste 25 gal/employee/shift Factories or businesses with showers or food preparation 35 gal/employee/shift Warehouse 100 gal/loading bay Warehouse-self storage (not including caretaker residence) 1 gal/unit Churches Churches without kitchens, day care or camps 3 gal/seat Churches with kitchen 5 gal/seat Churches providing day care or camps 25 gal/person 
(child and employee) Fire, rescue and emergency response facilities Fire or rescue stations without on site staff 25 gal/person Fire or rescue stations with on-site staff 50 gal/person/shift Food and drink facilities Banquet, dining hall 30 gal/seat Bars, cocktail lounges 20 gal/seat Caterers 50 gal/100 sq ft floor space Restaurant, full service 40 gal/seat Restaurant, single service articles 20 gal/seat Restaurant, drive-in 50 gal/car space Restaurant, carry out only 50 gal/100 sq ft floor space Institutions, dining halls 5 gal/meal Deli 40 gal/100 sq ft floor space Bakery 10 gal/100 sq ft floor space Meat department, butcher shop or fish market 75 gal/100 sq ft floor space Specialty food stand or kiosk 50 gal/100 sq ft floor space Hotels and Motels Hotels, motels and bed & breakfast facilities, without in-room cooking facilities 120 gal/room Hotels and motels, with in-room cooking facilities 175 gal/room Resort hotels 200 gal/room Cottages, cabins 200 gal/unit Self service laundry facilities 500 gal/machine Medical, dental, veterinary facilities Medical or dental offices 250 gal/practitioner/shift Veterinary offices (not including boarding) 250 gal/practitioner/shift Veterinary hospitals, kennels, animal boarding facilities 20 gal/pen, cage, kennel or stall Hospitals, medical 300 gal/bed Hospitals, mental 150 gal/bed Convalescent, nursing, rest homes without laundry facilities 60 gal/bed Convalescent, nursing, rest homes with laundry facilities 120 gal/bed Residential care facilities 60 gal/person Park, recreation, campgrounds, R-V parks and other outdoor activity facilities Campground with comfort station, without water or sewer hookups 75 gal/campsite Campground with water and sewer hookups 100 gal/campsite Campground dump station facility 50 gal/space Construction, hunting or work camps with flush toilets 60 gal/person Construction, hunting or work camps with chemical or portable toilets 40 gal/person Parks with restroom facilities 250 gal/plumbing fixtures Summer camps without food preparation or laundry facility 30 gal/person Summer camps with food preparation and laundry facilities 60 gal/person Swimming pools, bathhouses and spas 10 gal/person Public access restrooms 325 gal/plumbing fixture Schools, preschools and day care Day care and preschool facilities 25 gal/person (child and employee) Schools with cafeteria, gym and showers 15 gal/student Schools with cafeteria 12 gal/student Schools without cafeteria, gym or showers 10 gal/student Boarding schools 60 gal/person (student 
and employee) Service stations, car wash facilities Service stations, gas stations 250 gal/plumbing fixtures Car wash facilities (if recycling water see Rule .0235) 1,200 gal/bay Sports centers Bowling center 50 gal/lane Fitness exercise, karate or dance center 50 gal/100 sq ft Tennis, racquet ball 50 gal/court Gymnasium 50 gal/100 sq ft Golf course with only minimal food service 250 gal/plumbing fixture Country clubs 60 gal/member or patron Mini golf, putt-putt 250 gal/plumbing fixture Go-kart, motocross 250 gal/plumbing fixture Batting cages, driving ranges 250 gal/plumbing fixture Marinas without bathhouse 10 gal/slip Marinas with boathouse 30 gal/slip Video game arcades, pool halls 250 gal/plumbing fixtures Stadiums, auditoriums, theaters, community centers 5 gal/seat Stores, shopping centers, malls and flea markets Auto, boat recreational vehicle dealerships/showrooms with restrooms 125 gal/plumbing fixture Convenience stores, with food preparation 60 gal/100 sq ft Convenience stores, without food preparation 250 gal/plumbing fixtures Flea market 30 gal/stall Shopping centers and malls with food service 130 gal/1,000 sq ft Stores and shopping centers without food service 100 gal/1,000 sq ft Transportation terminals-air, bus, train, ferry, port and dock 5 gal/passenger  
It is recognized that the design flow figures in 15A NCAC 02T.0114 may be questioned for any given establishment; however, these are the figures developed by the state and are the figures the town must use in seeking permits from the state. 
(9)  In calculating system development fees with respect to new development, the town will credit the value of costs in excess of the development's proportionate share of connecting facilities required to be oversized for use of others outside of the development. No credit shall be applied, however, for water or sewer capital improvements on-site or to connect new development to water or sewer facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-34, 10-10-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-O-34, adopted October 10, 2017, repealed Sec. 32-12, and enacted a new Sec. 32-12 as set out herein. The former section pertained to impact fees and derived from Code 1973, § 10-15; Code 1993, § 16-13; Ord. No. 1992-20, October 27, 1992; Ord. No. 1993-08, April 13, 1993; Ord. No. 1995-10, April 11, 1995; Ord. No. 1995-28, August 29, 1995; Ord. No. 2005-29, September 13, 2005; Ord. No. 2012-33, August 14, 2012; Ord. No. 2013-09, February 12, 2013. 
Secs. 32-13-32-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXTENSION OF MAINS 

Sec. 32-43. - Application; approval. 
(a)  Any property owner desiring water or sanitary sewer service shall apply in writing to the city council requesting the extension of water or sanitary sewer service or both. No request for the extension of services shall be considered unless submitted in writing in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city council may require the applicant to submit, as part of the written application, such information, plans, specifications or other data as may be required to adequately determine if the requirements of this article are to be met. 
(c)  When application is made for a water or sewer extension or both to serve an area or development that is planned as part of a larger development project or subdivision, all of which is not to be developed at the time application is made, the owner shall submit plans in sufficient detail in order to determine the size and type of facilities which will be necessary to serve the entire development or subdivision when completed. 
(d)  No extension to the municipal water or sanitary sewer system shall be made and no application shall be approved except in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 21-20; Code 1993, § 16-31) 
Sec. 32-44. - Specifications; ownership. 
    Any water mains or sanitary sewer mains extended under the provisions of this article shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the approved plans, specifications and other requirements of the city. All facilities installed under the provisions of this article, whether within or outside the corporate limits, shall become the sole property of the city and under its jurisdiction and control for all purposes at the time such facilities are connected to the municipal system. When required, the property owners shall grant to the city such utility easements as it may require. In addition, a deed to the city for water and/or sewer facilities installed, which are located outside the corporate limits, the cost of which is borne by individual property owners, shall be executed prior to the time any extension provided for in this article is connected to the municipal system. 
(Code 1973, § 21-24; Code 1993, § 16-35) 
Sec. 32-45. - Additional subdivision improvement. 
    The city council may, in its discretion, as a condition under which water or sewer service, or both, will be extended, require the owners of a proposed subdivision to enter into an agreement to improve the proposed streets therein at their own expense and in accordance with the ordinances then in force governing the acceptance of public streets for the city. If required, this section shall apply to subdivisions which are located either within or outside the corporate limits. 
(Code 1973, § 21-25; Code 1993, § 16-36) 
Sec. 32-46. - Laterals to be laid only to inside of curb. 
    Sewer laterals laid as a part of any sewer main improvement shall be laid only to the inside of the curb, unless in the resolution ordering the improvement the city council specifically directs otherwise. 
(Code 1973, § 21-26; Code 1993, § 16-37) 
Sec. 32-47. - Extension of laterals. 
    After laterals are laid from the sewer main to the inside of the curb, no such lateral shall be extended to the property line until the owner or occupant of the property to be served thereby applies therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-27; Code 1993, § 16-38) 
Secs. 32-48-32-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATERWORKS SYSTEM REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-100. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, wherever used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section unless the context plainly indicates otherwise or a more restricted or extended meaning is intended. 
    Building water service or water connection means the connecting pipe from a building, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall, to the municipal water system. 
    City manager means the chief administrative officer of the city. It may also include any other city employee delegated to act for the city by the city manager or by the city council. 
    Concealed water use means any water use of which the user has no knowledge, such as leaking underground piping. Leaking water closets (toilets), faucets, and hose bibs are not considered as concealed water uses and are the customer's responsibility to maintain and correct on an as-needed basis. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, corporation, governmental agency, board, commission, or municipal corporation other than this city. 
    Potable water means water that does not contain objectionable pollution, contamination, minerals, or infective agents and is considered satisfactory for domestic consumption. Nonpotable water is considered unsatisfactory for domestic consumption but may be satisfactory for cooling, heating, or irrigation purposes. 
    Private water system means any facilities for obtaining potable water not maintained and operated by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 16-41; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 1) 
Sec. 32-101. - Use of public water system required. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public water line of the city, who has installed suitable toilet and other facilities therein necessary for potable water, is hereby required at the owner's expense to connect such facilities directly with the proper public water line in accordance with the requirements of the city, provided that such public water line abuts the property. 
(Code 1993, § 16-42; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 2) 
Sec. 32-102. - Private water systems. 
(a)  Where a public water line is not available under the provisions of section 32-101, such toilet and other facilities requiring potable water shall be connected to a private water system complying with the requirements of the appropriate state and/or local regulatory agency. 
(b)  At such time as a public water line becomes available to a property served by a private water system, a direct connection shall be made to the public water line in compliance with this article. There shall be no physical connection (cross-connection) between any privately owned water source and the city system. 
(c)  The owner shall operate and maintain any private water facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(d)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any state or federal agencies. 
(Code 1993, § 16-43; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 3) 
Sec. 32-103. - Applications for service-building water services and connections. 
(a)  Tampering. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public water line or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  Application for permit. The owner or his agent shall make application to the city for a building water service permit. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city manager. Pipes on the consumer's premises must be so arranged that the point of connection is conveniently located with respect to the city's service lines and water mains. 
(c)  Costs; losses. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building water service shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building water service. 
(d)  Building, plumbing codes, etc.-Generally. The size, alignment and materials of construction of a building water service, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(e)  Same-Connections. The connection of the building water service to the city water system shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All connections shall be made watertight and be verified by proper testing. 
(f)  Supervision of connection. The applicant for the building water service permit shall notify the city manager when the building water service is ready for inspection and connection to the city water system. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city manager or his representative. 
(g)  Excavations. All excavations for building water services shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(h)  Fee; meter; installation. The city shall charge the applicant a water tap fee for which the city will provide a water meter at the city right-of-way line connecting the applicant's building water line to the city water system. The owner shall be responsible for installation to the city's right-of-way only. 
(i)  Rejection of application-Generally. The city may reject any application for service which involves excessive service cost, or which may affect the supply of service to other customers or for other good and sufficient reasons. 
(j)  Same-Delinquent payments. The city may reject any application for service when the applicant is delinquent in payment of bills incurred for service previously supplied at any location, provided that when the owner of the premises has been furnished water and has not paid for the same, the city shall not be required to render service to any person at such location where the water was used until such water bills have been paid. 
(k)  User's piping. The city shall not be responsible for the user's piping. 
(l)  Multiple meters. When two or more meters are to be installed for the same premises but for different consumers, such meters shall be closely grouped and each clearly designated to indicate to which consumer it applies. 
(m)  Separate meters. Each consumer's service must be separately metered in a single delivery and metering point. Each commercial unit and each storeroom or stall used for business purposes shall have separate meters. All commercial use, including storerooms and stalls for business purposes, shall be metered separately from any residential use and vice versa, whether now in service or to be installed in the future. (See also section 32-109(d) and (e) related to this topic.) 
(n)  Water for given lot. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only. 
(o)  Relocation of piping. If the user's piping on the user's premises is so arranged that the city is required to provide additional meters, the consumer may be required to relocate the piping such that said connection can be made with a single meter at the city's right-of-way. 
(p)  Damage; defects. The city shall not be liable for damage of any kind whatsoever resulting from water or the use of water on the consumer's premises. The city shall not be responsible for any maintenance of, or for any damage done by or resulting from any defect in the piping, fixtures or appliances on the consumer's premises. The city shall not be responsible for negligence of third persons or forces beyond the control of the city resulting in any interruption of service. 
(q)  Responsibility for meter. Where meters are located on or near premises of a user, the user shall be responsible for the city's meter and shall provide an unobstructed and accessible location at all times to the meter reader. 
(r)  Cutoff valves. The user shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the user's side of the meter. The city will provide a like valve on the city's side of the meter. 
(s)  Backflow. Users shall install and maintain backflow prevention devices when determined that the device is necessary to prevent hazardous backflow conditions or to meet state requirements. The user's responsibility starts at the point of delivery from the city's potable water system and includes the user's entire water system. The user, at his own expense, shall install, operate, test, and maintain an approved backflow prevention device, as directed by the city. The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the user's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connection or backflow. 
(Code 1993, § 16-44; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 4; Ord. No. 2012-29, 7-10-2012) 
Sec. 32-104. - Access to premises. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading or testing meters, or any other purpose in connection with the city's service and facilities. 
(b)  Each user shall grant or convey or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a perpetual easement and right-of-way across any property owned or controlled by the user wherever such perpetual easement or right-of-way is necessary for the city water facilities and mains so as to be able to furnish service to the user. 
(Code 1993, § 16-45; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 5) 
Sec. 32-105. - Change of occupancy. 
(a)  Not less than three days' notice must be given in person or in writing, at the water department office, to discontinue service for a change in occupancy. 
(b)  The outgoing person shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longest. 
(Code 1993, § 16-46; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 6) 
Sec. 32-106. - Reviewing authority; amendment. 
(a)  The city council shall be the reviewing authority for all appeals of actions or administrative determinations under the provisions of this article. A notice of intent to appeal and request for a hearing shall be addressed to the city manager in writing and shall detail the nature of the appeal. An early date for such hearing shall be set by the city council and the appellant promptly notified in writing. The decision of the city council after such hearing shall be final and conclusive and shall be conveyed to the persons involved in writing. 
(b)  The city council expressly reserves the absolute right to amend, modify, rescind, or supplement this article. No modification of rates or any of the rules and regulations shall be made by any agent of the city. No promise, agreement, or representation of any employee of the city shall be binding upon the city except and unless it has been agreed in writing, signed and accepted by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 16-47; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 7) 
Sec. 32-107. - Enforcement and suspension of services. 
(a)  The city manager shall endeavor to assure compliance with the requirements of this article by conference and persuasion. If such efforts, over a reasonable period of time, are futile, the city manager shall take formal action as provided in this section. 
(b)  In any case involving a person who is receiving water service from the city water system and where the city manager finds that such person has failed to comply with any provision of this article, the procedure for enforcement shall be as follows: 
(1)  The city manager or his representative shall give notice to such person by registered mail stating the specifies of the failure of compliance and requiring that the person remedy the failure within 72 hours. 
(2)  The city manager or his representative may thereupon, without further notice, cause the water service from the public water system to be discontinued for such person. 
(3)  In any case where water service is discontinued by the city for enforcement purposes, the restoration of such service shall be conditioned on full compliance by such person and payment of any expense incurred in the enforcement proceeding and in the restoration of service. 
(4)  The city may, in its discretion, continue or restore water service in a case of failure of compliance on condition that such person furnish a bond or other security, with terms as specified by the city, to hold harmless the city from any loss or expense that it may incur as a result of such noncompliance or any future compliance. 
(c)  In any case involving a person who fails to comply with any provision of this article but who is not receiving water service from the city water system, the city manager shall give notice to such person by registered mail stating the specifies of the failure of compliance and requiring that the person promptly remedy the failure. At the same time, the city manager shall report the facts of such case, in writing, to the city council and to such other government agency as may have jurisdiction and power to take appropriate enforcement action. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  User's failure to pay user's bills as required by this article; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of higher public authorities; 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, accident, or any unavoidable cause; or 
(8)  Discovery of a cross-connection between a private water source and the city water system. 
(e)  The city may, in addition to prosecution by law, permanently refuse service to any consumer who tampers with a meter or other measuring device. 
(Code 1993, § 16-48; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 8) 
Sec. 32-108. - Water service deposits. 
(a)  All applicants for city water service shall make a cash deposit to secure payments for water service at the currently adopted fee on file in the city clerk's office. The deposit shall be in accordance with the scope of the service and same shall not draw any interest. 
(1)  Residential and commercial shops with three-quarter-inch meters shall provide a minimum deposit as adopted by the city council. 
(2)  Services larger than three-quarter-inch meters shall provide a minimum deposit as adopted by the city council or three times the estimated normal consumption based on previous customers or used by other similar businesses. 
The most current deposit schedule shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b)  The individual in whose name the deposit is made shall be responsible for payment of all bills incurred in connection with the services furnished. 
(c)  A separate deposit is required for each meter installed. 
(d)  The deposit receipt is not negotiable and can be redeemed only at the water department office. Where the city finds that the request for a deposit refund is questionable, the city may require the applicant for refund to produce the deposit receipt properly endorsed. 
(e)  When services are discontinued and all bills paid, the remaining portion of the deposit will be refunded. 
(f)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the user; however, if the deposit is not sufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for the collection of debts. Service will be restored only by payment of the balance, if any, of the outstanding bills; and a new deposit is made on the basis of the customer deposit required above, plus a service charge as adopted by the city council for each meter reconnected during normal working hours, holidays and weekends. The most current service schedule shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1993, § 16-49; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 9; Ord. No. 1992-11, § 1, 8-11-1992) 
Sec. 32-109. - User charges and tap fees. 
(a)  For billing purposes, all users are subject to the rate schedule kept on file in the city clerk's office. The city council shall review the rate schedule not less often than once per year and shall revise the user charges if necessary. 
(b)  Tap-on fees shall be charged and collected from all new users in accordance with the rates on file in the city clerk's office. The city council shall review tap-on rates periodically and shall revise tap-on rates if necessary. The city council shall retain the authority and right to offer special tap-on charges for specified periods of time to new customers along newly constructed lines in areas previously not served by the city water system. 
(c)  The minimum charge shall be made for each meter installed regardless of location. The minimum charge shall be made even in the event of nonuse, such as is typical for summer homes in resort areas. 
(d)  Multi-use buildings (units) served through one meter will be billed at the city's regular published rates, or the published minimum rate per unit, per month, whichever is greater. The property owner or homeowners' association, as applicable, shall be responsible for payment of the bill. 
(e)  Multi-use building owners, when possible and practical as determined by the city, shall install individual meters on each user in addition to a master meter at the property line. The city will operate and maintain the individual meters and the master meter. The owner shall operate and maintain all piping on the owner's side of the master meter. The city shall invoice each individual user in the same manner as individual units are administered. The owner shall be invoiced for the minimum bill associated with the master meter. In the event that the consumption through the master meter exceeds the total of the water consumed through the individual meters, the owner shall be invoiced for the additional water consumed. 
(f)  Unmetered hydrant, sprinkler, or other related fire protection services provided by the city shall be invoiced monthly (or annually at the city's discretion) based on the current rates. Water use through fire services shall be for fire-related uses only. All other types of water consumption through fire services are strictly prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 16-50; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 10; Ord. No. 1992-11, § 1, 8-11-1992; Ord. No. 2012-29, 7-10-2012) 
Sec. 32-110. - Meter reading; billing; collecting. 
(a)  Water meters will be read monthly and bills rendered monthly and shall be due and payable within ten to 14 days of the date of billing. The service shall be discontinued without further notice for nonpayment. The city reserves the right to vary the dates or length of period covered, temporarily or permanently if necessary or desirable. 
(b)  Bills for water service will be figured in accordance with the city's published rate schedule then in effect and will be based on the amount consumed for the period covered by the meter readings. 
(c)  Charges for service commence when a meter is installed, whether used or not, except that 60 days may be allowed for initial hookup on newly constructed extensions of the water system. 
(d)  Readings from different meters will not be combined for billing, irrespective of the fact that such meters may be for the same or different premises, or for the same or different users, or for the same or different services. 
(e)  Bills are due when rendered and become delinquent within ten to 14 days of the bill. Delinquent amounts shall be subject to a ten percent penalty for each billing period; and if not paid, service will be discontinued and a service charge as adopted by the city council shall be made to restore each service. The current service charge shall be kept on file in the clerk's office. 
(f)  Failure to receive bills shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent or relieve the consumer from payment. 
(g)  Partial payments will be applied in the following order: penalty, solid waste, sewer, and water charges. 
(Code 1993, § 16-51; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 11; Ord. No. 1992-11, § 1, 8-11-1992; Ord. No. 1997-09, 3-11-1997; Ord. No. 2010-11, 3-9-2010) 
Sec. 32-111. - Water bill complaints and adjustments. 
(a)  If a water user believes a bill is in error, the user shall present a claim, in person or in writing, at the water department office before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claims, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as provided in this article. The consumer shall pay such bill under protest and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. The city manager or the director of the water and sewer department may authorize corrections for billing errors. 
(b)  Concealed leak adjustment may be authorized by the city manager or the director of the water and sewer department on bills under the following conditions: 
(1)  A concealed leak in the consumer's piping; and 
(2)  A statement from a licensed plumber, the owner, lessee, or tenant, on the location of the concealed leak and that same has been repaired. 
(c)  Adjustments on concealed water leaks shall be made for 50 percent of the excessive water usage and 100 percent of the excessive sewer usage unless the concealed water usage entered the city sewer system. Adjustment of the excessive sewer usage shall be made for 50 percent of the excessive sewer usage if the concealed water usage entered the sewer system. Adjustments are intended for hardship situations only. No adjustments will be made unless the excessive water usage is at least 2,000 gallons over the average monthly usage. A customer may receive only one concealed leak adjustment per 12 months. 
(d)  In extreme cases of personal hardship verified by the city manager, a delay of up to 120 days of the payment date of the water bill may be granted. Such a delay may be granted no more than one time per year and may be granted only by the city manager or the director of the water and sewer department. All other bills during that period of time shall be due and payable in accordance with this article. 
(e)  The city manager or the director of the water and sewer department shall make adjustments on bills for water usages requested or directed by the city to minimize or eliminate operational problems. 
(f)  In the event the city discovers that a leak is existing and the user is notified of same, the user shall take immediate steps to correct the situation. Undue delay by the user shall cause forfeiture of the benefits of adjustment. 
(g)  The city will make special meter readings at the request of the user for a fee adopted by the city council, during normal working hours; however, if such special readings disclose that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. 
(h)  The city will perform any service, such as turn-ons or turn-offs, at the request of the user for a charge adopted by the city council to restore service during normal working hours, holidays and weekends. 
(i)  Meters will be tested at the request of the user upon payment to the city of the actual cost to the city of making the test; however, if the meter is found to over-register beyond five percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(j)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bill and/or from other proper data. 
(k)  Adjustments of leaking water closets shall be made for 50 percent of the excessive water usage and 50 percent of the excessive sewer usage. Adjustments are intended for hardship situations only. No adjustments will be made unless the excessive water usage is at least 2,000 gallons over the average monthly usage for the preceding 12 months. Customers may receive only one water closet leak adjustment per 12 months. Customers must submit a statement from a licensed plumber, the owner, lessee or tenant that the leaking toilet has been repaired and an inspection performed to determine if other leaks are present in order to qualify for the adjustment. 
(Code 1993, § 16-52; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 12; Ord. No. 1995-37, 11-28-1995; Ord. No. 1998-16, 5-12-1998; Ord. No. 2016-02, 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 32-112. - Determining minimum distances and sizes for water system extensions. 
    All extensions of the city water system shall be governed by the following: 
(1)  The minimum distance for any extension of a water main shall be determined by the city council. In general, the minimum distance for extensions shall be made from the main line valve to valve. 
(2)  The size of water mains to be installed and the other required system facilities shall be determined by the city council in accordance with the recognized standards and accepted engineering practices and design, and in accordance with applicable system plans adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 16-53; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 13) 
Sec. 32-113. - Water service extension outside corporate limits. 
    Water service may be provided to customers outside of the corporate limits of the city upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Developers, subdividers, owners, and others wishing such service shall submit for approval to the city, preliminary plans and specifications for all water lines for proposed projects which plans shall comply with all requirements made by the city for such installations. Such plans must be approved before final plans are prepared. The city engineer shall review and approve all final plans and specifications as per the fee set in the city's fee schedule in the city clerk's office. All installations must comply with such plans and must be inspected by a full-time resident inspector during construction and by a city representative upon completion. Construction of the water extension shall be by a licensed utility contractor under the direction of a professional engineer under contract with the developer or the city. As built, utility plans and letters of certification of completion must be provided to the city and appropriate state agencies. 
(2)  The developers, subdividers, owners, etc., shall provide easements in such form as the city may require for lines, valves, and appurtenances and for installation and maintenance thereof. Such easements shall be furnished prior to any service being furnished. 
(3)  At the time of submission of plans for water system extensions, the owners shall ask that the property to be served and all improvements thereon be annexed to the city at such time as the city finds this lawful and practical. Such request for annexation shall remain open indefinitely, shall bind the heirs, successors, grantees and assigns of the owner, developer, subdivider, etc., and may be accepted by the city at any time unless the area involved becomes annexed to some other municipality. The request for annexation may be withdrawn if the city does not provide water services, as requested by the developer, owner, subdivider, etc., but not if such action is caused by failure to pay for services rendered or for damages done to the system or systems by the willful or negligent acts of the developers, subdividers, owners, etc., or their heirs, successors, grantees, or assigns or the agents, servants, employees, invitees, or licensees of any of them. 
(4)  This section in its entirety shall be in full force and effect with respect to all users outside the city limits that are connected to the city water system. 
(Code 1993, § 16-54; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 14; Ord. No. 1995-38, 11-28-1995) 
Sec. 32-114. - Financing water extensions outside corporate limits. 
(a)  All applications for water extensions outside the corporate limits shall be made in the same manner and under the same requirements as provided in this section. 
(b)  If an application is approved by the city council, the owner shall pay 100 percent of the total cost of all extensions including the cost of engineering and resident inspection provided by the city, if applicable; provided the city may participate to the extent agreed upon by the city council in the cost of larger size mains that are in excess of the size mains required to serve the project. No reimbursement shall be made upon annexation and all water lines connected to the city system and located outside the corporate limits shall become the property of the city at the time such facilities are connected. 
(c)  Prior to the beginning of any construction of water extensions by the city, the owner shall deposit with the city funds in an amount equal to 100 percent of the total estimated cost of such extensions. Upon receipt of such funds a written contract shall be entered into by and between the city and the property owner in accordance with the requirements of this section. Such contract shall provide that in the event the funds deposited exceed the amount of the total extension cost when completed, that portion in excess of the total cost will be refunded to the owner without interest. Such contract shall also provide that if the amount deposited is less than the total cost when completed, the owner shall pay such additional amount to the city. 
(d)  In lieu of depositing funds, the owner may execute a surety bond or similar document guaranteeing payment for such extension. 
(Code 1993, § 16-55; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 15) 
Sec. 32-115. - Financing water extensions within corporate limits. 
(a)  Extensions to approve subdivisions or developed property shall be made in the following manner: 
(1)  When application is received requesting the extension of water service to serve property within the corporate limits which is: 
a.  Developed or has been previously approved as a subdivision; or 
b.  Where streets have previously been dedicated and accepted by the city, and where such area is not part of a new subdivision which has not been approved by the city, and where such area is not part of a new subdivision which has not been approved by the city; 
The developer or other person designated by the city council shall estimate the cost of the project and present the application for such extension, the estimated cost and other required information to the city council for approval. If the application is approved by the city council and subject to the availability of funds, the city will install or have installed by contract under its supervision the extension which has been approved, and such extension shall be financed in accordance with this subsection (a). 
(2)  When an approved water line extension project has been completed and the total cost thereof has been determined, a percentage of the total cost of such water extension may be assessed against the property owners whose property abuts upon such extension at an equal rate per front foot in accordance with and under the authority granted to the city by G.S. 160A-217 through 160A-236. The remaining percentage of the total cost of such extension shall be borne by the city from funds appropriated for this purpose. Fire hydrants and other system facilities installed for general public use shall be paid for by the city and shall be excluded from the total cost shared by the property owners. 
(3)  Any property owner shall have the opportunity to pay his proportionate share of the cost of such extension after the assessment roll is confirmed rather than paying his share in equal annual installments with interest as required by the statute. 
(4)  Extensions to proposed subdivisions within the city limits shall be made in the following manner: The provisions of section 32-113 shall be applicable to serve extensions in all proposed subdivisions in the city limits. The developer shall be responsible for 100 percent of the water extension costs, including engineering and resident inspection services provided by the city if applicable. 
(b)  Facilities shall be excluded in determining the owner's share of costs, as follows: When the city determines that it is advisable to install larger size facilities than are necessary to serve the property whose owner is requesting such extension, the difference in the cost of the larger size facilities over and above the cost of the facilities required to serve the property whose owner is requesting such extension shall be paid for by the city and excluded from the total cost to the property owner. 
(c)  The following exceptions are authorized: Nothing in this section shall prevent the city council from extending water mains within the corporate limits on its own motion, without receipt of an application from property owners, and assessing the cost of such extensions in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, when, in the opinion of the city council, the general public interest demands such extension of service. 
(Code 1993, § 16-56; Res. of 12-9-1986(2), § 16) 
Secs. 32-116-32-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WASTE DISCHARGE STANDARDS 

Sec. 32-144. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, wherever used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section unless the context plainly indicates otherwise or that a more restricted or extended meaning is intended. In addition, definitions contained in 40 CFR Parts 35, 401 and 403 are hereby incorporated in this section by reference and shall take preference over definitions in this section in case of any conflicts. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter by weight. 
    Building sewer or house connection means the connecting pipe from a building, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall, to the city sewer system. 
    City manager means the chief administrative officer of the city. It may also include any other city employee delegated to act for the city by the city manager or by the city council. 
    Color means the true color of the light transmitted by the waste solution after removing the suspended material, including the pseudocolloidal particles. 
    Domestic waste means all liquid and waterborne pollutants, exclusive of "unpolluted wastewater" as defined in this section or wastewater or wastes from processes or operations in industrial establishments ("industrial waste"), as defined in this section. 
    Industrial waste means the liquid and waterborne pollutants resulting from processes or operations employed in industrial establishments, as defined in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, office of management and budget of the federal government, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions: 
(1)  Division A, Agricultural, forestry and fishing. 
(2)  Division B, Mining. 
(3)  Division D, Manufacturing. 
(4)  Division E, Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary services. 
(5)  Division I, Services. 
    Infiltration means water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system (including sewer service connections) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes. The term "infiltration" does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. 
    Infiltration/inflow means the total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source. 
    Inflow means water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system (including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. The term "inflow" does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. 
    Normal waste means a waste having an average concentration of 250 milligrams per liter of BOD, or less, and 250 milligrams per liter of suspended solids, or less, as determined by samples taken before entering the public sanitary sewers. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, corporation, governmental agency, board, commission, or municipal corporation other than this city. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in moles per liter of solution. Stabilized pH is that determined after a sample of the waste has been subjected to natural aeration. 
    Private wastewater disposal system means any facility for wastewater treatment and disposal not maintained and operated by the city. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the organic wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle being greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Receiving stream means that body of water, stream or watercourse receiving the discharge from a wastewater treatment plant, or that body of water, stream, or watercourse formed by the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant. 
    Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility that carries liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Sanitary sewerage system means any part of the public sanitary sewer or systems, including wastewater pumping stations, that discharge into wastewater treatment facilities owned and/or operated by the city. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater of any duration during which the rate of flow or concentration of any constituent increases to such magnitude as to affect adversely the operation of the sewer system or the ability of the city's wastewater treatment facilities to meet the water quality objectives. 
    Standard methods means the analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, or EPA Methods of Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, as published by the Environmental Protection Agency, water quality office in April 1971, or subsequent editions. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer intended to carry only stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters, and drainage. 
    Strength of waste means the concentration, expressed in milligrams per liter by weight (mg/l), of a pollutant or substance contained in the liquid waste. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means the total solid matter that either floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water or liquid waste, and which is removable by laboratory filtration. 
    Treatment works means any devices and systems for the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage, domestic sewage, or liquid industrial wastes. 
    Unpolluted wastewater means any wastewater which is substantially free of pollutants and is discharged from rain downspouts and drains, footing drains, storm and surface water drains, or cooling water systems. The term "unpolluted wastewater" also means any wastewaters judged by the state department of natural resources and community development to be admissible to streams and watercourses under the jurisdiction of such agency, and in accordance with the standards of water quality established by such agency for the particular stream or watercourse into which such unpolluted wastewater is to be discharged. Unpolluted wastewater shall contain, by definition, none of the following: 
(1)  BOD in excess of ten milligrams per liter; 
(2)  Suspended solids in excess of ten mg/l; 
(3)  Free or emulsified greases or oils; 
(4)  Acids or alkalis; 
(5)  Phenols or other substances imparting taste or odor in receiving waters; 
(6)  Toxic or poisonous substances; 
(7)  Noxious or odorous gases; or 
(8)  Temperature in excess of 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    User charge means a charge levied on users of any treatment works, for the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of such works. 
(Code 1993, § 16-61; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 1) 
Sec. 32-145. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any outlet other than a sanitary sewer, within the boundaries of the city, any domestic or industrial wastes except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article and state and federal laws. 
(b)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, who has installed suitable toilet and other facilities therein necessary for the discharge of domestic and industrial wastes, shall, at the owner's expense, connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the requirements of the city, provided that such public sewer abuts the property. 
(Code 1993, § 16-62; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 2) 
Sec. 32-146. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 32-145(b), such toilet and other facilities necessary for the discharge of domestic and industrial wastes shall be connected to a private disposal system complying with the requirements of the appropriate state and/or local regulatory agency. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the appropriate regulatory authority and furnish a copy thereof to the city manager. The copy of the permit shall be accompanied by such supplementary data as deemed necessary by the city manager to maintain an accurate file of such private wastewater disposal systems to facilitate the planning of future public sewer service. 
(c)  The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the state department of natural resources and community development or other such board or authority. 
(d)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(e)  The owner shall operate and maintain any private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(f)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by other state or federal agencies. 
(Code 1993, § 16-63; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 3) 
Sec. 32-147. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city manager. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, in which case the front building's sewer may be extended to the rear building's sewer and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer should be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the user's expense. 
(h)  No person shall make connection to roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and be verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city manager before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city manager when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the city manager or his representative. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(l)  The city shall charge the applicant a sewer tap fee for which the city will provide the building sewer from the city right-of-way line to the sanitary sewer main. The owner shall be responsible for installation of the building sewer on the owner's property to the city's right-of-way including the connection to the tap provided by the city. The most current schedule of charges for sewer taps shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. The connection of the building sewer to the city tap shall be inspected and approved by the building inspector prior to the owner's covering the connections. 
(Code 1993, § 16-64; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 4) 
Sec. 32-148. - Excluded wastes. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following materials, waste materials, wastes, gases or liquids into any sewer forming part of the sanitary sewerage system, except where these may constitute occasional, intermittent inclusions in the wastewaters discharged from residential premises: 
(1)  Any waste, liquid or vapor, at a temperature exceeding 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) or at such lower temperatures that will create hazardous conditions within, or cause deterioration of, the sanitary sewers; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing more than 50 milligrams per liter of petroleum substances, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral origin; 
(3)  Wastewater containing oil, fat or grease (exclusive of petroleum substances) of concentrations greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between zero degrees and 65 degrees at the point of discharge into the system; 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Properly shredded garbage shall not exceed one-half inch in any dimension; 
(5)  Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of either causing damage or creating a hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sanitary sewerage system and wastewater treatment facilities or interfering with proper operation of the city's wastewater treatment facilities; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a color which is not removable by the existing wastewater treatment plant processes and causes the plant effluent to exceed color requirements for discharge to the receiving waters; 
(7)  Any waters or wastes having a BOD 5 in excess of 350 mg/l unless identified as an industrial waste for billing purposes; 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a total suspended solids (TSS) concentration in excess of 350 mg/l unless identified as an industrial waste for billing purposes; or 
(9)  Any waters or wastes having an ammonia (NH 3 ) concentration in excess of 30 mg/l unless identified as an industrial waste for billing purposes. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following materials, waste materials, waste gases or liquids into any sewer forming part of the sanitary sewerage system: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha or other hydrocarbon solvents or oils, or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases including any waters or wastes which contain, at the point of discharge to the sewer system, explosive elements such that any single reading on an explosion hazard meter exceeds ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) or any two successive readings that exceed five percent of the LEL; 
(2)  Any other solid or viscous substance in quantity or character capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or interference with proper operation of wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to ashes, cinders, ceramic wastes, paper products, sand, mud, straw, shavings, thread, glass, rags, metal, feathers, bones, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, insulation materials, fibers of any kind, stock or poultry feeds, processed grains, viscera or other fleshy particles from processing or packing plants, lime or similar sludges; 
(3)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or any substance capable of creating a public nuisance when introduced into the sewerage system; 
(4)  Any "unpolluted wastewater," as defined in section 32-144. 
(c)  No person shall discharge into any sewer forming part of the sanitary sewerage system, any of the following materials in concentrations exceeding the stated limits: 
(1)  Any toxic or poisonous substance or any other materials in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with the wastewater treatment processes, or to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to cause a violation of the water quality standards or effluent standards for the steam or watercourse receiving the effluent from the city wastewater treatment plant. Concentrations of heavy metals and other incompatible pollutants in the discharge of any user of the sanitary sewerage system shall not exceed values listed below (all values are in mg/l): 
Copper 0.5 Nickel 0.5 Zinc 0.5 Lead 0.5 Cyanide, total 0.5 Cyanide, amenable 0.1 Chromium, total 0.5 Chromium, hexavalent 0.1  
(2)  In the event of conflicts between values established in this article and values established by applicable state or federal rules, regulations, laws, etc., the more stringent value shall apply. Effluent limits contained in the city's national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit and water quality standards assigned Calico Creek shall at no time be exceeded or contravened as a result of discharges to the city's sewer system either within or without the values established in this section; or 
(3)  Any radioactive isotope in concentration greater than that permitted by the latest effective regulations promulgated under applicable federal law. 
(Code 1993, § 16-65; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 5) 
Sec. 32-149. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Any person who is prohibited from discharging any substance as specified in this article shall have the sole responsibility to devise, at his own expense, the methods for eliminating the problem so as to make any waste discharge eligible for a permit or for compliance with this article. 
(b)  Each user shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in good working order at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the prewastewater facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the authority prior to the user's initiation of the changes. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the federal environmental protection agency or the state upon request. 
(c)  Grease, oil and sand separators (traps) shall be required by the city for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease, oil and/or sand and/or other substances in excessive amounts. Gas stations, automotive repair shops, restaurants, and other similar businesses shall provide grease, oil and/or sand separators. 
(d)  Commercial grease trap requirements. 
(1)  Grease and oil traps or other interceptors shall be provided at the user's expense, when such user operates an establishment preparing, processing or serving food and/or food products; except that such traps shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. At a minimum, all food preparatory sinks, dishwashers, etc., shall be connected to the trap. Any plumbing fixture not associated with food preparation should not be connected to the trap. 
(2)  All vehicle maintenance facilities are required to have a properly sized grease, oil and sand trap. 
(3)  All traps shall be of a type and capacity accessible for cleaning and inspection. All such traps shall be serviced and emptied of the waste content as required in order to maintain their minimum design capability to intercept oils and greases from the wastewater discharged to the public sewer, or to achieve compliance with the oil and grease limit of 250 mg/l. For grease traps, the service shall be completed and documented at an interval not to exceed 30 days. For under-the-sink interceptors, the service shall be completed and documented daily or a frequency recommended by the manufacturer. If an under-the-sink interceptor is not serviced daily, it shall be the responsibility of the user to demonstrate compliance with the oil and grease limit. 
(4)  All traps or interceptors shall be maintained by the user at his expense in a continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(5)  During trap maintenance, all inorganic and organic solids shall be removed from the trap. In addition, all floating material shall be skimmed from the trap to avoid accumulation of scum covering the surface of the liquid. There shall be no reintroduction of the water removed from the trap either to the trap itself or to the sanitary sewer system without prior written approval from the city. The user shall be responsible for the removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured materials in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(6)  The user shall maintain a written record on site of trap or interceptor maintenance for three years. A copy of each service record shall be sent to the city no later than 15 days after the end of the month during which the maintenance occurred. 
(7)  If an obstruction of any city sewer main occurs that causes a sewer overflow and such overflow can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease in the city's sewer main, the city will take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in the city's sewer use regulations, against the generator or contributor of such grease. These actions may include fines, civil penalties or a discontinuance of water and sewer service. 
(Code 1993, § 16-66; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 6; Ord. No. 2015-05, 2-10-2015) 
Sec. 32-150. - Flow and concentration control. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any wastes or wastewaters in a "slug," as defined in section 32-144. 
    (b) Any person discharging or proposing to discharge wastes which may include "slugs," as defined in section 32-144, may be required to provide facilities, or adopt procedures, for regulating, controlling, or equalizing the concentration of any constituent or the rate of waste discharge. Such facilities shall have a capacity of at least 80 percent of the normal volume of one twenty-four-hour production period of wastewater and an outlet to the sewer controlled by a waterworks-type rate controller, or other approved device. 
(Code 1993, § 16-67; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 7) 
Sec. 32-151. - Measurement of flow. 
(a)  For domestic wastewater users on the city water and sewerage systems, the volume of water purchased shall be considered to be the volume of wastewater discharged. In the event a user is connected to the city sewerage system but is not connected to the city water system, a mutually acceptable alternate means for determining volume must be negotiated between the city and the user. 
(b)  The volume or quantity of industrial waste discharged by any person into the sanitary sewerage system shall be measured by one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  If the volume of water used by any person in his industrial or process operations is substantially the same as the volume secured from the city waterworks system, then the volume of water purchased shall be considered to be the volume of waste discharged. 
(2)  If, on the premises of any person discharging industrial waste into the sanitary sewerage system, a substantial portion of the water secured from the city waterworks system is not used for industrial purposes, or is not returned to the sanitary sewerage system, the quantity of industrial waste shall be determined as follows: 
a.  By a meter on the water supply line to his industrial and/or process operations; or 
b.  By a meter on the waste line from his industrial and/or process operations; or 
c.  If meters as required under subsections (a) and (b) of this section have not been installed, by an estimate made by the city manager of the proportion of the water purchased which is used for industrial purposes and returned to the sanitary sewerage system. 
(3)  If any person discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste into the sanitary sewerage system does not secure his entire water supply requirements from the city waterworks system, such person shall install and maintain a meter on the waste line from his industrial and/or process operations, or shall install such additional meters on the private water supply as required to permit a determination of the total quantity discharged to the sewers from both sources under procedures comparable to subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 16-68; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 8) 
Sec. 32-152. - Control manhole. 
(a)  Any person who on December 9, 1986, is discharging industrial waste into the sanitary sewerage system shall provide reasonable access, means and facilities for the purpose of permitting the convenient observations, measurements, and sampling of such industrial waste. If such access, means and facilities are not otherwise available such person shall construct and maintain an accessible and safe control manhole on the waste line or lines for such purposes. 
(b)  Any person proposing to discharge industrial waste in quantities greater than 25,000 gallons per day (gpd), or with strengths equivalent to 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of domestic wastewater, shall provide a control manhole in accordance with the requirements of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 16-69; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 9) 
Sec. 32-153. - Determination of character and strength of wastes. 
(a)  The industrial waste and/or other pollutants being discharged by any person into the sanitary sewerage system shall be subject to periodic inspection. A determination of character and strength of such wastes may be made annually, or more often as may be deemed necessary by the city manager or his authorized assistants. 
(b)  Samples shall be collected manually or mechanically over such period of time and composited in such a manner as to be representative of the wastes being discharged. The laboratory methods followed in the examination of such wastes shall be those set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods, as defined in section 32-144. 
(c)  The determination of the character, strength, or quantity of the wastes as made by the city manager or his authorized assistants shall be binding as a basis for computation of charges or for actions by the city council. When requested by the person discharging wastes, the samples may be split to permit analysis by the discharger, or a qualified independent laboratory, for the discharger's information. The person discharging wastes may request additional sampling and analyses which will be performed, as soon as practical, with all costs, as determined by the city, being borne by the discharger. 
(Code 1993, § 16-70; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 10) 
Sec. 32-154. - Authority for inspection; access to premises. 
(a)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, flow measurement, sampling, and testing of industrial waste and other pollutants, in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information if the industry can establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(c)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the city manager and duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. The company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 32-152(a). 
(Code 1993, § 16-71; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 11) 
Sec. 32-155. - Protection of equipment/property. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface, tamper with or remove any equipment or materials or properties of the city. Only persons authorized by the city manager will be allowed to uncover, adjust, maintain, and remove such equipment and materials or property. 
(Code 1993, § 16-72; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 12) 
Sec. 32-156. - Reviewing authority; amendment. 
(a)  The city council shall be the reviewing authority for all appeals of actions or administrative determinations under the provisions of this article. Notice of an intent to appeal and request for a hearing shall be addressed to the city clerk in writing and shall detail the nature of the appeal. An early date for such hearing shall be set by the council and the appellant promptly notified in writing. The decision of the council after such hearing shall be final and conclusive and shall be conveyed to the persons involved in writing. 
(b)  The city council expressly reserves the absolute right to amend, modify, rescind, or supplement this article. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as preventing the execution of a contract, special agreement, or arrangement between the city and any person whereby water or wastewaters of unusual strength, character, or quantity may be admitted into the sanitary sewerage system upon such terms and conditions as the city council deems appropriate. All such agreements shall be in complete accord with all applicable local, state, and federal requirements. 
(Code 1993, § 16-73; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 13) 
Sec. 32-157. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all users of the city sanitary sewerage system, whether within or outside of the city limits. 
(b)  The city manager shall endeavor to assure compliance with the requirements of this article by conference and persuasion. If such efforts, over a reasonable period of time, are futile the city manager shall take formal action as provided in this section. 
(c)  In any case involving a person who is discharging waste into the sanitary sewerage system and where the city manager finds that such person has failed to comply with any provision of this article, the procedure for enforcement shall be as follows: 
(1)  The city manager shall give notice to such person by registered mail stating the specifies of the failure of compliance and requiring that the person remedy the failure within 72 hours. 
(2)  The city manager may thereupon, without further notice, cause the water service from the public water system to be discontinued for such person or cause the connection to the sanitary sewer system to be severed from such person. 
(3)  In any case where water service is discontinued or the sewer connection is severed by the city for enforcement purposes, the restoration of such service shall be conditioned on full compliance by such person and payment of any expense incurred in the enforcement proceeding and in the restoration of service. 
(4)  The city may, in its discretion, continue or restore water or sewer service in a case of failure of compliance on condition that such person furnish a bond or other security, with terms as specified by the city, to hold harmless the city from any loss or expense that it may incur as a result of such noncompliance or any future noncompliance. 
(d)  In any case involving a person who fails to comply with any provision of this article but who is not discharging waste into the sanitary sewerage system, the city manager shall give notice to such person by registered mail stating the specifies of the failure of compliance and requiring that the person promptly remedy the failure. At the same time, the city manager shall report the facts of such case, in writing, to the city council and to such other governmental agency as may have jurisdiction and power to take appropriate enforcement action. 
(e)  In any case involving the use of the city sewerage system the city shall have the right to collect the costs of treatment for the wastewater discharged by the user to the city sewerage system. 
(f)  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  User's failure to pay user's bills as provided for in this article; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Legal processes; 
(5)  Direction of higher public authorities; or 
(6)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, accident, or any unavoidable cause. 
(Code 1993, § 16-74; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 14) 
Sec. 32-158. - Application for industrial service; authorization required. 
(a)  All users discharging industrial waters or wastes other than normal waste into the city's sanitary sewerage system shall make application for service to the city. 
(b)  Users making application for service to the city shall do so in writing and shall provide the following information in support of the application: 
(1)  Name, address, and standard industrial classification of user; 
(2)  Average volume of wastewater to be discharged; 60-minute peak wastewater flow rates including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations; time and duration of discharge; 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by chemical analyses by a certified analytical laboratory for all applicable parameters; 
(4)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all chemicals, materials, and types of materials which are, or could be, discharged; 
(5)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; and 
(6)  Any other information as may be deemed appropriate by the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(c)  The city manager shall approve or disapprove all applications in writing. The reasons for disapproval shall be provided. 
(d)  Approvals of applications for service shall be valid until rescinded. The city reserves the right to modify the terms and conditions of providing sewer service at any time based on demonstrable causes. 
(Code 1993, § 16-75; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 15) 
Sec. 32-159. - Sewer user deposits. 
(a)  A deposit for sewer service shall not be required provided the user is also a user of the city water system. In the event a sewer user is not also a city water user, a deposit will be required in accordance with subsections (b) through (g) of this section. 
(b)  All applicants shall make a cash deposit to secure payments for sewer service not to exceed the amount of an estimated two-month bill. The deposit shall be in accordance with the class and scope of the service and shall not draw any interest. 
(1)  Residential and commercial shops with three-quarter-inch water meters shall provide a minimum deposit as adopted by the city council. 
(2)  Services with water meters larger than three-quarter-inch shall provide a minimum deposit as adopted by the city council based on previous users or on other similar businesses. 
The most current deposit schedule shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  The individual in whose name the deposit is made shall be responsible for payment of all bills incurred in connection with the services furnished. 
(d)  The deposit receipt is not negotiable and can be redeemed only at the water department office. 
(e)  Where the city finds that the request for a deposit refund is questionable, the city may require the applicant for refund to produce the deposit receipt properly endorsed. 
(f)  When services are discontinued and all bills paid, the remaining portion of the deposit shall be refunded. 
(g)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the deposit shall be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the user; however, if the deposit is not sufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for the collection of debts. Services will be restored only by payment of the balance, if any, of the outstanding bills, and a new deposit being made in the amount of the customer deposit required above. 
(Code 1993, § 16-76; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 16; Ord. No. 1992-11, § 2, 8-11-1992) 
Sec. 32-160. - Establishment and periodic adjustment of user charges. 
(a)  The city council shall review not less often than once per year the sewage contributions of users, the total costs of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the sewerage facilities, and the user charge system. The city council shall revise the user charges, if necessary, to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and user classifications. Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation and maintenance (including replacement) costs. 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary for the proper operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the sewerage facilities. 
(3)  Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rate accordingly. 
(b)  Charges shall be based on actual costs. 
(c)  Each user discharging any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the treatment works shall pay for 100 percent of such increased costs. 
(d)  All flow to the sewerage facilities not directly attributable to the users (i.e. infiltration/inflow) shall be distributed among all users and user classes of the sewerage facilities in the same manner that operations and maintenance costs are distributed. 
(e)  Each user shall be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charge which is attributable to operation and maintenance of the sewerage facilities. 
(Code 1993, § 16-77; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 17) 
Sec. 32-161. - Domestic wastewater charges. 
(a)  The domestic wastewater charge shall be applicable to all sewer system users except industrial users as defined in section 32-162(a). Industries with discharges from sanitary conveniences only are considered domestic customers. 
(b)  The domestic wastewater charge is hereby established at a flat rate per 1,000 gallons as shown in the most current rate schedule, which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  The wastewater charge shall be based on the following formula: 
Charge/1000 gallons = Total cost of O & M Total volume of flow (in thousands of gallons)  
(d)  There shall be a minimum charge per month for users with sewer discharges between zero and 2,000 gallons per month as shown in the rate schedule. A minimum bill is required even in the event of nonuse, such as is typical for resort areas. There shall be no discounts for increased quantity. 
(Code 1993, § 16-78; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 18; Ord. No. 1997-10, 3-11-1997) 
Sec. 32-162. - Industrial wastewater charges; industrial user defined. 
(a)  Industrial wastewater charges or "surcharges" shall be applied to industrial users, defined as follows: 
(1)  The term "industrial user" means any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the city sewerage system that discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary wastewater and is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, office of management and budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the following divisions: 
a.  Division A, Agriculture, forestry, and fishing. 
b.  Division B, Mining. 
c.  Division D, Manufacturing. 
d.  Division E, Transportation, communications, electric, gas, and sanitary services. 
e.  Division I, Services. 
In determining the amount of a user's discharge for purposes of classification, domestic wastewater discharges exceeding 25,000 gpd or the weight of biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids (SS) equivalent to that weight found in 25,000 gpd of sanitary wastes are considered industrial users. Sanitary wastes, for purposes of this calculation of equivalency, are the wastes discharged from residential users. 
(2)  The term "industrial user" means any other industrial, commercial or institutional user of the sanitary sewerage system that discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contain toxic pollutants, poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge at the treatment works, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works. 
(3)  The term "industrial user" also means any person discharging wastewater with concentrations in excess of 350 mg/l for BOD or suspended solids or 30 mg/l for ammonia nitrogen. 
(b)  The industrial wastewater charges shall be established not less than one time per year and at the same time domestic user charges are established. Industrial wastewater charges shall be based on the actual costs for providing sewer services during the preceding fiscal year. The charges so computed along with projected increases in costs shall be the basis for estimating the monthly billings to each such customer for the following fiscal year. The charges collected shall be adjusted to actual costs at the end of each fiscal year and appropriate credits given against billings in the ensuing year, or additional billings made to each such customer, using the actual wastewater quantities and characteristics discharged by that customer during the preceding fiscal year as the basis for computing the adjusted charges. The actual costs shall be determined as soon after the end of each fiscal year as possible and until such time the charges for the current year shall be based on either the rates for the year or on estimated rates for the current year. 
(c)  The costs included in the computation of actual charges for the preceding fiscal year, or of estimated charges for an ensuing fiscal year, shall include the following: 
(1)  Operation and maintenance expenses. 
(2)  Interest and principal on outstanding sewer bond issues. 
(d)  Industrial wastewater surcharges, in addition to the normal charges calculated in accordance with section 32-161(b), shall be established for each of the following parameters: 
(1)  BOD; per pound 
(2)  Suspended solids; per pound 
(3)  Other parameters as applicable; per pound 
(e)  The surcharges shall be calculated by the following formula: 
Surcharge = (O & M cost/unit of BOD 
+ O & M cost/unit of suspended solids 
+ O & M cost/unit of any pollutant) volume contribution of user/time  
(f)  Industrial wastewater charges shall become effective on the first regular meter reading date for each user after such user is connected to the city system, and after written notice from the city of classification as an industrial user. Interim monthly charges based on domestic user charges shall be invoiced and collected during the period equitable industrial rates are being developed. On December 9, 1986, there were no industrial dischargers on the city sewerage system. 
(g)  The city council may establish classes of industrial users and assign representative strengths of wastewater to each. Such class wastewater characteristics may recognize analyses of representative users of each class based on typical data from other sources. To the extent practical, actual data for each industrial user's wastewater shall be used. Industrial users assigned standard strength parameters may request sample analyses of wastewater. Upon determination of the characteristics on samples representative of the wastewater on not less than three working days, such characteristics shall be used in determining the charges until the wastewater may again be sampled. 
(h)  The city council may consolidate the component charges of the industrial wastewater charges into a single volume charge which includes the characteristic charges computed for a unit volume of 1,000 gallons. Such a weighted volume charge may be applicable to a class of users or to each user where his actual wastewater characteristics are known. 
(i)  Industrial users exhibiting marked, seasonal load variations shall pay charges which recognize the dedication or reservation of capacity for the treatment of their seasonal peak operating loads, and any unusual operation and maintenance costs directly related to such seasonal loads. This provision shall apply only to those industrial users whose peaks loads exceed ten percent of any capacity parameter and are at least twice its off-season loads. 
(j)  The user charge system in this article shall take precedence over any pre-existing agreements concerning the charges to be collected for providing wastewater treatment services or reserving capacity. 
(Code 1993, § 16-79; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 19) 
Sec. 32-163. - Billing and collecting. 
(a)  Sewer user bills shall be rendered monthly and shall be due and payable within ten to 14 days of the date of billing. Delinquent amounts shall be subject to a ten percent penalty for each billing period; and if not paid, service shall be discontinued without further notice for nonpayment. The city reserves the right to vary the dates or length of period covered, temporarily or permanently if necessary or desirable. 
(b)  Bills for sewer service shall be calculated in accordance with the city's published rate schedule then in effect and will be based on the amount consumed for the period covered by meter readings. 
(c)  Charges for service commences when the sewer tap is installed and connection made, whether used or not. Sixty days may be allowed for hookup on initial installation of a sewer line. 
(d)  Failure to receive bills shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent or relieve the consumer from payment. 
(e)  Sewer connections that have been plugged or severed due to delinquent accounts shall be unplugged or reconnected to the sewer system upon the payment of all outstanding sewer user bills and payment of a reconnection fee, as provided in the most current fee schedule, on file in the city clerk's office. 
(f)  Partial payments will be applied in the following order: penalty, solid waste, sewer, and water charges. 
(Code 1993, § 16-80; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 20; Ord. No. 1997-10, 3-11-1997) 
Sec. 32-164. - Sewer user bill complaints and adjustments. 
(a)  If a sewer user believes a bill to be in error, the user shall present a claim, in person or in writing, at the water department office before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claims, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective to prevent discontinuance of service as provided in this article. The user may pay such bill under protest and payment under protest shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  A user's sewer bill shall be adjusted automatically in the event of a similar adjustment of a water bill pursuant to section 32-111, provided the basis for adjustment was based on circumstances which also affected the sewer bill. 
(c)  The city council shall be the final reviewing authority for all appeals. 
(Code 1993, § 16-81; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 21) 
Sec. 32-165. - Determining minimum distances and sizes for sewer extensions. 
    All extensions of the sanitary sewer service shall be governed by the following: 
(1)  The minimum distance for any extension of a sanitary sewer main shall be determined by the city council. In general, the minimum distance for extensions shall be made from manhole to manhole. 
(2)  The size of sanitary sewer mains to be installed and the other required system facilities shall be determined by the city council in accordance with the recognized standards and accepted engineering practices and design, and in accordance with applicable system plans adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1993, § 16-82; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 22) 
Sec. 32-166. - Sewer service extension outside corporate limits. 
    Sewer service may be provided to customers outside of the corporate limits of the city upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Developers, subdividers, owners, and others wishing such service shall submit for approval to the city preliminary plans and specifications for all sewer lines for proposed projects which plans shall comply with all requirements made by the city for such installations. Such plans must be approved before final plans are prepared. The city engineer shall review and approve all final plans and specifications as per fee set in city's fee schedule in the city clerk's office. All installations must comply with such plans and must be inspected by a full-time resident inspector during construction and by a city representative upon completion. Construction of the sewer extension shall be a licensed utility contractor under the direction of a professional engineer under contract with developer or the city. As-built, utility plans and letter of certification of completion must be provided to the city and appropriate state agencies. 
(2)  The developers, subdividers, owners, etc., shall provide easements in such form as the city may require for lines, manholes, and appurtenances and for installation and maintenance thereof. Such easements shall be furnished prior to any service being furnished. 
(3)  At the time of submission of plans for the systems the owners shall ask that the property to be served and all improvements thereon be annexed to the city at such times as the city finds this lawful and practical. Such request for annexation shall remain open indefinitely, shall bind the heirs, successors, grantees and assigns of the owner, developer, subdivider, etc., and may be accepted by the city at any time unless the area involved becomes annexed to some other municipality. The request for annexation may be withdrawn if the city does not provide sewer services, as requested by the developer, owner, subdivider, etc., but not if such action is caused by failure to pay for services rendered or for damages done to the system or systems by the willful or negligent acts of the developers, subdividers, owners, etc., or their heirs, successors, grantees, or assigns of the agents, servants, employees, invitees, or licensees or any of them. 
(4)  This article in its entirety shall be in full force and effect with respect to all users outside the city limits that are connected to the city sewer system. 
(Code 1993, § 16-83; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 23; Ord. No. 1995-39, 11-28-1995) 
Sec. 32-167. - Financing sewer extensions outside corporate limits. 
(a)  All applications for sewer extensions outside the corporate limits shall be made as provided in this article. 
(b)  If an application is approved by the city council, the owner shall be required to pay 100 percent of the total cost of all extensions including the cost of engineering and resident inspection provided by the city, if applicable; provided the city may participate to the extent agreed upon by the city council in the cost of larger size mains that are in excess of the size mains required to serve the project. No reimbursement shall be made upon annexation and all sewer lines connected to the city system and located outside the corporate limits shall become the property of the city at the time such facilities are connected. 
(c)  Prior to the beginning of any construction of sewer extensions by the city, the owner shall deposit with the city funds in an amount equal to 100 percent of the total estimated cost of such extensions. Upon receipt of such funds a written contract shall be entered into by and between the city and the property owner in accordance with the requirements of this article. Such contract shall provide that in the event the funds deposited exceed the amount of the total extension cost when completed, that a portion in excess of the total cost will be refunded to the owner without interest. Such contract shall also provide that if the amount deposited is less than the total cost when completed, the owner shall pay such additional amount to the city upon demand. 
(d)  In lieu of depositing funds, the owner may execute a surety bond or similar document guaranteeing payment for such extension. 
(Code 1993, § 16-84; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 24) 
Sec. 32-168. - Financing sewer extensions within corporate limits. 
(a)  Extensions to approved subdivisions or developed property shall be made in the following manner: 
(1)  When application is received requesting the extension of sanitary sewer service to serve property within the corporate limits which is: 
a.  Developed or has been previously approved as a subdivision; or 
b.  Where streets have previously been dedicated and accepted by the city and where such area is not part of a new subdivision which has not been approved by the city; 
the developer or other person designated by the city council shall estimate the cost of the project and present the application for such extension, the estimated cost and other required information to the city council for approval. If the application is approved by the city council, and subject to the availability of funds, the city will install, or have installed by contract under its supervision, the extension which has been approved, and such extension shall be financed in accordance with subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(2)  When an approved sanitary sewer extension project has been completed and the total cost thereof has been determined, a percentage of the total cost of such sanitary sewer extension may be assessed against the property owners whose property abuts upon such extension at an equal rate per front foot in accordance with and under the authority granted to the city by G.S. 160A-216 through 160A-237. The remaining percentage of the total cost of such extension shall be borne by the city from funds appropriated for this purpose. The costs of pumping stations and system facilities installed for general public use shall be paid for by the city and shall not be included in the cost shared by property owners. 
(3)  Any property owner shall have the opportunity to pay his proportionate share of the cost of such extension after the assessment roll is confirmed rather than paying his share in equal annual installments with interest as required by the statute. 
(b)  Extensions to proposed subdivisions within the city limits shall be made in the following manner: The provisions of section 32-166 shall be applicable to extensions to and in all proposed subdivisions in the city limits. The developer shall be responsible for 100 percent of the sewer extension costs, including engineering and resident inspection services provided by the city, if applicable. 
(c)  Facilities shall be excluded in determining the owner's share of costs, as follows: When the city determines that it is advisable to install larger-size facilities that are necessary to serve the property whose owner is requesting such extension, the difference in the cost of the larger-size facilities over and above the cost of the facilities required to serve the property whose owner is requesting such extension shall be paid for by the city and excluded from the total cost to the property owner. 
(d)  The following exceptions are authorized: Nothing in this article shall prevent the city council from extending sanitary sewer mains on its own motion without receipt of an application from property owners, and assessing the cost of such extensions in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, when, in the opinion of the city council, the general public interest demands such extension of service. 
(Code 1993, § 16-85; Res. of 12-9-1986(1), § 25) 
Secs. 32-169-32-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local governments providing public water service must prepare local water supply plan, G.S. 143-355. 

Sec. 32-190. - Water shortage. 
(a)  A water shortage shall be deemed to exist when the water supply available through the facilities of the city becomes so reduced that the citizens cannot be supplied with water to protect their health and safety without substantially curtailing the water demand. 
(b)  In the event of a water shortage, the mayor of the city is authorized, empowered, and directed to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such state and the severity thereof, and in order to more effectively protect the health and safety of the people within the city, to place in effect the restrictive provisions hereinafter authorized. 
(Code 1993, § 16-110; Ord. No. 1998-10, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 32-191. - Unlawful to use water contrary to the provisions of article. 
    In the event the mayor issues any such proclamation described in subsection 32-190(b), then it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use or permit the use of water from the water system except within the restrictions contained in the proclamation until such time as the ordinance is amended or repealed, or until the mayor, by public proclamation, has declared a particular stage of the water shortage to be over and the restrictions applicable to it no longer in effect. 
(Code 1993, § 16-111; Ord. No. 1998-10, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 32-192. - Restrictive measures in effect at each stage of shortage. 
(a)  Stage I. In the event that water pumping levels or mechanical problems exist which limit water production to 90 percent of normal daily demand, a Stage I water shortage alert shall be in effect and the following steps will be taken and these voluntary water restrictions directed: 
(1)  An extensive publicity campaign will be initiated using public media and specialized methods to inform the public of an impending water shortage. 
(2)  Residential consumers will be encouraged to practice the following conservation measures: 
a.  Use shower for bathing rather than bathtub and limit shower to no more than five minutes. 
b.  Limit flushing of toilets by multiple usage. 
c.  Use faucets intermittently while shaving or rinsing dishes and do not allow constant water flow. 
d.  Limit use of clothes washers and dishwashers. When used, operate only when fully loaded. 
e.  Limit lawn watering to that which is necessary for grass to survive. 
f.  Water shrubbery the minimum required to provide for their survival, reusing household water when possible. 
g.  Limit car washing to the minimum. 
h.  Delay washing down outside areas such as sidewalks, patios, etc., until the emergency is over. 
i.  Install water flow restrictive devices in showerheads. 
j.  Use disposable and biodegradable dishes. 
k.  Install water saving devices such as bricks, plastic bottles, or commercial units in toilet tanks. 
l.  Limit hours of operation of water cooled air conditioners which use any public water supply. 
m.  Encourage conservation in public buildings, institutions, dormitories, hotels, etc. by reducing water consumption by installation of water flow control devises, and by only periodic flushing of urinals. 
(b)  Stage II. In the event water pumping levels or mechanical problems exist which limit water production of 80 percent of normal daily demand, a Stage II water shortage emergency shall be in effect, and the restrictions set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall become mandatory and in addition, the following stringent, mandatory water restrictions shall be imposed. It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Water lawns, shrubbery, flowers and vegetable gardens except during the hours between 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturday. 
(2)  Operate a water cooled air conditioning unit or other equipment using a public water supply that does not recycle cooling water, except when health and safety make this absolutely necessary. 
(3)  Introduce water into swimming pools except to the extent necessary to maintain operation of commercial pools. 
(4)  Wash any motor vehicle including commercial washing. 
(5)  Serve water in a public restaurant except upon request. 
(6)  Allow water to run except when being used in accordance with the water restrictions then in effect or using water in an amount in excess of that necessary to accomplish allowed purposes. 
(c)  Stage III. In the event water pumping levels or mechanical problems exist which limit water production to 70 percent of normal daily demand, a Stage III water shortage crisis shall be in effect and a system of water rationing shall be put in effect in addition to all previously imposed restrictions. 
(d)  The water supply will be controlled and rationed. It shall be unlawful to fail to act in accordance therewith or use water in any manner not permitted or to attempt to evade or avoid water rationing restrictions. 
(Code 1993, § 16-112; Ord. No. 1998-10, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 32-193. - Penalty for violation. 
    Each violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate misdemeanor punishable and upon conviction punished by a fine not exceeding $50.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days as provided by G.S. 14-4, and in addition thereto, such violation may be enjoined and restrained as provided in G.S. 160A-175. 
(Code 1993, § 16-113; Ord. No. 1998-10, 4-28-1998) 
PART IV - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE[1] 
Appendices 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ordinance No. 2001-19, adopted June 12, 2001, enacted the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) for the Town of Morehead City. Those provisions have been set out herein as adopted. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Capitalization and numbering changes have only been made for uniformity of style. Amendments to the UDO are shown in history notes in parentheses at the end of the affected sections. 
Federal law reference- Preservation of local zoning authority concerning wireless telecommunications facilities, 47 USC 322(c)(7); limited federal preemption of state and local zoning laws affecting amateur radio facilities, Memorandum Opinion and Order, PRB-1, 101 FCC 2d 952 (1985) and 47 CFR 97.15(b); Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, 42 USC 2000cc et seq. 
State Law reference- Planning agency, G.S. 160A-361; supplemental powers, G.S. 160A-363; subdivision regulation, G.S. 160A-371; grant of zoning power, G.S. 160A-381; planning agency and zoning plan, G.S. 160A-387; board of adjustment, G.S. 160A-388. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1-1 - Title 
    This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Morehead City Unified Development Ordinance." 
1-2 - Authority 
1-2.1  This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in G.S. 160A-174 which states that a town may, by ordinance, define, prohibit, regulate, or abate acts, omissions, or conditions detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of its citizens and the peace and dignity of the town, and may define and abate nuisances, and G.S. 160A-363 which allows cities to combine ordinances related to planning and development into a unified ordinance. 
1-2.2  Whenever any provision of this Ordinance refers to or cites a section of the North Carolina General Statutes (G.S.) and that section is later amended or superseded, the Ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 1, 1-10-2006) 
1-3 - Jurisdiction 
1-3.1  This Ordinance shall be effective throughout the town's planning jurisdiction. The town's planning jurisdiction comprises the area within the corporate boundaries of the town as well as the extraterritorial area as shown on the Official Zoning Map for the Town of Morehead City. Such planning jurisdiction may be modified from time to time in accordance with G.S. 160A-360. However, bona fide farms shall not be affected by these regulations, but any use of such property for nonfarm purposes shall be subject to these regulations. 
1-3.2  In addition to other locations required by law, a copy of the official zoning map showing the boundaries of the town's planning jurisdiction shall be available for public inspection in the planning department. 
1-4 - Purpose 
    The purpose of these regulations shall be to accomplish compatible development of the land within the planning area of the Town of Morehead City in accordance with the Morehead City Land Use Plan and in a manner which will substantially promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the people, as well as to provide for efficiency and economy in the process of development; to make adequate provisions for traffic; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other hazards; to provide for light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; to protect property against blight and depreciation and for other purposes in accordance with the Land Use Plan for the Town of Morehead City. 
    This Ordinance will also establish procedures and standards for the development and subdivision of land within the territorial jurisdiction of the Town of Morehead City. It is further designed to provide for the orderly growth and development of the town; for the coordination of transportation networks and within proposed subdivisions with existing or planned streets and highways and with other public facilities; for the dedication or reservation of recreation areas serving residents of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision and of right-of-way or easements for street and utility purposes; and for the distribution of population and traffic in a manner that will avoid congestion and overcrowding and will create conditions essential to public health, safety, and the general welfare. This Ordinance is designed to further facilitate adequate provisions for water, sewerage, parks, schools, and playgrounds, and also to facilitate the further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2, 1-10-2006) 
1-5 - Effective Date 
    The provisions in this Ordinance were originally adopted and became effective on June 12, 2001. 
1-6 - Relationship to Existing Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances 
    To the extent that the provisions of this Ordinance are the same in substance as the previously adopted provisions that they replace in the town's zoning and subdivision ordinances, they shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments unless otherwise specifically provided. In particular, a situation that did not constitute a lawful, nonconforming situation under the previously adopted zoning or subdivision ordinance does not achieve lawful nonconforming status under this Ordinance merely by the repeal of the zoning or subdivision ordinance. 
1-7 - Relationship to Coastal Area Management Act (CAMA) Land Use Plan 
    It is the intention of the City Council that this Ordinance implement the planning policies adopted by the City Council for the town and its extraterritorial planning area, as reflected in the CAMA Land Use Plan and other planning documents. While the City Council reaffirms its commitment that this Ordinance and any amendment to it be in conformity with adopted planning policies, the City Council hereby expresses its intent that neither this Ordinance nor any amendment to it may be challenged on the basis of any alleged nonconformity with any planning document (see Article 21, Coastal Area Management). 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 1-13-2009) 
1-8 - No Use of Land or Buildings Except in Conformity With Ordinance Provisions 
1-8.1  Subject to Article 8 of this Ordinance (Nonconforming Situations), no person may use or occupy any land or buildings or authorize or permit the use or occupancy of land or buildings under his control except in accordance with all of the applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
1-8.2  For purposes of this section, the "use" or "occupancy" of a building or land relates to anything and everything that is done to, on, or in that building or land. 
1-9 - Fees 
1-9.1  Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration, inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be charged to applicants for zoning permits, sign permits, conditional-use permits, special-use permits, subdivision plat approval, zoning amendments, variances and other administrative relief. The amount of the fees charged shall be as set forth in the town's fee schedule. 
1-9.2  Fees established in accordance with subsection 1-8.1 shall be paid upon submission of a signed application or notice of appeal. 
1-10 - Severability 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentence, clauses, or phrases of this Ordinance since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation into this Ordinance of such unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase. 
1-11 - Computation of Time 
1-11.1  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a time period upon which an act is to be completed shall be computed by excluding the day of notification and including the entire last day of period expiration. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall be excluded. 
1-11.2  Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever a person is required to do some act within a prescribed period and the notice or paper is served by mail, three (3) days shall be added to the prescribed period. 
1-12 - Abrogation 
    This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. 
1-13 - Conflicts of Interest 
    For legislative and advisory decisions, Council and Planning Board members are not to vote on ordinance or recommendations if they have a direct, substantial, readily-identified financial interest in the outcome of the decision. For quasi-judicial decisions, members must not participate in or vote on any matter where they have a fixed opinion on the case prior to the hearing, they have undisclosed ex-parte communications, have a close family, business or associational ties with an affected person, or have a financial interest in the outcome of the case. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 3, 1-10-2006) 
ARTICLE 2. - BASIC DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS 

2-1 - Word Interpretation 
    For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain words shall be interpreted as follows. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this Ordinance shall have their customary dictionary definition. 
2-1.1  As used in this Ordinance, words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
2-1.2  Words used in the singular in this Ordinance include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
2-1.3  Words used in the present tense include future tense. 
2-1.4  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, corporation, company, trust, and partnership as well as an individual. 
2-1.5  The word "may" is permissive. 
2-1.6  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive. 
2-1.7  The words "used for" shall include the meaning "designed for." 
2-1.8  The words "used" or "occupied" shall mean "intended, designed, and arranged to be used or occupied." 
2-1.9  The word "lot" shall include the words "plot," "parcel," "tract," "site," and "premises." 
2-1.10  The word "structure" shall include the word "building." 
2-1.11  The word "Council" shall include "City Council" of the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina. 
2-1.12  The words "Planning Board" shall mean the "Town of Morehead City Planning Board." 
2-1.13  The word "town" shall mean the "Town of Morehead City," a municipal corporation of the State of North Carolina. 
2-1.14  The words "City Manager" shall mean the "Town of Morehead City [City] Manager." 
2-1.15  The words "map," "zoning map," and "Morehead City Zoning Map" shall mean the "Official Zoning Map for the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina." 
2-1.16  The words "Board of Adjustment" shall mean the "Town of Morehead City Board of Adjustment." 
2-1.17  The words "Ordinance" and "regulation" shall mean the "Town of Morehead City Unified Development Ordinance." 
2-1.18  The words "dwelling," "dwelling units," "rooming house," "rooming units," and "premises" shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
2-2 - Definitions of Basic Terms 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the context, the words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this Ordinance. 
2-2.1  Abandoned vehicle. As authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303, an abandoned motor vehicle is one that: 
(A)  Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or 
(B)  Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven (7) days; or 
(C)  Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than twenty-four (24) hours; or 
(D)  Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant, or lessee thereof, for longer than two (2) hours. 
2-2.1.1  Abandoned (other than vehicles). In addition to those definitions provided by state codes, local ordinances and case law, the term "abandoned" also means and refers to any item which has ceased to be used for its designed and intended purpose. The following factors, among others, will be considered in determining whether or not an item has been abandoned: 
(A)  Present operability and functional utility; 
(B)  The date of last effective use; 
(C)  The condition of disrepair or damage; 
(D)  The last time an effort was made to repair or rehabilitate the item; 
(E)  The status of registration or licensing of the item; 
(F)  The age and degree of obsolescence; 
(G)  The cost of rehabilitation or repair of the item versus its market value; and 
(H)  The nature of the area and the location of the item. 
2-2.2  Abandonment. To visibly cease or discontinue a use or activity, but excluding temporary or short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility, or during normal period of vacation or seasonal closure. 
2-2.2.1  Abate. In addition to its common meaning, to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such an extent as the enforcement officer in his/her judgment shall determine is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the community and to carry out the purposes and provisions of this article. 
2-2.3  Abutting. Having a common border with or being separated from such a common border by a right-of-way, alley, or easement. 
2-2.4  Accessory building or use. A structure or use that: is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a principal building or use; is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal use served; contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants, business, or industry in the principal buildings or principal use served; and is located on the same lot as the principal building or use served except as allowed by section 14-31.3 (see section 14-31). Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building. 
2-2.5  Accessory outdoor displays. The outdoor display or storage of merchandise on private property which is subordinate to the indoor retail establishment. 
2-2.6  Accessory personal services. This classification shall include a barber/beauty shop, tanning salon, and other similar uses. The customer base shall be limited to the residents of the multifamily project in which the accessory personal service is located and the services shall be provided in a public area of the multifamily project. 
2-2.7  Accessory structure (appurtenant structure). Refer to accessory building or use. 
2-2.8  Addition (to an existing building). An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. 
2-2.9  Address. The official house, building, or structure number assigned by the town for a specific lot, building, or portion thereof. 
2-2.10  Adult cabaret. Any place which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment (see section 14-28). 
2-2.11  Adult day care center. An agency, organization, or individual providing daytime care to adults not related by blood or marriage, or not the legal wards of the attendant adult at any place other than an occupied dwelling. 
2-2.12  Adult day care center, family. A private residence where care, protection, and supervision are provided, for a fee, at least twice a week to no more than six (6) adults at one (1) time who are not related by blood or marriage. 
2-2.13  Adult establishment. Any place defined in G.S. 14-202.10 or an adult cabaret (see section 14-28). 
2-2.14  AEC. Area of Environmental Concern. 
2-2.15  Air rights. The ownership or control of all land, property, and that area of space at and above a horizontal plane shall be at a height that is reasonably necessary or legally required for the full and free use of the ground surface. 
2-2.16  Alley. A public thoroughfare which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
2-2.17  Alteration. Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy of an existing structure. 
2-2.18  Alteration, structural. Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as load-bearing walls, floor joists, columns, beams, or girders; provided, however, that the application of any exterior siding to an existing building shall not be considered a structural alteration. 
2-2.19  Amusement arcade. A building or part of a building in which five (5) or more pinball machines, video games, or other similar player-operated amusement devices are maintained. This use is categorized as "recreation use, indoor." 
2-2.20  Animal hospital/veterinary clinic. A place or facility which provides dental, medical, and surgical care for dogs, cats, and other domesticated animals within an enclosed building. Kennels are not included within this definition. 
2-2.21  Antenna. Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves external to or attached to the exterior of any building. 
2-2.22  Apartment. A room or suite of two (2) or more rooms which is designed or intended for occupancy by, or which is occupied by, one (1) family or person. 
2-2.23  Appeal. A request for a review of the Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance. For floodplain management and flood insurance purposes, a request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance. 
2-2.24  Approval Authority. A zoning vested right shall be deemed established upon the valid approval, or conditional approval, by the City Council or Board of Adjustment, as applicable, of a site specific development plan, following notice and public hearing. 
2-2.24.1  Arcade club. An establishment that features a combination of video games, arcade games, and/or table games such as air hockey or foosball and/or pinball machines and may include a bar area where alcohol may be sold. 
2-2.25  Area of special flood hazard. See Special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
2-2.25.1  Attractive nuisance. Any condition which is unsafe, unhealthy, unprotected and might prove detrimental to children whether on the premises of a building, or on an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which might prove hazardous or dangerous to inquisitive minors. 
2-2.26  Auction house. A place of business offering for sale or resale art, antiques, jewelry, porcelain, and similar goods which are owned by the owner/operator or have been placed there by consignment for normal business sales, and which periodically holds auctions on the premises for the purpose of selling said goods to the highest bidder at public auction. 
2-2.27  Authorizing official. The supervisory employee of the police department or the town's building inspector, respectively, designated to authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of section 22-2. 
2-2.28  Automobile repair garage. An establishment where the following services are available: major mechanical repairs, including engine overhaul and transmission work; body rework; painting; and customizing. Repair garages can also offer services similar to service stations (see section 14-25). 
2-2.29  Automobile service station. A building or lot dedicated to the rendering of automotive services such as the sale of gasoline, oil, grease, and accessories and the minor repair of automobiles such as tuneups, brake adjustments, and tire changes, excluding body working, overhauling, and painting (see section 14-25). 
2-2.30  Automobile wrecking. Refer to junkyard. 
2-2.31  Bar/cocktail lounge. Any premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages which are sold at retail for consumption on the premises and minors are excluded therefrom by law. It shall not mean a premises wherein such beverages are sold in conjunction with the sale of food for consumption on the premises and the sale of said beverages according to state statutes (see section 14-26). 
2-2.32  Base flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
2-2.33  Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
2-2.34  Base flood elevation (BFE). A determination as published in the Flood Insurance Study of the water surface elevations of the base flood. 
2-2.35  Bed and breakfast inn. A house, or portion thereof, where short term lodging rooms and breakfast are provided. The operator of the inn shall live on the premises or in adjacent premises. 
2-2.35.1  Berm. A grassed, earthen mound designed to provide visual interest and screening and/or decrease noise. 
2-2.36  Best management practices (BMP). A structural or nonstructural management based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce nonpoint source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals. 
2-2.37  Billboard. Refer to Sign, outdoor advertising. 
2-2.38  Block. A parcel of land which is bounded on all sides by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels, bodies of water, or a combination thereof. 
2-2.39  Boardinghouse. A building dedicated to the lodging or feeding or both of nontransient persons for compensation. 
2-2.40  Boat sales/storage. An establishment in business to sell and store boats. This definition excludes commercial marinas. This use is classified under retail, marine-related. 
2-2.41  Borrow pit. Any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, or other material is excavated below the grade for any purpose other than that necessary and incidental to site grading or building construction. Borrow pits must meet any applicable state requirements. 
2-2.42  Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
2-2.43  Reserved. 
2-2.44  Reserved. 
2-2.45  Building. Any structure which has a roof and which is designated for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." For floodplain management and flood insurance purposes, see Structure. 
2-2.46  Building height. The vertical distance from the average finished grade of the building lot to the highest point of the building, including rooftop structures as defined in the North Carolina Building Code (i.e. stairwells, elevator shafts, etc.). 
2-2.47  Building line. The line, parallel to the street line, that passes through the point of the principal building nearest the front lot line. 
2-2.48  Building setback line. Refer to Setback line. 
2-2.48.1  Bulkhead/sea wall. Any manmade structure erected for the purpose of preventing earth, soil or sand from along the banks of a canal, waterway or boat basin from washing or otherwise eroding into the waters of the canal, waterway or boat basin, or which structure prevents the water of the canal, waterway or boat basin from eroding or washing away the bank or shoreline of the property. 
2-2.49  Business residence. A building which contains both a business and a residence and which is subject to the conditions of section 14-20. 
2-2.49.1  Canopy tree. A tree that is normally more than thirty (30) feet in height at maturity that provides shade from its foliage mass; also individual or tree groups forming an overhead cover. Recommended canopy trees are included in Appendix VI. 
2-2.50  Car wash. A freestanding building or structure providing facilities for washing motor vehicles. 
2-2.51  Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated within the boundaries of such cemeteries. This definition does not include pet cemeteries (see section 14-8). 
2-2.51.1  Changeable copy. A sign on which letters, numbers, or other copy can be changed to display different messages or images. This definition includes mechanical, manual, and electronic changeable copy of signs as well as tri-view signs. 
2-2.51.2  Changeable copy, electronic. A sign conveying a message in an electronic format. This definition includes digital marquee signs. 
2-2.52  Child day care (after-school). A facility receiving a payment, fee, or grant for the care of six (6) or more children thirteen (13) years of age or less for four (4) hours or less per school day and more than four (4) hours during school holidays and breaks. 
2-2.53  Child day care (home). A private residence where care, protection, and supervision are provided for a fee at least twice a week to no more than five (5) children at one (1) time, including children of the adult supervisor (see sections 14-10 and 14-13). 
2-2.54  Child day care (preschool, nursery). Any child care arrangement or facility under which six (6) or more children of less than thirteen (13) years of age, not including the operator's after-school children, receive care away from their own home at least once per week for more than four (4) hours but less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, regardless of the time of day (and regardless of whether the same children attend regularly), by persons other than his parents, grandparents, aunts, uncles, brothers and sisters who are not minors and guardians or full-time custodians. The following are not included: public schools, nonpublic schools, whether or not accredited by the State Department of Public Instruction, which regularly and exclusively provide a course of grade school instruction to children who are of public school age; summer camps having children in full-time residence; summer day camps which are run by nonprofit organizations exempt from taxation pursuant to Article 4 of Ordinance 105 of the General Statutes (G.S. 105-103 et seq.); and facilities licensed under Article 2 of Ordinance 122C of the General Statutes (G.S. 122C-21 et seq.). 
2-2.54.1  Chronic violator. A person who owns property whereupon, in the previous calendar year, the municipality gave notice of violation at least three (3) times under any provisions of the public nuisance ordinance. 
2-2.55  City block. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a city block shall mean a block located in Old Morehead City which totals 2.18 acres. Old Morehead City consists of the area between Calico Creek and Bogue Sound from 34th Street east on the south side of Arendell Street and from 25th Street east on the north side of Arendell Street. 
2-2.56  Church. An institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings, and other activities. The term "church" shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held (see section 14-9). 
2-2.57  Clear cutting. The systematic removal of trees, shrubs, or undergrowth with the intention of preparing real property for nonagricultural development purposes. This definition shall not include the selective removal of trees and shrubs when the soil is left relatively undisturbed, removal of dead trees, or normal mowing operations. 
2-2.58  Clinic. A building designed and used for the care and treatment of human patients that does not include overnight care facilities. 
2-2.59  Club or lodge, private. An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities operated on a nonprofit basis for the benefit of its members and holding a certificate of nonprofit organization from the Secretary of State of the State of North Carolina (see section 14-16). 
2-2.60  Cluster housing. Dwellings which are grouped together on lots which do not necessarily meet the minimum lot size requirements but do meet the density requirements of the district in which it is located. 
2-2.61  Cluster housing development. A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. The development must meet the density requirement of the zoning district in which it is to be located (see section 14-23). 
2-2.62  CAMA (North Carolina's Coastal Area Management Act). This act, along with the Dredge and Fill Law and the Federal Coastal Zone Management Act, is managed through North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources' (NCDENR's) Division of Coastal Management (DCM). 
2-2.63  Chemical storage facility. A building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products. 
2-2.64  Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a FIRM or other adopted flood map as determined in section 18-3.2 of this code, as Zone VE or V1-30. 
2-2.65  Commission. The North Carolina Coastal Resources Commission. 
2-2.66  Communication services. This classification includes businesses which are associated with the communication field including answering services, radio services, cellular telephone services, etc. 
2-2.66.01  Communication tower. A structure that is designed and constructed for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas including without limitation self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. 
2-2.66.1  Reserved. 
2-2.66.5  Condominium hotel/condotel. Multifamily dwelling of ten (10) or more residential units in condominium form of ownership utilized for mixed transient and permanent occupancy, in which some or all units may be rented out by the owner[s] thereof on a daily or more extended basis, and which shall have on-site front desk staffed twenty-four (24) hours, seven (7) days a week every week, three hundred sixty-five (365) days a year and management services. Other typical hotel services may be provided for occupants of the premises such as cleaning, laundry, switchboard service, meeting rooms, limited breakfast service and fitness center; provided, however, that no full service restaurant or bar shall be operated on the premises. The maximum size of the facility will be limited by available parking spaces based upon two (2) spaces per unit. 
2-2.67  Congregate housing. Any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units. 
2-2.67.5  Crisis response ministry center. A non-profit, charitable, or religious organization, recognized as a voting member of state Voluntary Organization Assisting in Disaster (VOAD), providing crisis cleanup and recovery services in response to a governmental declared disaster, and including ancillary services on its premises including offices, storage of crisis response related equipment and materials, and lodging and feeding of short-term volunteers. A crisis response ministry center may be permitted as either a principle use or as an accessory use to a church within the CD, DB, or IC districts, only. 
2-2.68  Cul-de-sac. A short street having but one (1) end open to traffic and the other end being permanently or temporarily terminated in which a vehicular turnaround is provided. 
2-2.69  Curb cut. A lowered or cut-away curb for purposes of ingress and egress for vehicles to property abutting a public street. 
2-2.70  Dedication. A transfer, by the owner, of a right to use land for stated purposes. Because a transfer of property rights is entitled, dedication must be made by written instrument, and is completed by an acceptance. 
2-2.71  Density. The number of dwelling units permitted per net acre of land. 
2-2.72  Deteriorated. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and can be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this Ordinance at a cost not in excess of fifty (50) percent of its value, as determined by finding of the inspector. 
2-2.73  Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
2-2.73.1  Diameter at breast height (DBH). Diameter of a tree measured at four and one-half (41/2) feet (fifty-four (54) inches) above the ground. 
2-2.74  Dilapidated. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and cannot be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this Ordinance at a cost not in excess of fifty (50) percent of its value, as determined by finding of the inspector. 
2-2.75  Discontinue. To visibly break the continuity; cease to operate, administer, use, produce, or take. 
2-2.75.1  Dismantled. That from which essential equipment, parts or contents have been removed or stripped if the outward appearance verifies the removal. 
2-2.76  Disposal. Defined as in G.S. 130A-290(a)(6). 
2-2.76.1  Distillery. A distillery as permitted by N.C.G.S. is an enterprise which engages in one or more of the following: 
(A)  Manufacture, purchase, import, possess, and transport ingredients and equipment used in the distillation of spirituous liquor; 
(B)  Sell, deliver and ship spirituous liquor in closed containers at wholesale to exporters and local boards within the state, and, subject to the laws of other jurisdictions, at wholesale or retail to private or public agencies or establishments of other states or nations; 
(C)  Transport into or out of the distillery the maximum amount of liquor allowed under federal law, if the transportation is related to the distilling process. 
2-2.77  District, zoning. A section of the Town of Morehead City within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
2-2.77.5  Dog training facility. A business where basic training skills for the mutual benefit of both humans and dogs is conducted in a structured class setting. This definition shall not be construed to include trainers of attack and security dogs. Dog training facilities are subject to additional requirements contained under Section 14-44. 
2-2.78  Dormitory. A building used as living quarters for persons comprising a student body or a religious order or receiving resident care; i.e., an accessory use for a college, boarding school, orphanage, convent, monastery, or other principal institutional use. 
2-2.79  Dry cleaning/laundry establishment. A laundromat which is primarily self-service and/or has a laundering/dry cleaning service available for walk-in customers. 
2-2.80  Duplex. Refer to dwelling, two-family (duplex). 
2-2.81  Dwelling. A building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential purposes, including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels and boardinghouses. 
2-2.82  Dwelling, multifamily. A residence designed for or occupied by three (3) or more families, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each, including apartments, hotel apartments, and group housing projects, (including some forms of unit ownership (condominium) development and townhouse development). For townhouse development, refer to section 4-30. 
2-2.83  Dwelling, single-family, detached. A detached residence, other than a manufactured home, designed for or occupied by one (1) family, entirely surrounded by open space. 
2-2.84  Dwelling, two-family (duplex). A residence designed for or occupied by two (2) families, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. 
2-2.85  Dwelling unit. A building or portion thereof providing complete living facilities for one (1) family. 
2-2.86  Easement. A grant by the property owner of land for a specified use by another. 
2-2.86.1  Election. A formal and organized process of electing or being elected, of members of a political body, sanctioned by the Carteret County Board of Elections. 
2-2.87  Elevated building. A basement building which has its reference level raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
2-2.88  Emergency shelter mission. A nonprofit, charitable, or religious organization providing boarding and/or lodging and ancillary services on its premises to primarily indigent, needy, homeless, or transient persons. Soup kitchens shall be included within this definition (see Section 14-22). 
2-2.89  Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
2-2.89.1  Enforcement officer. Same as "public officer" (see subsection 2-2.210). 
2-2.90  Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is pre-FIRM. 
2-2.91  Extermination. The control and extermination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making in accessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods. 
2-2.92  Fabricating shop. A shop which assembles prepared parts into finished products. This definition does not include the manufacturing of the prepared parts. 
2-2.93  Facade. The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building. 
2-2.94  Family. One (1) or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, fraternity, or sorority house or a hotel. 
2-2.95  Family care home. A home: 1) with support and supervisory personnel; and 2) providing room and board, personal care, and habilitation services in a family environment for not more than six (6) resident handicapped persons. Handicapped persons are defined in G.S. 168-21(2) (see section 14-7). 
2-2.96  Family shelter home. A home providing temporary shelter for not more than nine (9) persons who are victims of domestic violence as defined by G.S. 50B-1, together with not more than two (2) persons providing supervision and other services to such persons, all of who live together as a single housekeeping unit. 
2-2.97  Farmer's market. An open air market in which fresh produce is sold. 
2-2.98  Fence. A structure, other than a building, which is a barrier and used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement. This definition includes chain-link, split rail, stockade, picket, shadow box, and other types of fences. 
2-2.98.1  Fill. The act of depositing soil, sand, stone, or other inert debris customarily used for supplementing or augmenting land. The term "fill" also applies to the added soil, sand, stone, or other deposited material. 
2-2.99  Financial institution. An establishment which conducts business involving the circulation of money, the granting of credit, the making of investments, and the provision of banking facilities. 
2-2.100  Flea market. An occasional or periodic sales activity held within a building, structure, or open area where groups of individual sellers offer goods, new and used, for sale to the public, not to include private yard sales. 
2-2.101  Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(A)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters; and 
(B)  Unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
2-2.102  Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
2-2.103  Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas have been defined as Zone A. 
2-2.104  Flood insurance. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
2-2.105  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated. 
2-2.106  Flood insurance study (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazard areas, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood insurance risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by FEMA. The flood insurance study report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), if published. 
2-2.107  Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
2-2.108  Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
2-2.109  Floodplain administrator. The individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
2-2.110  Floodplain regulations. This Ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in floodprone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
2-2.111  Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, or structures with their contents. 
2-2.112  Floodprone area. See Floodplain. 
2-2.113  Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
2-2.114  Flood zone. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
2-2.115  Floor. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. For floodplain management and flood insurance purposes, see Lowest floor. 
2-2.116  Floor area, gross. The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building, including areas used for human occupancy, including basements, attics, and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human occupancy or any floor space in accessory buildings, in the main building intended and designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this Ordinance, or any such floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and ventilating equipment. It shall include the horizontal area at each floor level devoted to stairwells and elevator shafts. 
2-2.117  Floor area ratio (FAR). The maximum square foot amount of total floor area including all stories permitted for each square foot of ground area. 
2-2.118  Freeboard. The additional amount of height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for uncertainties in the determination of flood elevations. See also Regulatory flood protection elevation. 
2-2.119  Frontage. The distance between the two (2) side lot lines as measured along the street right-of-way line. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage. 
2-2.120  Frontage road. A local street or road that is parallel to a full or partial access controlled facility and functions to provide access to adjacent land. 
2-2.121  Functionally dependent facility. A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
2-2.122  Garage, public. Any building or premises used for the storage of motor vehicles for profit. 
2-2.123  Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
2-2.123.5  Garden center. An establishment engaged in indoor and/or outdoor retailing of nursery and garden products, such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, sod, mulch, and pine straw. Garden centers may be associated with a landscaping business providing offsite landscaping services. 
2-2.124  Habitable room. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces. 
2-2.125  Health/recreational facility. Indoor facilities operated to provide exercise and health improvement opportunities and which may include, but are not limited to, gymnasiums, diet centers, weight training, exercise, racquetball, tennis, swimming pool, and related activities. This use is categorized as "recreation use, indoor." 
2-2.126  Hazardous waste management facility. A facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste as defined in G.S. Article 9 of Chapter 130A. 
2-2.127  Highest adjacent grade (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
2-2.128  Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
(A)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(B)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(C)  Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places; 
(D)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. 
2-2.129  Home occupation. An occupation, profession, activity, or use that is clearly a customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood (see section 14-10). 
2-2.130  Homeowners' or property owners' association. An organization of homeowners or property owners owning real property, residing or operating a business within a particular subdivision or planned development whose major purpose is to maintain and provide community facilities, services, or land for the common use of the residents or property owners of that subdivision or planned development. 
2-2.131  Impervious surface. The portion of a project that is covered by impenetrable or partially impenetrable cover, including buildings, pavement, recreation facilities, etc., but not including wood decking. 
2-2.132  Industry, heavy. A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions such as noise, waste, odor, vibration, etc. 
2-2.133  Industry, unoffensive. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
2-2.134  Infestation. The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
2-2.134.1  Inoperative. Incapable of functioning or producing activity for mechanical or other reasons. 
2-2.135  Inspector. The town building inspector appointed as such to administer Article 23 and including any agent of the inspector who is authorized by the inspector. 
2-2.136  Institution of higher learning. A college, university or trade school. 
2-2.136.1  Intersection point. The point at which two (2) property lines meet at a street intersection. 
2-2.137  Junk. Old, dilapidated, scrap or abandoned metal, paper, building material and equipment, bottles, glass, appliances, furniture, beds and bedding, rags, rubber, motor vehicles and parts thereof, boats and boat motors, household fixtures and salvage materials. 
2-2.138  Junked motor vehicle. As authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303.2, the term, junked motor vehicle means a vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and: 
(A)  Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or 
(B)  Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it originally was intended to move; or 
(C)  Is more than five (5) years old and appears to be worth less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
2-2.139  Junkyard. Use of property for indoor and/or outdoor storage, sale, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel, materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles and boats or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof (see section 14-12). 
2-2.140  Kennel. An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs, cats, or other household pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or selling of animals is conducted as a business (see section 14-19). 
2-2.140.1  Landscape screen. A buffer or strip of land together with plantings, groundcover, and/or walls or fences required thereon. Refer to Article 15 for landscape screen requirements. 
2-2.140.2  Landscaping. Alterations to the features of a plot of ground intended to restore the natural environment and make it more attractive through the addition of trees, shrubs, and groundcover. Refer to Article 15 for landscaping requirements. 
2-2.140.3  Landscaping plan. A plan containing the information provided for in subsection 15-6.3. 
2-2.141  Land Use Administrator. The City Manager or his/her designee, the agent for administration and enforcement of these regulations. 
2-2.141.1  Lienholder. Any person, as defined in this article, who has a recorded interest in real property, including mortgagee, beneficiary under a deed of trust, or holder or other recorded liens or who claims an interest in real property. 
2-2.142  Lot. A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet the minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot may consist of: a) a single lot of record; b) a portion of a lot of record; c) a combination of complete lots of record, a complete lot of record and portions of lots of record, or portions of lots of record; or d) a parcel of land described by metes and bounds; but in no case of division or combination shall any residual parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance (see section 2-1.9). 
2-2.143  Lot, corner. A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a street, providing that the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. For the purposes of defining setbacks, a corner lot shall have two (2) front lot lines and two (2) side lot lines. 
2-2.144  Lot coverage. That portion of an individual lot that is covered by a building or roof area, but not including decking as defined in 15 NCAC 2H.1000 (Stormwater Runoff Disposal). 
2-2.145  Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines. 
2-2.146  Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot with only one (1) frontage on a street. 
2-2.147  Lot line. A line dividing one (1) lot from another lot or from a street or alley. 
2-2.148  Lot line, front. The line dividing a street right-of-way from a lot as defined in this Ordinance. All lot lines which are parallel to the street right-of-way shall be considered front lot lines. 
2-2.149  Lot line, rear. The lot line not intersecting a front lot line that is most distance from and most closely parallel to the front lot line. 
2-2.150  Lot line, side. Any lot line not a front or rear lot line. 
2-2.151  Lot of record. A lot which is a part of a subdivision or plat which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds of Carteret County, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded in the office of the register of deeds. 
2-2.152  Lot, reversed frontage. A lot which has frontage on two (2) or more streets with access restricted to a subordinate street. 
2-2.153  Lot, single-tiered. A lot which backs up to a limited access highway, a railroad, a physical barrier, or another type of land use and to which access from the rear is usually prohibited. 
2-2.154  Lot, substandard. A lot or parcel of land that has less than the required minimum area or width as established by the zone in which it is located and provided that such lot or parcel was of record as a legally created lot on the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this title. 
2-2.155  Lot, through or double frontage. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one (1) street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double frontage lots. 
2-2.156  Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the required front setback line. 
2-2.157  Lowest adjacent grade (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk, patio slab, or deck support immediately next to the building after completion of the building. For Zone A and AO, use the natural grade elevation prior to construction. 
2-2.158  Lowest floor. For floodplain management and flood insurance purposes, the subfloor, top of slab or grade of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable elevation design requirements of this Ordinance. 
2-2.159  Maintenance guarantee. A guarantee of facilities or work to ensure the correction of any failures of any improvements required pursuant to this Ordinance and regulations or to maintain the same. 
2-2.160  Major and/or multi-unit development. Development consisting of: 
(A)  Structures on a tract of three (3) acres or more; and/or 
(B)  Nonresidential structures having a total floor area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more. 
2-2.161  Manufactured home. A structure which is transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis to HUD standards and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
2-2.162  Manufactured home park. A parcel of land under unified control that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured housing for dwelling purposes (see section 14-14). 
2-2.162.1  Manufactured ice vending machines, freestanding. An automated, freestanding building or modular unit which produces, stores, dispenses and/or bags ice to a consumer for a fee. 
2-2.163  Marina, commercial. Any dock or basin and associated structures providing permanent or temporary commercial harboring of ten (10) or more commercial and/or pleasure boats and providing services related to the facility, including, but not limited to, fuel sales, retail and food sales, drystack boat storage, and other related services (see section 14-24). 
2-2.164  Marine storage/repair yard. An establishment where the following services are available: boat building, boat storage, marine engine overhaul and repair, and boat repairs, painting, and customizing. 
2-2.164.1  Marketplace. A space, either open or within a building, where a public community market provides space to vendors to display and distribute their products and services, such as homemade arts and crafts; fresh produce; meats and fish; food and beverage distribution; entertainment; and other similar products. This definition does not include a flea market. 
2-2.165  Market value. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value) or adjusted assessed values. 
2-2.166  Massage parlor. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, or similar professional person licensed by the state. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa, or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation to the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory use. This use shall be considered as an adult establishment (see section 14-28). 
2-2.167  Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 or other vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced, refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used. 
2-2.167.5  Microbrewery. A small facility for the brewing of beer that produces less than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year. It may often include a tasting room and retail space to sell the beer to patrons on the site and may be affiliated with an attached restaurant. 
2-2.168  Minimum building setback line. Refer to setback line. 
2-2.169  Mobile home. Refer to manufactured home. 
2-2.170  Mobile home park. Refer to manufactured home park. 
2-2.171  Motel (hotel, motor inn). A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public, which may provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. 
2-2.172  Motor vehicle or vehicle. All machines designed or intended to travel over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle. 
2-2.173  Motor vehicle sales. The sale of any vehicle which requires the obtaining of a title from the North Carolina Division of Motor Vehicles. 
2-2.173.1  Multi-tenant development. A development consisting of one (1) or more lots and two (2) or more businesses, services, or other non-residential entities or establishments which share appurtenant facilities, such as driveways, pedestrian walkways, or off-street parking or loading facilities. 
2-2.173.2  Natural vegetation. A generally undisturbed, maintenance-free, self-perpetuating stand of vegetation comprised of indigenous shrubs, flowers, wild grasses, and trees. 
2-2.174  New construction. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the original version of this Ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
2-2.175  New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is completed on or after November 10, 1977. 
2-2.176  Nonconforming building or use. Any legally existing building or use which fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
2-2.177  Nonconforming building or development. For floodplain management and flood insurance purposes, any legally existing building or development which fails to comply with the current provisions of this Ordinance. 
2-2.178  Nonconforming lot. A lot which does not conform to the size requirements of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated. 
2-2.179  Nonconforming structure. Any building that does not meet the limitations on building size, height, and/or location on a lot for the district in which such building is located or the use to which such building is being put. 
2-2.180  Nonconforming use. A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use regulations for its zoning district but which complied with applicable regulations at the time the use was established. 
2-2.181  Nonencroachment area. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot as designated in the flood insurance study report. 
2-2.181.1  Nuisance. Any public nuisance proscribed by statute, regulation, or this article or known at common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
2-2.182  Nuisance vehicle. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, or unlawful, including a vehicle found to be: 
(A)  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats, or other pests; or 
(B)  A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight (8) inches in height; or 
(C)  A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or 
(D)  A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil, or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor; or 
(E)  One which has areas which cannot be operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods, etc.; or 
(F)  So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning over; or 
(G)  One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; or 
(H)  One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or 
(I)  One used by vagrants or others as a shelter or rendezvous; or 
(J)  Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public nuisance by the City Council. 
2-2.183  Nursing home (convalescent home, rest home)/assisted living facility. A health facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation. 
2-2.184  Obstruction. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
2-2.185  Occupant. Any person over one (1) year of age living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
2-2.186  Office. A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations. 
2-2.187  Official maps or plans. Any map or plans officially adopted by the Morehead City Council. 
2-2.188  Open space. An area that is intended to provide light and air and is designed for either environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes. Open space may include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative planting, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, wooded areas, and watercourses. Open space shall not be deemed to include driveways, parking lots, or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular travel and power line rights-of-way. 
2-2.189  Open space, common. Open space within or related to a development, not in individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. 
2-2.190  Openable area. That part of a window or door available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
2-2.191  Operator. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
2-2.192  Outdoor storage. The keeping of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours in an unenclosed area which is subject to the weather. 
2-2.192.1  Outdoor vending self-service kiosk. Small, stand-alone structure used to house, cover and screen outdoor vending self-service machines that dispense products or services provided to consumers for payment or at no charge (see section 14-40). 
2-2.192.2  Outdoor vending self-service machine. Any self-contained or connected appliance, machine, and/or container which dispenses or provides storage of a product or service (see section 14-40). Newspaper racks, telephone booths, automated teller machines, coin-operated rides, drink/food machines, FedEx/UPS drop-off boxes, and recycling machines are examples of vending machines as defined by this section. This definition shall not be construed as including publicly owned parking meters or change makers. 
2-2.193  Owner. Any persons who alone or jointly or severally with others shall: 
(A)  Have title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(B)  Have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Ordinance, to the same extent as if he were the owner; 
(C)  The registered owner of a vehicle; or 
(D)  The person(s) to whom property tax is assessed on personal property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county; or 
(E)  For purposes of nuisance abatement owner shall include renter(s) lessee(s) and other occupant(s) residing permanently or temporarily on real property. 
2-2.194  Reserved. 
2-2.195  Parking facility. An area where motor vehicles may be stored for the purposes of temporary, daily, or overnight off-street parking. This definition includes open parking lots as well as a public garage and parking deck. 
2-2.196  Parking, shared. The development and use of parking areas on two (2) or more separate properties for joint use by the businesses on those properties. 
2-2.197  Parking space. A unobstructed space or area other than a street or alley that is permanently reserved and maintained for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle. 
2-2.198  Parties in interest. All individuals, associations, and corporations that have interests of record in a dwelling and any that are in possession thereof. 
2-2.199  Performance guarantee. A financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by this Ordinance will be completed in compliance with the Ordinance, regulations, and the approved plans and specifications of a development. 
2-2.199.1  Person. Any individual, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, social club, fraternal organization, trust, estate, receiver, or any other entity. 
2-2.200  Personal services. This classification shall include barber/beauty shops, tanning salons, and similar uses. 
2-2.201  Planned development. A planned development is: 
(A)  Land under unified control, to be planned and developed as a whole; 
(B)  In a single development operation or a definitely programmed series of development operations, including all lands and buildings; 
(C)  For principal and accessory structures and uses substantially related to the character and purposes of the district; 
(D)  Developed according to detailed plans that include, but are not limited to, streets, utilities, lots, or building sites and the like and for all buildings as intended to be located, constructed, used, and related to each other; 
(E)  Designed with a program for provision, operation, and maintenance of such areas, facilities, and improvements as will be for common use by some or all of the occupants of, or visitors to, the district, but such program will not be provided, operated, or maintained at general public expense. 
2-2.202  Plat. A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been subdivided. 
2-2.203  Plumbing. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units (mechanical sink grinders), waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basin, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to the water, sewer, or gas line. 
2-2.204  Post-FIRM. Construction or other development which started on or after January 1, 1975, or on or after the effective date of the initial flood insurance rate map for the area, whichever is later. 
2-2.205  Pre-FIRM. Construction or other development which started before January 1, 1975, or before the effective date of the initial flood insurance rate map for the area, whichever is later. 
2-2.205.1  Premises. Any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion thereof whether improved or unimproved, occupied or unoccupied. 
2-2.206  Primary frontal dune. A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and over-topping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope. 
2-2.207  Principal building. A building wherein the primary use of the lot is conducted. 
2-2.208  Principal use. The main use of land or structures, as distinguished from a secondary or accessory use. 
2-2.208.1  Property. Any real property, including, but not limited to, land, lot, or parcel of land, or any hereditament held by any owner. 
2-2.208.2  Protected tree. A hardwood tree that has a minimum diameter at breast height (DBH) of eighteen (18) inches. This definition excludes pine trees. 
2-2.209  Public authority. Any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the town or of the state relating to health, fire, building requirements, or other activities concerning dwellings in the town. 
2-2.209.1  Public dedication. Land offered or dedicated to the public (open space, park land, etc.) for the public's use. 
2-2.210  Public officer. The officer or officers who are authorized by ordinances adopted hereunder or appointed by the town manager to exercise the powers prescribed by this Ordinance. 
2-2.211  Public safety and/or nuisance. For floodplain management and flood insurance purposes, anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
2-2.212  Public sewage disposal system. A system serving two (2) or more dwellings or commercial units and approved by the town, Carteret County Health Department, Department of Environment and Natural Resources, and/or other appropriate governmental agencies. 
2-2.213  Public utility building/use. Any building or use connected with a public utility which is defined as a business organization, such as an electric, phone, or water company, which performs a public service and is subject to special governmental regulation. 
2-2.214  Recommended tree. A recommended tree listed in Appendix VI. 
2-2.215  Recreation, passive. A leisure activity which occurs outdoors and is conducted with minimal impact to the natural environment. Examples include: walking trails, picnic areas, etc. 
2-2.215.1  Recreation use, indoor. Uses or structures for active recreation including gymnasiums, health/fitness centers, indoor tracks, indoor ball courts, etc. This definition includes both non-profit and for-profit organizations. 
2-2.215.2  Recreation use, outdoor. Parks and other open space used for active or passive recreation such as ballfields, playgrounds, trails, pools, boat ramps, tennis courts, golf courses, outdoor classroom and associated customary accessory uses. This definition includes both non-profit and for-profit operations. 
2-2.216  Reserved. 
2-2.216.1  Recreation use, governmental. Land or facilities owned, operated and managed by governmental agencies for public indoor or outdoor recreation use. 
2-2.217  Reserved. 
2-2.218  Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
(A)  Built on a single chassis; 
(B)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(C)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(D)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
2-2.219  Recycling center. A building in which used material is separated and processed prior to shipment to others who will use those materials to manufacture new products. 
2-2.220  Recycling collection point. A designated use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources. No processing of such items would be allowed. This facility would generally be located in a shopping center parking lot or in other public/quasi-public areas, such as at churches and schools. 
2-2.221  Recycling plant. A facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable resources, such as newspaper, magazines, books and other paper products, glass, metal cans, and other products are recycled, reprocessed, and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used for production. 
2-2.222  Reference feature. The receding edge of a bluff or eroding frontal dune or, if such a feature is not present, the normal highwater line or the seaward line of permanent vegetation if highwater line cannot be identified. 
2-2.223  Reference level. The portion of a structure or other development that must be compared to the regulatory flood protection elevation to determine regulatory compliance of such building. Within Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, or AH, the reference level is the top of the lowest floor. Within Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as zones VE or V1-V30, the reference level is the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member. 
2-2.224  Regulatory flood protection elevation. The elevation to which all structures and other development located within the special flood hazard areas must be elevated or floodproofed, if residential. Within areas where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus one (1) foot of freeboard. In areas where no BFE has been established, all structures and other development must be elevated or floodproofed, if residential, to two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
2-2.225  Remedy a violation. To bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or community floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
2-2.226  Repair. The replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building or that would affect or change required existing facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring, or heating installations, or that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply to any change in construction. 
2-2.227  Required. Required by some provision of this Ordinance. 
2-2.228  Reservation. An obligation to keep property free from development for a stated period of time or indefinitely. 
2-2.229  Residential occupancy. Buildings in which families or households live or in which sleeping accommodations are provided and all dormitories shall be classified as "residential occupancy." Such buildings include, among others, the following: dwellings, multifamily dwellings, and lodging houses. 
2-2.230  Restaurant. An establishment designed, in whole or in part, to cater to or accommodate the consumption of food and/or beverage on premises. 
2-2.231  Restaurant, drive-in. An establishment designed, in whole or in part, to cater to or accommodate the consumption of food and/or beverages in automobiles on or off the premises. 
2-2.232  Retail and wholesaling, indoor. An establishment which sells items at retail or wholesale wholly within an enclosed building. 
2-2.232.1  Retaining wall. A manmade structure designed to prevent the lateral displacement of soil, rock, fill, or other similar material. This definition shall not include bulkheads. 
2-2.233  Retrofitting. Measures, such as floodproofing, elevation, construction of small levees, and other modifications, taken on an existing building or its yard to protect it from flood damage. 
2-2.234  Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
2-2.234.1  Rooftop structures. An enclosed structure on or above the roof of any part of a building, including rooftop structures as defined in the North Carolina Building Code (i.e. stairwells, elevator shafts, etc.). 
2-2.235  Roominghouse. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one (1) or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three (3) or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
2-2.236  Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
2-2.237  Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials except garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metal mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust. 
2-2.238  Salvage yard. Property used for the storage, collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment whatsoever, whether industrial or noncommercial, and including, but not limited to, vehicles, appliances and related machinery. 
2-2.239  Satellite dish antenna. A device incorporating a reflective surface and is in the shape of a shallow dish or cone. Such device is used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves from satellites. Generally considered an accessory use. 
2-2.240  School, private. An organization which provides education which is not under the control of the Carteret County Board of Education, serving grades kindergarten through 12. 
2-2.241  School, public. An organization which provides education which is under the control of the Carteret County Board of Education, serving grades kindergarten through 12. 
2-2.241.1  Screen. For purposes of interpreting landscaping requirements, refer to Landscape screen. 
2-2.242  Seating capacity. The actual seating capacity of an area based upon the number of seats or one (1) seat per eighteen (18) inches of bench or pew length. 
2-2.243  Self-service storage facility. A building consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods or contractors supplies. 
2-2.244  Setback line. A line which runs parallel to a property line on the front, rear, or side of a lot set according to the zoning district regulations, which delineates the area upon which a structure may be built and maintained. 
2-2.245  Shopping center. A grouping of retail business and service uses on a site with common ingress/egress points from a public right-of-way and common off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
2-2.245.1  Shrub. A woody plant or bush of relatively low height (two (2) to six (6) feet) distinguished from a tree by having numerous stems rather than having one (1) or more well-defined trunks at maturity. 
2-2.246  SIC. Standard industrial classification (see Appendix I). 
2-2.246.1  Sight triangle. The horizontal and vertical areas at the intersections of streets and/or driveways which must remain unobstructed in order to ensure that drivers can see traffic and pedestrians around the corner of intersections, street entrances, or driveways. 

Sight Triangle
2-2.247  Sign. Any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, structures, designs, trade names, or trademarks by which anything is made known such as are used to designate an individual, firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, or a commodity or product, which are used to attract attention. 
2-2.248  Sign area. The entire area within a single continuous rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of such sign where writing, representation, emblem, or other display together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background may be placed; and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. Sign area shall be the same as sign face. 

Sign Area Measurement Examples. Extent of Calculated Sign Area Shown in Red Dashed Lines
2-2.250  Sign, banner. A non-permanent strip of cloth or other material on which a sign is drawn, written, painted, or otherwise applied. 
2-2.251  Reserved. 
2-2.252  Sign, canopy. A sign painted or otherwise applied to a permanent decorative porch or walkway cover other than an awning, which is attached to a building or supported by columns, extending to the ground. This definition shall include signs on gas station and convenience store canopies. 
2-2.253  Reserved. 
2-2.254  Reserved. 
2-2.255  Reserved. 
2-2.256  See "Sign area." 
2-2.256.1  Sign, feather flag. A vertical sign that contains a pole driven into the ground for support or which is supported by means of an individual stand and which includes a vertically-elongated attached pennant. This definition includes banner flag, swooper flag, flutter flag, blade flag, sail flag, bow flag, teardrop flag, tall flag, and quill flag signs. This definition does not include pole banner signs. 

Feather Flags
2-2.256.2  Sign, fence screening. A sign printed or otherwise applied to a fence or gate wrap made of mesh fabric which is installed on a permitted fence and which is used to provide privacy, enhance safety, or provide wind protection at a construction site. 
2-2.257  Sign, flag. A flag sign which is not classified as a governmental flag sign. 
2-2.258  Sign, freestanding. A sign that is not attached to a building and is permanently attached to the ground by one (1) or more supports. 
2-2.259  Sign, governmental flag. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a governmental flag is defined as the flag of the United States of America, the flag of nations recognized by the United States of America, the flag of the State of North Carolina, the flag of any state or territory of the United States, the flag of a political subdivision of any state or territory of the United States, or a governmentally affiliated military flag (e.g. Marine, Air Force, Navy, Army, Coast Guard, POW/MIA, etc.). 
2-2.260  Sign height. The height of a sign shall be the vertical distance as measured from the normal grade to the highest point of the sign. Any berming or filling or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign shall be computed as a part of the sign height. 
2-2.261  Sign, illegal. Any sign which was not lawfully installed or modified. 
2-2.262  Sign, inflatable display. A display, that is gas or air-filled, and which is used to attract attention. 
2-2.263  Sign, legal. Any sign that is not an illegal sign. 
2-2.264  Sign, menu board. Signage attached or otherwise applied to the following types of menu boards: 
(1)  Drive-through menu board used solely for drive-through service at a business where customers remain seated in a vehicle occupying a drive-through service lane to the point of a drive-through service window or other service area of a business; 
(2)  Preview menu board which abuts a drive-through service lane and precedes the drive-through menu board for the purpose of expediting ordering of products and/or services from the drive-through menu; and 
(3)  Parking stall menu board located immediately adjacent to a vehicle parking stall on the premises of a business utilizing drive-in parking stalls where customers remain seated in a vehicle. 
2-2.265  Sign, noncommercial. A sign which carries no message, statement, or expression related to commercial interests. 
2-2.266  Sign, nonconforming. Any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained in compliance with applicable code provisions, but which no longer complies with all of the provisions of this Ordinance due to the enactment of a subsequent amendment to this Ordinance. 
2-2.267  Reserved. 
2-2.268  Sign, obsolete. A sign related to or identifying a business which is no longer open or an activity or event which has already transpired. 
2-2.269  Reserved. 
2-2.270  Reserved. 
2-2.271  Reserved. 
2-2.272  Sign, outdoor advertising. Any outdoor sign, display, light, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, or any other thing which is designed, intended, or used to advertise or inform, any part of the advertising or information contents of which is visible from any place on the main-traveled interstate or primary system, whether the same be permanent or a portable installation, and for which an outdoor advertising permit has been issued by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
2-2.273  Sign, pedestrian wayfinding. A sign which facilitates pedestrian wayfinding and is part of an approved Town wayfinding program. 
2-2.273.1  Sign, pole banner. A sign which is vertically affixed at two ends to a light pole by way of pole banner brackets. This definition is not intended to include feather flag signs. 
2-2.274  Sign, projecting. A sign forming an angle with a building, which extends beyond the exterior wall of the building and is attached to and supported by the building. 
2-2.275  Reserved. 
2-2.276  Sign, roof. Any sign attached to the roof of a building. 
2-2.277  Sign, suspended. A sign that is attached to the underside of a horizontal plane or arm and is supported by the horizontal plane. 
2-2.278  Reserved. 
2-2.279  Sign, temporary. A sign which is intended for temporary use and which is not permanently mounted or permanently affixed to any structure nor permanently installed in the ground. 
2-2.279.1  Sign, tri-view. A sign on which each face intermittently rotates with a maximum of three (3) faces per side. 
2-2.280  Sign, wall. Any sign, other than a projecting sign, awning sign, or canopy sign, which is attached to or painted on the wall of a building. 
2-2.281  Sign, window. Any sign that is attached to, painted on, or etched into a window. 
2-2.282  Site-specific development plan. A plan of land development submitted to the town for the purpose of obtaining one (1) of the following zoning or land use permits or approval: 
(A)  Site development plan approval by the Planning Board as provided in section 12-1 of this Ordinance. 
(B)  Final approval by the Planning Board of a final plat of a subdivision as provided in Article 4, Part I of this Ordinance. 
(C)  Approval of a multifamily site plan as provided in section 13-2 of this Ordinance. 
(D)  Approval of a residential multifamily district site plan as provided in Article 4, Part I of this Ordinance. 
(E)  Approval of a special use permit by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 4-8 of this Ordinance. 
(F)  Approval of a commercial development plan in accordance with Articles 13, 14, 18, and 20 of this Ordinance. Such plans shall include the approximate boundaries of the site: significant topographical and other natural features affecting the development site; the approximate location on the site of the proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements; the approximate dimensions, including the height of the proposed buildings and other structures; and the approximate location of all existing and proposed infrastructure on the site, including water, sewer, roads, and pedestrian walkways. Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a variance, a sketch plan nor any other document that fails to describe with certainty the type and intensity of use for a specified parcel or parcels of property shall constitute a site specific development plan. 
2-2.283  Sixty-year setback. A distance equal to sixty (60) times the average annual long-term recession rate at a site, measured from the reference feature. 
2-2.284  Special flood hazard area (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in subsection 18-3.2 of this Ordinance. 
2-2.285  Special privilege to use. Allowing an applicant to use the property in a manner inconsistent with those uses permitted by the provisions of section 11-1 of this Ordinance which would be applicable to the zoning district in which the property is located. 
2-2.286  Special use. A use that would not be appropriate generally as a right without restrictions throughout a zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, morals, or the general welfare. Special use permits are reviewed by the Board of Adjustment. 
2-2.286.1  Stable, private. A private stable houses horses, mules and ponies that are for the enjoyment of the property owner and horses are owned by the property owner. 
2-2.286.2  Stable, public. A public stable houses horses, mules and ponies that are for the enjoyment of the property owner and the animals are available for hire, lease and/or riding lessons and stalls may be rented. 
2-2.287  Stairway. One (1) or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one (1) story to another in a building or structure. 
2-2.288  Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, P.L. 97-348, includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
2-2.288.1  Storage containers. A standardized reusable shipping container, with or without wheels, used in the transportation of freight and capable of being mounted and moved on a railcar, or mounted on a chassis for movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship. 
2-2.289  Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. 
2-2.290  Street. A dedicated right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
2-2.291  Street, local. A local street is any link not part of a higher order urban system which serves primarily to provide direct access to abutting land and access to higher systems. 
2-2.292  Street, local residential. Cul-de-sacs, loop streets, and streets less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet in length, or streets less than one (1) mile in length that do not connect thoroughfares, or serve major traffic generators, and do not collect traffic from more than one hundred (100) dwellings. 
2-2.293  Street, major thoroughfare. Major streets that provide for the expeditious movement of volumes of traffic within and through urban areas. 
2-2.294  Street, minor residential. A street serving primarily the lots or units in a subdivision, planned development, or apartment complex. No thoroughfares, highways, or state roads nor any street carrying or anticipated to carry volume of traffic which is found by the Land Use Administrator to be of such magnitude that to allow vehicles to back on to it would endanger life or property shall be considered a minor street. 
2-2.295  Street, minor thoroughfare. A street which performs the function of collecting traffic from local access streets and carrying it to the major thoroughfare system. It may supplement the major thoroughfare system by facilitating minor through traffic movement and may also serve abutting property. 
2-2.296  Street, residential collector. A local access street which serves as a connector street between local residential streets and the thoroughfare system. Residential collector streets typically collect traffic from one hundred (100) to four hundred (400) dwelling units. 
2-2.297  Structure. Anything constructed, built, or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground or attached to something having more or less a fixed location on or in the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, manufactured homes, garages, carports, porches, decks, signs, etc. For floodplain management and flood insurance purposes, a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
2-2.298  Subdivider. Any person, firm, or corporation who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as defined in this Ordinance. 
2-2.299  Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or building sites, or other divisions when any one (1) or more of those divisions is created for the purpose of sale or building development, whether immediate or future, and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or change in existing streets; but the following shall not be included within this definition nor be subject to any regulations enacted pursuant to this Ordinance: 
(A)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the Town of Morehead City as shown in this Ordinance; 
(B)  The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved; 
(C)  The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors; 
(D)  The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is not greater than two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards and regulations of the Town of Morehead City. 
2-2.300  Subdivision, major. All subdivisions shall be considered major subdivisions except those defined as minor subdivisions in Article 4. 
2-2.301  Subdivision, minor. The division of five (5) acres or less into five (5) or fewer lots and which creates no new public or private streets or roads, no right-of-way dedication, and no new easements except for electrical, drainage, cable or telephone easements, and no utility extensions. 
2-2.302  Substandard dwelling or structure. A dwelling, dwelling unit, multifamily dwelling, apartment house, or any other space used or intended to be used as a habitable living space in any building or structure which does not meet the basic minimum requirements of this Ordinance for such use. 
2-2.303  Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. See definition of substantial improvement. 
2-2.304  Substantial improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during any one-year period whereby the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(A)  Any correction of existing violations of State or Community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(B)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
2-2.305  Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision. Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced. 
2-2.306  Supplied. Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of, the owner or operator. 
2-2.307  Temporary housing. Any tent, manufactured home, or other structure used for human shelter that is designed to be transportable and that is not attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
2-2.308.1  Towing/recovery storage yard. An establishment/location offering the service of short-term storage (ninety (90) days or less) of towed/recovered/wrecked vehicles and which does not include dismantling, repair or service of the vehicles on the same site (see section 14-36). Towing/recovery storage yard shall not include storage of junked vehicles or in any way operate as a "junkyard" except to the extent of processing of a vehicle as an "unclaimed vehicle" under G.S. 20-77. 
2-2.309  Townhouse development. A townhouse development shall consist of one or more residential structures comprised of three (3) or more attached single-family residences, where land directly underneath each unit is sold with that unit. 
2-2.309.1  Townhouse duplex. A residential structure constructed on a duplex lot, comprised of two (2) attached single-family residences where land directly underneath each unit is sold with that unit and the remainder of the land is owned as common area (see section 14-41). 
2-2.310  Townhouse lot. The area, when combined with one (1) attached single-family residence, which is sold fee simple within a townhouse development. 
2-2.311  Townhouse plat. The entire development area as shown on an approved preliminary plat. 
2-2.312  Trailer. Any vehicle, prefabricated vehicle, or prefabricated enclosure being or resembling a trailer, whether designed for a special installation or not, house car, camp car, house trailer, home trailer, home car, or any portable or movable vehicle on or off wheels, skids, rollers, blocks, brick, wood, steel, plastic, or aluminum, either self-propelled or propelled by any other means whatsoever, which is used or designed to be used for residential, living, sleeping, permanent office, commercial, or utility purposes, but not including those vehicles primarily designed for the transportation of goods. 
2-2.313  Trailer, overnight camping. A vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are: travel trailer, camping trailer and truck camper. 
2-2.314  Trailer park, camp or court. Land use or intended to be used, owned, leased, or rented for occupancy by six (6) or more trailers which are mounted on wheels, anchored in place by a foundation or other stationary supports, to be used for living or commercial quarters of any kind, together with automobile parking space and incidental utility structures and facilities required and provided in connection therewith. This definition shall not include trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sales. 
2-2.315  Trailer park, overnight camping (campground). An approved site, tract of land, or lot upon which not less than two (2) overnight campsites and/or overnight trailers occupied for temporary shelter, dwelling, recreational, or vacation uses may be located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such services. This use shall be classified under recreation use, outdoor. 
2-2.315.1  Tree. A self-supporting woody plant having one (1) or more well-defined stems or trunks, a more or less definitely formed crown, usually attaining a mature height of at least ten (10) feet, and a trunk diameter of at least three (3) inches measured four and one-half (4 1/2) feet (fifty-four (54) inches) above the ground. 
2-2.315.2  Tree removal. The removal of a tree by an act that causes it to die, including: cutting, pruning, root damage or other damage resulting from construction, grading, paving, or other activities. 
2-2.315.3  Understory tree. A tree that is normally less than thirty (30) feet in height at maturity, but that still provides shade and a degree of protection to the earth and vegetation beneath it. Examples of recommended understory trees are included in Appendix VI. 
2-2.316  Unfit for human habitation. That conditions exist in a dwelling that violate or do not comply with one or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one (1) or more of the requirements established by this Ordinance. 
2-2.317  Unit-ownership (condominium) development. A project of two (2) or more units in one (1) or more buildings designed and constructed for unit-ownership submitted under Section 3 of the North Carolina Unit-Ownership Act and other applicable regulations. 
2-2.317.5  Value added operations. The enhancement added to a product or service before product is shipped. 
2-2.318  Variance. A variance may be granted only by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Section 3-7.3. 
2-2.319  Ventilation. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
2-2.320  Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in sections 18-4 and 18-5 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
2-2.320.1  Wall. For purposes of Article 19, "wall" includes any permanent architectural extension of a wall, including parapets, even if such extension projects beyond or above the enclosed portions of the building. For purposes of calculating sign area, the window area shall not be considered part of the wall. 
2-2.321  Warehouse. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
2-2.322  Warehousing and distribution. A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
2-2.323  Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
2-2.324  Water surface elevation (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
2-2.324.1  Wrecked. That which has outward manifestation or appearance of damage to parts and contents which are essential to operation. 
2-2.325  Yard. A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from ground to sky. 
2-2.326  Yard, front. A yard extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the front building setback line. 
2-2.327  Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of the lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear property line and the rear building setback line. 
2-2.328  Yard, side. A yard extending along either side of a lot from front setback line to the rear building setback line. 
2-2.329  Yard sale. All general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any district for the purpose of disposing of personal household property. The term "yard sale" shall include all such herein described sales, whether or not they are garage, lawn, yard, attic, porch, room, backyard, patio, or rummage sales (see section 14-27). 
2-2.330  Zero lot line. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more of the building's sides rests directly on a lot line. 
2-2.331  Zone of imminent collapse. An area subject to erosion adjacent to the shoreline of an ocean, bay, or lake and within a distance equal to ten (10) feet plus five (5) times the average annual long-term erosion rate for the site, measured from the reference feature. 
2-2.332  Zoning vested right. A right pursuant to G.S. 160A-385.1 to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of an approved site specific development plan. 
(Ord. No. 2003-11, § 1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 2003-28, § 1, 6-18-2003; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1, 4-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-22, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-07, §§ 4, 5, 1-10-2006; Ord. No. 2006-31, § 1, 4-12-2006; Ord. No. 2006-32, § 1, 4-12-2006; Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 4-12-2006; Ord. No. 2007-08, §§ 1, 2, 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 2007-42, § 1, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 2007-50, § 1, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 1-27, 1-8-2008; Ord. No. 2008-27, §§ 1-3, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 2008-56, § 1, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2009-02, §§ 2-8, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-07, §§ 10-12, 3-9-2010; Ord. No. 2010-37, §§ 1-11, 9-14-2010; Ord. No. 2010-43, § 1, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2011-12, §§ 1, 2, 5-10-2011; Ord. No. 2011-20, § 1, 7-12-2011; Ord. No. 2011-24, § 1, 10-11-2011; Ord. No. 2012-24, § 1, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 2012-31, § 1, 8-14-2012; Ord. No. 2012-43, § 1, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2013-21, §§ 1-11, 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 2, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 2014-29, § 1, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-03, §§ 1-4, 3-13-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-09, §§ 1-4, 6-18-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-15, § 11, 8-14-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-22, § 1, 12-11-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-07, § 1, 4-9-2019) 
2-3 - Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries 
2-3.1  Streets, rights-of-way, and easements. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the centerline of a street, highway, railroad right-of-way, utility easement, stream or riverbed, or of such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries. 
2-3.2  Lot lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
2-3.3  Corporate limits. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the corporate limits shall be construed as following the corporate limits. 
2-3.4  Property divisions. If a district boundary divides a lot, the requirements for the district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall be extended to the balance of the lot; provided, that such extension shall not include any part of such lot which lies more than one hundred (100) feet beyond the district boundary; and further provided, that the remaining parcel shall not be less than the minimum required for the district in which it is located. 
2-3.5  Vacation and abandonment. Where any public street or alley is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to parcels abutting property shall apply to that portion of such street or alley added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment. 
2-3.6  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 3, 1-14-2014) 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATIVE MECHANISMS 
PART I. - PLANNING BOARD 

3-1 - Created, Membership 
3-1.1  A town Planning Board is hereby created under the authority of the G.S. 160A-361. 
3-1.2  The Planning Board shall consist of four (4) members, citizens of the town, who shall be appointed by the City Council to serve for staggered terms of three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled as they occur by the City Council for the period of the unexpired term. Faithful attendance of the meetings of the Board is considered as prerequisite for the maintenance of membership on the Board. 
3-1.3  In addition, the Planning Board shall consist of three (3) members, residents of the extraterritorial area (ETJ), who shall be appointed by the County Board of Commissioners. Vacancies shall be filled as they occur by the County Board of Commissioners for the period of the unexpired term. Faithful attendance of the meetings of the Board is considered a prerequisite for the maintenance of membership on the Board. If the Carteret County Board of Commissioners fails to make the appointments provided for in this subsection within ninety (90) days after receipt of a resolution from the City Council requesting that such appointments be made, the City Council may thereupon make such appointments. Terms of extraterritorial members shall be allotted in the same manner as town member terms above. The Planning Board members residing in the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) shall have equal rights, privileges, powers, and duties with the other Planning Board members on all matters before the Board except as provided herein. 
3-1.4  The chairman shall be a citizen of the town. 
3-1.5  Members of the Planning Board may, after a public hearing, be removed by the City Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. 
3-1.6  The City Manager shall be an ex officio member of the Planning Board with no voting powers. 
3-1.7  Terms shall be limited to three (3) full consecutive three-year appointments. A Planning Board member who has served the maximum time allowed may only be considered for reappointment after remaining off the Planning Board for not less than three (3) calendar years. 
State Law reference- Planning and regulation of development, G.S. 160A-340 et seq.; interlocal cooperation, G.S. 160A-460 et seq. 
3-2 - Organization, Rules, Meetings, Records 
    Within thirty (30) days after appointment, the Planning Board shall meet and elect a chairman and create and fill such offices as it may determine. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its members' attendance and of its resolutions, discussions, findings and recommendations, which record shall be a public record. The Board shall schedule at least one (1) meeting monthly. All of its meetings shall be open to the public. The minutes and records of each meeting, regardless of type of meeting, shall be submitted to the City Council for its information. 
3-3 - Finances 
    The expenditures of the Planning Board, exclusive of gifts or grants, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the City Council. No indebtedness for which the town shall be liable shall be contracted or incurred by the Planning Board unless an appropriation is made by the City Council for such purpose, as authorized by law, and then only to the extent of such appropriation. The Planning Board shall have the right to accept gifts and donations for the exercise of its functions and may expend the money received for such gifts and donations in a manner which in the judgment of the Planning Board is consistent with the best interests of the planning program. 
3-4 - Powers and Duties 
3-4.1  Studies. The Planning Board shall make careful studies of present conditions and the probable future development of the town and its environs. Such studies may include, but shall not be limited to, land use surveys; population studies; economic base studies; school, park and recreation studies; traffic and parking studies; and urban renewal studies. 
3.4-2  Plans. The Planning Board shall formulate and maintain a comprehensive plan of the town and its environs for the purpose of achieving a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the town which would promote, in accordance with present and future needs, the safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of its citizens; efficiency and economy in the process of development; convenience of traffic; safety from fire and other dangers; adequate light and air; healthful and convenient distribution of population; provision of adequate open spaces; good civic design and arrangement; wise and efficient expenditures of public funds; adequate provision for public utilities; and for other matters pertaining to the public requirements. The comprehensive plan shall consist of a number of parts which may include, but not be limited to, a land use plan, a major thoroughfare plan, a utilities plan, a plan for economic development, a recreation plan, a school plan, and a community facilities plan. 
3.4-3  Cooperation with other commissions, recommendations. The Planning Board shall cooperate with the redevelopment commission, if and when such commission is established, and shall review all redevelopment plans and proposals and make recommendations to the City Council. 
3.4-4  Designated as zoning commission, amendment of unified development ordinance. The Planning Board is hereby designated as the zoning commission for the town and shall revise, if it deems necessary, the existing unified development ordinance to govern the use of buildings and premises. Such revisions, if made, shall be submitted to the City Council for its consideration and possible adoption. If the Planning Board deems necessary, it may prepare a totally new and different unified development ordinance, which shall be submitted to the City Council for its consideration and possible adoption. The unified development ordinance shall not be changed, altered, or amended until such change, alteration, or amendment has been submitted to the Planning Board for its recommendation. A majority vote of not less than three-fourths (3/4) of the entire membership of the City Council will be required to overrule a recommendation by the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning Board to act within thirty (30) days after submission shall constitute approval of the proposed change, alteration, or amendment. 
3-4.5  Preparation of subdivision regulations. The Planning Board shall prepare subdivision regulations governing the subdivision of land within the town and its environs to be submitted to the City Council for its consideration and possible adoption. 
3-4.6  Annual report. The Planning Board shall, in January of each year, submit in writing to the City Council a written report of its activities, an analysis of the expenditures to date for the current fiscal year, and a proposed planning program for the next fiscal year. 
State Law reference- Meetings of public bodies, G.S. 143-318.9 et seq.; budget, fiscal control, G.S. 159-7 et seq.; territorial jurisdiction, G.S. 160A-360; extraterritorial representation, G.S. 160A-362; changes in zoning regulations, G.S. 160A-385; planning agency, duties as to zoning, G.S. 160A-387; Urban Redevelopment Law, G.S. 160A-500 et seq. 
PART II. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

3-5 - Creating the Board of Adjustment 
    The Board of Adjustment is hereby created and shall consist of five (5) members. Terms shall be limited to three (3) full consecutive three-year appointments. In appointing the members or in the filling of vacancies caused by the expiration of the terms of existing members, the Morehead City Council may appoint certain members for less than three (3) years so that the terms of all members shall not expire at the same time. A Board of Adjustment member who has served the maximum time allowed may only be considered for reappointment after remaining off the Board of Adjustment for not less than three (3) calendar years. Three (3) members and not more than two (2) alternates shall reside within the town limits and shall be appointed by the Morehead City Council for overlapping terms of three (3) years. The two (2) other members and not more than two (2) alternates of the Board of Adjustment shall reside in the extraterritorial area of the Town of Morehead City and shall be appointed by the Carteret County Board of Commissioners for overlapping terms of three (3) years. Alternates shall serve in the absence of regular members. Except as provided herein, such members shall have equal rights, privileges, and duties with the other members of the Board of Adjustment in all matters pertaining to the regulation of Morehead City and its extraterritorial area. In the event the Carteret County Board of Commissioners fails to make the appointments provided for in this section within ninety (90) days after receipt of a resolution from the Morehead City Council requesting that such appointments be made, the Morehead City Council may thereupon make such appointments. The members of the Board of Adjustment shall elect a chairperson from among those members residing within the town limits. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 4, 1-14-2014) 
3-6 - Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment 
    The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules to conduct its affairs and establish regular meeting dates. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and a public record of all findings and decisions shall be maintained. The Board shall determine contested facts and make its decision within a reasonable time. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision shall be reduced to writing and reflect the Board's determination of contested facts and their application to the applicable standards. The written decision shall be signed by the chair or other duly authorized member of the Board. A quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing the written decision with the Clerk to the Board. The decision of the Board shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, property owner and to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy, prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The Clerk to the Board shall certify that proper notice has been made. The concurring vote of four-fifths (?) of the Board's membership shall be necessary to grant a variance. A majority of the members of the Board shall be required to decide any other quasi-judicial matter or to determine an appeal made in the nature of certiorari. Vacant positions on the Board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the Board for calculation of the requisite majority if there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 5, 1-14-2014) 
3-7 - Powers and Duties 
    The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
3-7.1  Appeals. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals of decisions of administrative officials charged with enforcement of this Ordinance and may hear appeals arising out of any other ordinance that regulates land use or development. 
3-7.2  Special uses. To hear and decide only such special uses as the Board of Adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this Ordinance. The Board shall not grant a special use permit unless and until the stipulations and requirements as outlined in subsections 4-8.1 and 4-8.2 are met. 
3-7.3  Variances. When unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of this Ordinance, the Board of Adjustment shall vary any of the provisions of this Ordinance in accordance with Subsection 5-3.2. 
3-7.4  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 6-8, 1-14-2014) 
PART III. - APPEARANCE COMMISSION 

3-8 - Created, Members, Organization, Rules, Meetings, Records 
3-8.1  Creation, number and qualification, vacancies and terms. There is created an appearance commission, which shall consist of nine (9) members, all of whom shall be citizens and residents of the town's area of planning and zoning jurisdiction. Members shall be appointed by the City Council for staggered terms of three (3) years. Vacancies occurring for reasons other than the expiration of terms shall be filled as they occur for the period of the unexpired term. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. 
3-8.2  Appointments. In making appointments to the commission, the City Council shall seek to appoint persons who possess qualities of impartiality, maturity, and broad judgment, and in whom the community at large may be expected to have confidence. Appointments shall be made in such a way as to maintain on the commission at all times not less than five (5) members who have had special training or experience in a design field, if possible. 
3-8.3  Reappointment, performance. Members may be immediately reappointed to the commission upon the expiration of legal terms, and they may be removed from the commission by the City Council for due cause. Faithful attendance at the meetings of the commission and conscientious performance of the duties of members shall be considered a prerequisite for continued membership on the commission. 
3-8.4  Compensation. Members of the commission shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incidental to the performance of their duties. 
3-8.5  Organization, etc. Within thirty (30) days after its appointment the appearance commission shall meet and elect a chairman. It shall create and fill such offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman and other officers shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its members' attendance and of its resolutions, discussions, findings, and recommendations, which shall be open to the public. The commission shall hold at least one (1) meeting monthly, and all of its meetings shall be open to the public. For the purpose of taking any official action authorized or required, there shall be present a quorum of five (5) members. A copy of the minutes of each meeting shall be filed with the City Manager, the City Council, and the Planning Board. 
State Law reference- Community appearance commissions, G.S. 160A-451 et seq. 
3-9 - Powers and Duties 
    The appearance commission shall have the powers and duties specified in G.S. 160A-452. 
PART IV. - LAND USE ADMINISTRATOR AND PLANNING DIRECTOR 

3-10 - Land Use Administrator 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, primary responsibility for administering and enforcing this Ordinance may be assigned by the City Manager to one (1) or more individuals. The person or persons to whom these functions are assigned shall be referred to in this Ordinance as the "land use administrator" or "administrator." 
3-11 - Planning Director 
    The planning director is the administrative head of the planning department. As provided in section 4-27, the planning director is authorized to approve minor subdivision final plats. 
PART V. - CITY COUNCIL 

3-12 - The City Council 
3-12.1  The City Council, in considering conditional-use permit applications, acts in a quasi-judicial capacity and, accordingly, is required to observe the procedural requirements set forth in Articles 4 and 6 of this Ordinance. 
3-12.2  In considering proposed changes in the text of this Ordinance or in the zoning map, the City Council acts in its legislative capacity and must proceed in accordance with the requirements of Article 24. 
3-12.3  Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance, in acting upon conditional-use permit requests or in considering amendments to this Ordinance or the zoning map, the City Council shall follow the regular voting and other requirements as set forth in other provisions of the Town Code. 
ARTICLE 4. - PERMITS AND SUBDIVISION APPROVAL 
PART I. - ZONING, BUILDING AND SPECIAL-USE PERMITS 

4-1 - Permits Required 
4-1.1  The use made of property may not be substantially changed, substantial clearing, grading, or excavation may not be commenced, and buildings or other substantial structures may not be constructed, erected, moved, or substantially altered except in accordance with and pursuant to one (1) of the following permits: 
(A)  A zoning and/or building permit by the City. 
(B)  A special-use permit issued by the Board of Adjustment. 
4-1.2  Zoning permits, building permits and special-use permits are issued under this Ordinance only when a review of the application submitted, including the plans contained therein, indicates that the development will comply with the provisions of this Ordinance if completed as proposed. Such plans and applications as are finally approved are incorporated into any permit issued, and except as otherwise provided in section 4-15, all development shall occur strictly in accordance with such approved plans and applications. 
4-1.3  Physical improvements to land to be subdivided may not be commenced until preliminary plat approval by the Planning Board for major subdivisions or after final plat approval by the planning director for minor subdivisions (see Part II of this article). 
4-1.4  A zoning permit, building permit and a special-use permit shall be issued in the name of the applicant (except that applications submitted by an agent shall be issued in the name of the principal), shall identify the property involved and the proposed use, shall incorporate by reference the plans submitted, and shall contain any special conditions or requirements lawfully imposed by the permit-issuing authority. All special-use permits issued with respect to tracts of land in excess of one (1) acre shall be recorded in the Carteret County Registry after execution by the record owner as provided in subsection 4-14.2. 
4-2 - No Occupancy or Use Until Requirements Fulfilled 
    Issuance of a special-use or zoning permit authorizes the recipient to commence the activity resulting in a change in use of the land or (subject to obtaining a building permit) to commence work designed to construct, erect, move, or substantially alter building or other substantial structures. However, except as provided in sections 4-7, 4-11, and 4-12, the intended use may not be commenced and no building may be occupied until all of the requirements of this Ordinance and all additional requirements imposed pursuant to the issuance of a special-use permit have been complied with. 
4-3 - Who May Submit Permit Applications 
4-3.1  Applications for zoning, building or special-use permits will be accepted only from persons having the legal authority to take action in accordance with the permit. By way of illustration, in general this means that applications should be made by the owners or lessees of property, or their agents, or persons who have contracted to purchase property contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary permits under this Ordinance, or the agents of such persons (who may make application in the name of such owners, lessees, or contract vendees). 
4-3.2  The administrator may require an applicant to submit evidence of his authority to submit the application in accordance with subsection 4-3.1. 
4-4 - Applications To Be Complete 
4-4.1  All applications for zoning, building or special-use permits must be completed before the permit-issuing authority is required to consider the application. 
4-4.2  Subject to subsection 4-4.3, an application is complete when it contains all of the information that is necessary for the permit-issuing authority to decide whether or not the development or use, if completed as proposed, will comply with all of the requirements of this Ordinance. 
4-4.3  In this Ordinance, information to be included with applications for zoning, building and special use permits are set forth in Appendix II of this Ordinance. It is not necessary that the application contain the type of detailed construction drawings that would be necessary to determine compliance with this Ordinance, so long as the plans provide sufficient information to allow Morehead City to evaluate the application in the light of the substantive requirements set forth in the text of this Ordinance. 
4-4.4  The presumption established by this Ordinance is that all of the information set forth in Appendix II is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this section. However, it is recognized that each permit request is unique, and therefore the permit-issuing authority may allow less information or require more information to be submitted according to the needs of the particular case. 
4-4.5  The administrator shall make every effort to develop application forms, instructional sheets, checklists, or other techniques or devices to assist applicants in understanding the application requirements and the form and type of information that must be submitted. In cases where a minimal amount of information is necessary to enable the administrator to determine compliance with this Ordinance, such as applications for zoning/building permits to construct single-family or two-family houses, the administrator shall develop standard forms that will expedite the submission of the necessary plans and other required information. 
4-5 - Staff Consultation After Application Submitted 
4-5.1  Upon receipt of a formal application for a zoning, building or special-use permit, the administrator shall review the application and confer with the applicant to ensure that he understands the planning staff's interpretation of the applicable requirements of this Ordinance, that he has submitted all of the information that he intends to submit, and that the application represents precisely and completely what he proposes to do. 
(A)  If application is for special-use permit, the administrator shall place the application on the agenda of the appropriate Board when the applicant indicates that the application is as complete as he intends to make it. However, as provided in section 4-10, if the administrator believes that the application is incomplete, he shall recommend to the appropriate Board that the application be denied on that basis. 
4-6 - Zoning Permits 
4-6.1  A completed application form for a zoning permit shall be submitted to the administrator by filing a copy of the application with the administrator in the planning department. 
4-6.2  The administrator shall issue the zoning permit unless he finds, after reviewing the application, that: 
(A)  The requested permit is not within his jurisdiction according to the Table of Permissible Uses; or 
(B)  The application is incomplete; or 
(C)  If completed as proposed in the application, the development will not comply with one (1) or more requirements of this Ordinance (not including those requirements when a variance has been granted or those the applicant is not required to comply with under the circumstances specified in Article 8, Nonconforming Situations). 
4-7 - Authorizing Use or Occupancy Before Completion of Development Under Zoning Permit 
    In cases when, because of weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the zoning-permit recipient (exclusive of financial hardship), it would be unreasonable to require the zoning-permit recipient to comply with all requirements of this Ordinance prior to commencing the intended use of the property or occupying any buildings, the administrator may authorize the commencement of the intended use or the occupancy of buildings (insofar as the requirements of this Ordinance are concerned) if the permit recipient provides a performance bond or other security satisfactory to the administrator to ensure that all of the requirements of the Ordinance will be fulfilled within a reasonable period (not to exceed twelve (12) months) determined by the administrator. 
4-8 - Special-Use Permits 
4-8.1  An application for a special-use permit shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustment by filing a copy of the application with the administrator in the planning department. 
4-8.2  Subject to subsection 4-8.3, the Board of Adjustment or the City Council, respectively, may issue the requested permit unless it concludes, based upon the information submitted at the hearing, that: 
(A)  The requested permit is not within its jurisdiction according to the Table of Permissible Uses; or 
(B)  The application is incomplete; or 
(C)  If completed as proposed in the application, the development will not comply with one (1) or more requirements of this Ordinance (not including those the applicant is not required to comply with under the circumstances specified in Article 8, Nonconforming Situations). 
4-8.3  Special use criteria: 
(A)  A written application for a special use permit is submitted indicating the section of this Ordinance under which the special use permit is sought. 
(B)  The proposed development does not affect adversely the general plans for the physical development of the town as embodied in these regulations or in any plan or portion thereof adopted by the Planning Board and/or the City Council. 
(C)  The proposed use will not be contrary to the purposes stated in these regulations. 
(D)  The proposed use will not affect adversely the health and safety of residents and workers in the town. 
(E)  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or other neighborhood uses. 
(F)  The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses. 
(G)  The proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use. 
(H)  The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, of the vehicular movement, or noise or fumes or of the type of physical activity. 
(I)  The standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted have been met. 
(J)  The proposed use shall be subject to the minimum area, setback, and other locational requirements of the zoning district in which it will be located. 
(K)  The proposed use shall be subject to the off-street parking and service requirements of these regulations. 
4-8.4  Additional restrictions and revocation of permits: 
(A)  The Board of Adjustment may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions upon these permits. 
(B)  Wherever the Board of Adjustment shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said Board shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving the notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunities for a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 9, 1-14-2014) 
4-9 - Burden of Presenting a Complete Application, Burden of Persuasion 
4-9.1  The burden of presenting a complete application (as described in section 4-4) to the permit-issuing Board shall be upon the applicant. However, unless the Board informs the applicant at the hearing in what way the application is incomplete and offers the applicant an opportunity to complete the application (either at that meeting or at a continuation hearing), the application shall be presumed to be complete. 
4-9.2  The burden of persuasion on the issue of whether the development, if completed as proposed, will comply with the requirements of this Ordinance remains at all times on the applicant. 
4-10 - Recommendations on Special-Use Permit Applications 
4-10.1  When presented to the Board of Adjustment at the hearing, the application for a special-use permit shall be accompanied by a report setting forth the planning staff's proposed findings concerning the application's compliance with section 4-4 (Application To Be Complete) and the other requirements of this Ordinance, as well as any staff recommendations for additional requirements to be imposed by the Board of Adjustment. 
4-10.2  If the staff proposes a finding or conclusion that the application fails to comply with section 4-4 or any other requirement of this Ordinance, it shall identify the requirement in question and specifically state supporting reasons for the proposed findings or conclusions. 
4-11 - Authorizing Use, Occupancy, or Sale Before Completion of Development Under Special-Use Permits 
4-11.1  In cases when, because of weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the special-use permit recipient (exclusive of financial hardship) it would be unreasonable to require the permit recipient to comply with all of the requirements of this Ordinance before commencing the intended use of the property or occupying any buildings or selling lots in a subdivision, the permit-issuing Board may authorize the commencement of the intended use or the occupancy of buildings or the sale of subdivision lots (insofar as the requirements of this Ordinance are concerned) if the permit recipient provides a performance bond or other security satisfactory to the Board to ensure that all of these requirements will be fulfilled within a reasonable period (not to exceed twelve (12) months). 
4-11.2  When the Board imposes additional requirements upon the permit recipient or when the developer proposes in the plans submitted to install amenities beyond those required by this Ordinance, the Board may authorize the permittee to commence the intended use of the property or to occupy any building or to sell any subdivision lots before the additional requirements are fulfilled or the amenities installed if it specifies a date by which or a schedule according to which such requirements must be met or each amenity installed and if it concludes that compliance will be ensured as the result of any one (1) or more of the following: 
(A)  A performance bond or other security satisfactory to the Board is furnished; 
(B)  A condition is imposed establishing an automatic expiration date on the permit, thereby ensuring that the permit recipient's compliance will be reviewed when application for renewal is made; 
(C)  The nature of the requirements or amenities is such that sufficient assurance of compliance is given by section 7-4 (Penalties and Remedies For Violations) and section 7-5 (Permit Revocation). 
4-11.3  With respect to subdivisions in which the developer is selling only undeveloped lots, the Planning Board may authorize final plat approval and the sale of lots before all the requirements of this Ordinance are fulfilled if the subdivider provides a performance bond or other security satisfactory to the Planning Board to ensure that all of these requirements will be fulfilled within not more than twelve (12) months after final plat approval. 
4-12 - Completing Developments in Phases 
    Refer to section 4-31. 
4-13 - Expiration of Permits 
4-13.1  Zoning and special-use permits shall expire automatically if, within six (6) months after the issuance of such permits, the use authorized by such permits has not commenced in circumstances where no substantial construction, erection, alteration, excavation, demolition, or similar work is necessary before commencement of such use. 
4-13.2  If, after some physical alteration to land or structures begins to take place, such work is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, then the permit authorizing such work shall immediately expire. However, expiration of the permit shall not affect the provisions of section 4-14. 
4-14 - Effect of Permit on Successors and Assigns 
4-14.1  Zoning and special-use permits authorize the permittee to make use of land and structures in a particular way. Such permits are transferable. However, so long as the land or structures or any portion thereof covered under a permit continues to be used for the purposes for which the permit was granted, then: 
(A)  No person (including successors or assigns of the person who obtained the permit) may make use of the land or structures covered under such permit for the purposes authorized in the permit except in accordance with all the terms and requirements of that permit; and 
(B)  The terms and requirements of the permit apply to and restrict the use of land or structures covered under the permit, not only with respect to all persons having any interest in the property at the time the permit is obtained, but also with respect to persons who subsequently obtain any interest in all or part of the covered property and wish to use it for or in connection with purposes other than those for which the permit was originally issued, so long as the persons who subsequently obtain an interest in the property had actual or record notice (as provided in subsection 4-14.2) of the existence of the permit at the time they acquired their interest. 
4-14.2  Whenever a special-use permit is issued to authorize development (other than single-family or two-family residences) on a tract of land in excess of one (1) acre, nothing authorized by the permit may be done until the record owner of the property signs a written acknowledgment that the permit has been issued so that the permit may be recorded in the Carteret County Registry and indexed under the record owner's name as grantor. 
4-15 - Amendments to and Modifications of Permits 
4-15.1  Insignificant deviations from the permit (including approved plans) issued by the City Council, the Board of Adjustment, or the administrator are permissible and the administrator may authorize such insignificant deviations. A deviation is insignificant if it has no discernable impact on neighboring properties, the general public, or those intended to occupy or use the proposed development. 
4-15.2  Minor design modifications or changes in permits (including approved plans) are permissible with the approval of the permit-issuing authority. Such permission may be obtained without a formal application, public hearing, or payment of any additional fee. For purposes of this section, minor design modifications or changes are those that have no substantial impact on neighboring properties, the general public, or those intended to occupy or use the proposed development. 
4-15.3  All other requests for changes in approved plans will be processed as new applications. If such requests are required to be acted upon by the Board of Adjustment, new conditions may be imposed, but the applicant retains the right to reject such additional conditions by withdrawing his request for an amendment and may then proceed in accordance with the previously issued permit. 
4-15.4  The administrator shall determine whether amendments to and modifications of permits fall within the categories set forth above in subsections 4-15.1, 4-15.2, and 4-15.3. 
4-15.5  A developer requesting approval of changes shall submit a written request for such approval to the administrator, and that request shall identify the changes. Approval of all changes must be given in writing. 
4-16 - Reconsideration of Board Action 
4-16.1  Whenever the Board of Adjustment disapproves an application for a special-use permit or a variance, on any basis other than the failure of the applicant to submit a complete application, such action may not be reconsidered by the respective Board at a later time unless the applicant clearly demonstrates that: 
(A)  Circumstances affecting the property that is the subject of the application have substantially changed; or 
(B)  New information is available that could not with reasonable diligence have been presented at a previous hearing. A request to be heard on this basis must be filed with the administrator within the time period for an appeal to superior court (see section 7-6). However, such a request does not extend the period within which an appeal must be taken. 
4-16.2  Notwithstanding subsection 4-16.1, the Board of Adjustment may at any time consider a new application affecting the same property as an application previously denied. A new application is one that differs in some substantial way from the one previously considered. 
4-17 - Applications to be Processed Expeditiously 
    Recognizing that inordinate delays in acting upon appeals or applications may impose unnecessary costs on the appellant or applicant, the town shall make every reasonable effort to process appeals and permit applications as expeditiously as possible, consistent with the need to ensure that all development conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
    If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant or applicant may file with the Town a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to hear the appeal within fifteen (15) days after such request is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 10, 1-14-2014) 
4-18 - Maintenance of Common Areas, Improvements, and Facilities 
    The recipient of any zoning, building or special-use permit, or his successor, shall be responsible for maintaining all common areas, improvements, or facilities required by this Ordinance or any permit issued in accordance with its provisions, except those areas, improvements, or facilities with respect to which an offer of dedication to the public has been accepted by the appropriate public authority. As illustrations, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this means that private roads and parking areas, water and sewer lines, and recreational facilities must be properly maintained so that they can be used in the manner intended, and required vegetation and trees used for screening, landscaping, or shading must be replaced if they die or are destroyed. 
PART II. - MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS 

4-19 - Regulation of Subdivisions 
    Major subdivisions are subject to a three-step approval process: sketch plan, preliminary plat, and final plat approval. Minor subdivisions only require a one-step approval process: final plat approval (in accordance with section 4-27). 
4-20 - No Subdivision Without Plat Approval 
4-20.1  No person may subdivide his land except in accordance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance. In particular, no person may subdivide his land unless and until a final plat of the subdivision has been approved in accordance with the provisions of section 4-27 and recorded in the Carteret County Registry. 
4-20.2  The Carteret County Register of Deeds may not record a plat of any subdivision within the town's planning jurisdiction unless the plat has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
4-20.3  Building permits may be denied for lots that have been illegally subdivided. In addition to other remedies, Morehead City may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful subdivision of land, to restrain, correct, or abate the violation, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 6, 1-10-2006) 
4-21 - Effect of Plat Approval on Dedications 
    Pursuant to G.S. 160A-374, the approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect the acceptance by the town or public of the dedication of any street or other ground, public utility line, or other public facility shown on the plat. The City Council may, however, by resolution, accept any dedication made to the public of lands or facilities for streets, parks, public utility lines, or other public purposes, when the lands or facilities are located within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction, but outside the corporate limits of the municipality shall not place on the town any duty to open, operate, repair, or maintain any street, utility line, or other land or facility, and the municipality shall in no event be held to answer in any civil action or proceeding for failure to open, repair, or maintain any street located outside its corporate limits. 
    Unless a town, county, or other public entity operating a water system shall have agreed to begin operation and maintenance of the water system or water system facilities within one (1) year of the time of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the first unit of housing in the subdivision, the subdivider shall not be required to dedicate easements for water systems or facilities on land located outside the corporate limits of the town. 
4-22 - School Sites on Land Use Plan 
    If the Morehead City Council and the Carteret County Board of Education have jointly determined the specified location and size of any school sites to be reserved and this information appears in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Planning Director shall immediately notify the Carteret County Board of Education whenever a plan for a subdivision is submitted which includes all or part of a school site to be reserved. The Carteret County Board of Education shall promptly decide whether it still wishes the site to be reserved. If the Carteret County Board of Education does not wish to reserve the site, it shall so notify the Planning Board. If the Board does wish to reserve the site, the subdivision shall not be reserved without such reservation. The Carteret County Board of Education shall then have eighteen (18) months, beginning on the date of final approval of the subdivision, within which to acquire the site by purchase or by initiating condemnation proceedings. If the Carteret County Board of Education has not purchased or begun proceedings to condemn the site within eighteen (18) months, the subdivider may treat the land as freed of the reservation [G.S. 160A-372]. 
4-23 - Construction Procedures 
    No grading, clearing, construction, or installation of improvements shall commence in a proposed subdivision until the preliminary plat has been approved, and all plans and specifications required by this Ordinance have been approved by the appropriate authorities. 
    No building, zoning, or other permits shall be issued for erection of a structure on any lot not of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance until all requirements of this Ordinance have been met. A lot which is a lot of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance is exempt from these regulations. The subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, shall make arrangements with the administrator of this Ordinance to provide for adequate inspection. The approving authorities having jurisdiction and their representatives shall inspect and approve all completed work prior to release of sureties pursuant to section 4-29. 
4-24 - Homeowners' Associations 
    If a subdivision includes common areas or areas of common maintenance, a homeowners' association shall be mandatory and shall be organized and in legal existence prior to the sale of any lot in the development. 
4-25 - Subdivision Name Duplication 
    The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely resemble the name of an existing subdivision within Carteret County. 
4-26 - Subdivision Design 
4-26.1  Blocks. 
(A)  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: provisions for adequate building sites suitable to the special needs; zoning requirements; needs for vehicular and pedestrian circulation; control and safety of street traffic; limitations and opportunities of topography; and convenient access to water areas. 
(B)  Blocks shall be not less than four hundred (400) feet or more than twelve hundred (1,200) feet in length. 
(C)  Blocks shall have sufficient size to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth except where single tier lots are required to separate residential development from through vehicular traffic or another type of use in nonresidential subdivision, or where abutting public waters. 
(D)  Block numbers shall conform to the town street numbering system, if applicable. 
4-26.2  Lots. 
(A)  All lots in new subdivisions which are located within Morehead City limits shall conform to the zoning requirements of the district in which the subdivision is located. Conforming to zoning requirements means, among other things, that all lots in the subdivision must meet all dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, not just minimum lot size. All lots in new subdivisions which are located within Morehead City's planning jurisdiction but outside the town limits shall be subject to the following minimum lot requirements in addition to the dimensional requirements provided in section 13-1. Lots served by a public water and a public sewage disposal system shall have a minimum lot size of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet; lots served by either public water or a public sewage disposal system shall have a minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet; lots served by neither public water or public sewage disposal system shall have a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(B)  Lots shall meet any applicable Carteret County Health Department requirements. 
(C)  Double frontage lots shall be avoided wherever possible. 
(D)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial to street lines. 
4-26.3  Easements. Easement shall be provided as follows: 
(A)  Utility easements. Utility easements for underground or above ground utilities shall be provided, and shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide for water and sanitary sewer lines and as required by the companies involved for telephone, gas, and power lines. The Planning Board will determine whether one (1) easement is sufficient or whether several easements are necessary to accommodate the various facilities and the subdivider shall provide the required easement(s). 
(B)  Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream or drainage way, an easement shall be provided conforming with the lines of such stream or way and of such width as will be adequate for the purpose. Provisions for the future maintenance and upkeep of all drainage easements shall be approved by the town prior to plat approval and such provisions shall be included in the final plat. Unless otherwise recommended by the Planning Board, at least one (1) fifteen-foot easement shall be provided adjacent to the up slope crest of any open cross drainage course. 
4-27 - Procedures for Review of Major and Minor Subdivisions 
4-27.1  All subdivisions shall be considered major subdivisions except those defined as minor subdivisions in this Article. Major subdivisions shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in sections 4-29 and 4-32 of these regulations. 
Minor subdivisions shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 4-28 of these regulations. However, if the subdivider owns, leases, holds an option on, or holds any legal or equitable interest in any subdividable property adjacent to or within five hundred (500) feet of or located directly across a street, easement, road, or right-of-way from the property to be subdivided, the subdivision shall not qualify for approval under the abbreviated procedure. Furthermore, the abbreviated procedure may not be used a second time within two (2) years on any property adjacent to or part of or less than five hundred (500) feet from the original property boundaries by anyone who owned, had an option on, or had any legal or equitable interest in the original subdivision at the time the subdivision received preliminary or final plat approval. 
4-27.2  A minor subdivision is defined as the division of five (5) acres or less into five (5) or fewer lots and which creates no new public or private streets or roads, no right-of-way dedication, and no new easements except for electrical, drainage, cable, or telephone easements, and no utility extensions. 
4-28 - Approval Procedure for Minor Subdivisions 
    All plats for minor subdivisions shall be reviewed and approved pursuant to the procedures and requirements of this section. 
4-28.1  Application requirements. 
(A)  An application for plat approval may be filed only by all of the owners of the property or by an agent, lessee, or contract purchaser specifically authorized by all of the owners to file such application for such amendment. Where an agent, lessee or contract purchaser files the application, the agent, lessee or contract purchaser shall provide the town with written documentation that all of the owners of the property have authorized the filing of the application. The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Director ten (10) copies, including one (1) reproducible copy, of a final plat of the proposed subdivision. The subdivider shall also submit the final plat and any other information pertinent to the subdivision in a digital format compatible with Morehead City's Geographic Information System. 
(B)  An application for plat approval shall be filed with the Planning Director, along with the application fee in accordance with the current fee schedule as set by the Council to cover administrative costs and the recreation fee, if applicable, in accordance with section 15-2. 
(C)  The application shall contain or be accompanied by such information and plans as required on the application form and the plat shall meet the specifications for final plats in section 4-32. 
(D)  The plat shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor or Licensed Professional Engineer, currently licensed and registered in the State of North Carolina by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. The final plat shall conform to the provisions set forth in G.S. 47-30. 
(E)  The following signed certificates shall appear on all ten (10) copies of the final plat: 
Certificate of Ownership. 
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described hereon which is located within the subdivision jurisdiction of Morehead City, and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent and establish minimum building setback lines as noted. 
___________ 
Date 
___________ 
Owner 
Certificate of Survey and Accuracy. 
In accordance with the Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, on the face of each map prepared for recordation there shall appear a certificate acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgments and executed by the person making the survey or map, including deeds and any recorded data shown thereon. The certificate shall include a statement of error of closure calculated by latitudes and departures. The map shall clearly indicate all lines which were not actually surveyed and a statement shall be included in the certificate revealing the sources of information from which the map was prepared. The certificate shall take the following general form: 
I, ___________, certify that this map was [drawn by me], [drawn under my supervision] from [an actual survey made by me] [an actual survey made under my supervision] of [deed description recorded in Book _____, Page _____, etc.] [other]; that the ration of precision as calculated by latitudes and departures is 1: [that the boundaries and lines not surveyed are shown as broken lines platted from information found in Book _____, Page _____] and that this map was prepared in accordance with NCGS Section 47-30, as amended. 
Witness my hand and seal this ___ day of ___________, 20___. 
Official Seal___________ 
Registered Land Surveyor 
___________ 
Registration Number 
Certificate of Approval for Recording. 
I hereby certify that this subdivision plat has been found to comply with the Subdivision Regulations of Morehead City, North Carolina, and that this plat has been approved by the Town of Morehead City for recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County. 
___________ 
Municipal Clerk 
Morehead City, North Carolina 
___________ 
Date 
4-28.2  Required improvements. Prior to approval of the subdivision plat, monuments and markers shall be installed on the property. 
4-28.3  Staff review and approval of plat. The application and plat shall be reviewed for general compliance with this Ordinance and other applicable town ordinances and regulations. The Planning Director shall approve the subdivision plat upon finding that the application is complete and all required improvements have been installed on the subject property. In the event that the Planning Director determines a field inspection is needed to ensure the installation of the required improvements, such inspection shall be conducted. A decision shall be rendered within thirty (30) days of receipt of a completed application. 
4-28.4  Appeal of disapproval. In the event the Planning Director disapproves a minor subdivision, an appeal may be filed with the City Council within ten (10) calendar days of disapproval. If an appeal is filed, the City Council, at its next regularly scheduled meeting, shall decide whether to consider the appeal or not. If the City Council decides to consider the appeal, by majority vote, then the City Council may direct that the minor subdivision shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedural provisions for major subdivisions or affirm, reverse or modify the Planning Director's disapproval. 
4-28.5  Effect of plat approval. 
(A)  After obtaining approval of the plat, the subdivider may file the plat with the Carteret County Register of Deeds. The final plat shall be of a size suitable for recording with the Carteret County Register of Deeds and shall be at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. Maps may be placed on more than one (1) sheet with appropriate match lines. One (1) reproducible tracing as recorded by the Register of Deeds shall be returned to the Municipal Clerk. 
(B)  The approved plat must be recorded within thirty (30) days after approval by the Planning Director. The recording of the approved plat with the Register of Deeds shall authorize the subdivider, or any subsequent developer of the property, to proceed with such applications for environmental permits and building permits as this Ordinance may require for development on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-22, § 1, 8-9-2011) 
4-29 - Procedure for Review of Major Subdivisions 
4-29.1  Sketch plan for major subdivisions. 
(A)  Prior to the preliminary plat submission, the subdivider shall submit to the Planning Board and the Council at least twenty-five (25) copies of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. The sketch plan shall be a conceptual plan which shall indicate the intentions of the subdivider with respect to all of the lands owned or controlled by the subdivider which is planned to be subdivided, including any portions proposed to be developed in phases. 
(B)  Submission of the sketch plan shall be accompanied by a filing fee according to the current fee schedule as set by the Council to cover administrative costs. The engineering fee according to the current fee schedule shall also accompany the sketch plan. 
(C)  The sketch plan shall meet the requirements stated in section 4-32. 
(D)  The sketch plan shall be submitted at least twenty-eight (28) calendar days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which it will be reviewed. Subject to the length of the agenda and complexity of the application, late submittals may be placed on the meeting agenda with the approval of the Land Use Administrator. The Planning Board shall review the sketch plan for general compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and any other applicable regulations, and forward its comments to the Council for consideration during the Council's sketch plan review. 
(E)  Variances. The Council, upon receipt of a recommendation of the Planning Board, may authorize a variance from the design standards contained in these regulations, when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In order to grant any variance, the Council must make the findings required below, taking into account the nature of the proposed subdivision, the existing land use in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the council finds: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property such that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; 
(2)  That the variance is necessary for the preservation, or enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; 
(3)  That the circumstances giving rise to the need for the variance are peculiar to the parcel and are not generally characteristic of other parcels subject to this Ordinance; and 
(4)  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare or injurious to other property in the general area in which said property is situated. 
In granting a variance from the terms of these regulations, the Council may attach any reasonable conditions or safeguards deemed necessary to insure that the purposes and intent of this Ordinance are not compromised. No variance shall be granted which conflicts with any other applicable local, state, or federal statute, ordinance, or regulation. 
(F)  A copy of the sketch plan with Planning Board comments shall be presented to the Council for its approval prior to submission of the preliminary plat. 
4-29.2  Preliminary plat submission for major subdivisions. 
(A)  Every major subdivision shall be required to submit a preliminary plat which shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and approved by the Planning Board before any grading, clearing, construction or installation of improvements may begin (excepting soil tests, wetland surveys, etc.) 
(B)  The preliminary plat shall be consistent in concept with the previously submitted and approved sketch plan. The preliminary plat may constitute a portion of the sketch plan. Minor changes and revisions to the previously approved plan may be permitted, provided said changes or revisions do not result in: 
(1)  An increase in the density of the subdivision; 
(2)  A change in the design of vehicular traffic routes; 
(3)  A change in the open space dedication; 
(4)  A change in water access points; or 
(5)  Other substantial changes as determined by the Planning Director. 
Any such changes shall only be made in accordance with the procedures set forth for sketch plan approval. 
(C)  Eighteen (18) copies of the preliminary plat as well as any additional copies which the Planning Director determines are needed to be sent to other agencies shall be submitted at least twenty-eight (28) calendar days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which it will be reviewed. Subject to the length of the agenda and complexity of the application, late submittals may be placed on the meeting agenda with the approval of the Land Use Administrator. 
(D)  Subdivisions shall be constructed and/or improved as required by Articles 15, 16, and 17. Preliminary plats shall contain the information items as prescribed in section 4-32. 
(E)  The Planning Director shall require that copies of the preliminary plat and any accompanying material be submitted to other officials and agencies concerned with the new development, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Technical review committee consisting of the City Manager, appropriate town Department Heads and, if requested by the Planning Director or City Manager, a professional engineer or surveyor who shall confirm the accuracy of the preliminary plat and shall provide comments on technical data. If a material inaccuracy is found by such engineer or surveyor hired by the town, the costs shall be charged to the subdivider, and no action on the plat shall be taken until these costs have been paid; 
(2)  Carteret County Health Department; 
(3)  Carteret County Board of Education; 
(4)  The District Engineer of the North Carolina Department of Transportation; 
(5)  The North Carolina Department of Health and Natural Resources, Wilmington Regional Office; 
(6)  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or Office of Coastal Management, Morehead City; and 
(7)  Any other agency deemed appropriate or necessary to review the plat as determined by the staff, Town Attorney, Planning Board, or City Council. 
(F)  The Planning Board shall not approve the preliminary plat and the final plat of a major subdivision at the same meeting. The Planning Board may review the preliminary plat before the comments from all of the appropriate agencies have been received. 
(G)  The Planning Board shall, in writing, grant approval, conditional approval with recommended changes to bring the plat into compliance, or disapproval with reasons within forty-five (45) days of its first consideration of the plat. 
(H)  If the Planning Board grants approval of the preliminary plat, it shall retain one (1) copy of the plat for its minutes and return one (1) copy of the plat and its recommendations to the subdivider. 
(I)  If the Planning Board denies the preliminary plat, it shall retain one copy of the plat for its minutes and return one (1) copy of the plat and its recommendations to the subdivider. 
(J)  If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the subdivider may submit a revised preliminary plat or appeal the decision to the Council within ten (10) calendar days of the date of disapproval. Approval by the Council shall constitute preliminary plat approval as required by these regulations. 
(K)  If the Planning Board does not make a written recommendation within forty-five (45) days after its first consideration of the plat, the subdivider may apply to the Council for approval unless the delay is caused by failure of the subdivider to pay engineering or surveying costs. Approval by the Council shall constitute preliminary plat approval as required by these regulations. 
4-29.3  Final plat for major subdivisions. 
(A)  Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Board, or by the City Council if an appeal is heard, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and the installation of or arrangement for required improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this Ordinance. No final plat will be accepted for review by the Planning Board unless accompanied by written notice by the City Manager acknowledging compliance with the improvement requirements and guaranty standards of this Ordinance. The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record. Such portion shall conform to all requirements of this Ordinance. 
(B)  Improvements guaranties. Agreement and security required. In lieu of requiring the completion, installation, and dedication of all public improvements prior to final plat approval, the Town of Morehead City may enter into an agreement with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall agree to complete all required improvements. Once said agreement is signed by both parties and the security required herein is provided, the final plat may be approved by the Planning Board if all other requirements of this Ordinance are met. To secure this agreement, the subdivider shall provide, subject to approval of the City Manager, either one (1) or a combination of the following guaranties not exceeding 1.25 times the entire cost as provided herein: 
(1)  Surety Performance Bond[s]. The subdivider shall obtain a performance bond(s) from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in North Carolina. The bonds shall be payable to the Town of Morehead City and shall be in an amount equal to 1.25 times the entire cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the City Manager, of installing all required public improvements. The duration of the bond(s) shall be until such time as the improvements are in place and approved by the appropriate state or local authority. 
(2)  Cash or Equivalent Security. The subdivider shall deposit cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value (hereinafter "Instrument"), either with the town or in escrow with a financial institution designated as an official depository of the town. The use of any method other than cash shall be subject to the approval of the town. The amount of deposit or the face value of the Instrument, as the case may be, shall be equal to 1.25 times the cost of installing all required improvements, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the City Manager. If cash or an approved Instrument is deposited in escrow with a financial institution as provided above, then the subdivider shall file with the City Manager an agreement guaranteeing the following: 
(a)  That said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the Council and may not be used, encumbered, transferred or pledged by the subdivider in any other matter during the term of the escrow; and 
(b)  That in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to complete said improvements, the financial institution shall, upon notification by the Council and submission by the Council to the financial institution of an engineer's estimate of the amount needed to complete the improvements, immediately pay to the town the funds estimated to complete the improvements, up to the full balance of the escrow payable in full to the town to be used to pay the costs of completing the improvements. 
(3)  Default. Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the subdivider to complete the required improvements in a timely manner as specified in the performance bond or escrow agreement, the surety or the financial institution holding the escrow account upon request of the Council, shall pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow fund, including earned interest, to the Town of Morehead City up to the amount needed to complete the improvements based on an engineering estimate. Upon payment, the Council, at its discretion, may expend such portion of said funds as it deems necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements. All interest earned shall be paid to the town to be used to pay the costs of completing the improvements. Any funds and interest not used for completion of the improvements shall be returned to the subdivider. 
(4)  Release of Guaranty Security. The Council may release a portion of any security or authorize a release from any escrow posted as the improvements are completed and recommended for approval by the appropriate state or local agency. Within thirty (30) days after receiving the approval, the Council shall review said improvements, then it may release such amount of the security posted as in its opinion represents the fair share of improvements approved and completed. 
(C)  The subdivider shall submit the final plat, so marked, at least twenty-eight (28) days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which it will be reviewed. Subject to the length of the agenda and the complexity of the application, late submittals may be placed on the meeting agenda with the approval of the Land Use Administrator. Further, the final plat for the subdivision shall be submitted not more than twenty-four (24) months after the date on which the preliminary plat was approved. One twelve-month extension may be granted by the Planning Board for good cause such as substantial progress towards improvements. Preliminary plat approval shall be null and void upon expiration of the twenty-four-month period unless an extension has been granted. 
(D)  The final plat shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor or Licensed Professional Engineer currently licensed and registered in the State of North Carolina by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. The final plat shall conform to the provisions set forth in G.S. 47-30. 
(E)  Twelve (12) copies of the final plat shall be submitted. One (1) of these shall be on reproducible material. The subdivider shall also submit the final plat and any other information pertinent to the subdivision in a digital format compatible with Morehead City's Geographic Information System. 
(F)  The final plat shall be of a size suitable for recording with the Carteret County Register of Deeds and shall be at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. Maps may be placed on more than one (1) sheet with appropriate match lines. 
(G)  The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the Carteret County Register of Deeds within ninety (90) days of approval by the Planning Board or Council, or such approval shall be null and void. One (1) reproducible tracing as recorded by the Carteret County Register of Deeds shall be returned to the Municipal Clerk. 
(H)  The final plat shall meet the specifications in section 4-32. Subdivisions shall be constructed and/or improved as required by this Ordinance. 
(I)  The following signed certificates shall appear on all twelve (12) copies of the final plat: 
Certificate of Ownership. 
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described hereon which is located within the subdivision jurisdiction of Morehead City, and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent and establish minimum building setback lines as noted. 
___________ 
Date 
___________ 
Owner 
Certificate of Survey and Accuracy. 
In accordance with the Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, there shall appear on the face of each map prepared for recordation a certificate acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgments and executed by the person making the survey or map, including deeds and any recorded data shown thereon. The certificate shall include a statement of error of closure calculated by latitudes and departures. The map shall clearly indicate all lines which were not actually surveyed and a statement shall be included in the certificate revealing the sources of information from which the map was prepared. The certificate shall take the following general form: 
I, ___________, certify that this map was [drawn by me], [drawn under my supervision] from [an actual survey made by me] [an actual survey made under my supervision] of [deed description recorded in Book _____, Page _____, etc.] [other]; that the ration of precision as calculated by latitudes and departures is 1: [that the boundaries and lines not surveyed are shown as broken lines platted from information found in Book _____, Page _____] and that this map was prepared in accordance with NCGS Section 47-30, as amended. 
Witness my hand and seal this ___ day of ___________, 20___. 
Official Seal 
___________ 
Registered Land Surveyor 
___________ 
Registration Number 
Certificate of Approval of the Design and Installation of Streets, Utilities, and Other Required Improvements. 
I hereby certify that all streets, utilities, and other required improvements have been installed in a manner approved by the appropriate state or local authority and according to Morehead City specifications and standards in the ___________ Subdivision or that guaranties of the installation of the required improvements in an amount and manner satisfactory to the Town of Morehead City have been received, and that the filing fee for this plat has been paid. 
___________ 
City Manager 
or Authorized Representative 
___________ 
Date 
(J)  The Planning Board shall review the final plat for compliance with this Ordinance, the approved preliminary plat, and any other relevant regulations, and shall grant approval, conditional approval with modification to bring the plat into compliance with the preliminary plat, or disapproval of the final plat with reasons within forty-five (45) days of its first consideration of the plat. 
(K)  The Planning Board shall grant approval of the final plat if improvements have been constructed in accordance with the requirements shown on the preliminary plat or an improvements guaranty has been received, and if all other conditions attached to the preliminary plat approval have been met. If the Planning Board grants approval of the final plat, it shall keep one (1) copy of the plat. 
(L)  If the Planning Board grants conditional approval of the final plat with modifications to bring the plat into compliance, it shall retain one (1) copy of the plat with conditions and forward one (1) copy of the plat with conditions to the subdivider. If the subdivider disagrees with the conditional approval given by the Planning Board, he may appeal to the Council within ten (10) calendar days of the date of decision. 
(M)  If the Planning Board disapproves the final plat, it shall instruct the subdivider concerning resubmission of the revised plat and the subdivider may make such changes as will bring the plat into compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and resubmit the plat for reconsideration by the Planning Board, or appeal the decision to the Council. 
(N)  Failure of the Planning Board to make a written decision within forty-five (45) days after its review of the final plat shall constitute grounds for the subdivider to apply to the Council for approval unless delay is caused by failure of the subdivider to pay engineering or land surveying fees incurred by the town and authorized by these regulations: 
(1)  If the Planning Board grants conditional approval with modifications to bring the plat into compliance and the subdivider appeals to the Council, the Council shall review and approve or disapprove the final plat within forty-five (45) days after the plat and recommendations of the Planning Board have been first considered by the Council. 
(O)  If the final plat is disapproved by the Council, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of this Ordinance with which the final plat does not comply. One (1) copy of such reasons and one (1) print of the plat shall be retained by the Council as part of its proceedings; one (1) copy of the reasons and one (1) copy of the plat shall be transmitted to the subdivider. If the final plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make such changes as will bring the final plat into compliance and resubmit same for reconsideration by the Planning Board and the Council or by the Council only, as determined by the Council. 
(1)  If the final plat is approved by the Council, one (1) print of the plat shall be retained by the subdivider. One (1) reproducible copy and one (1) print shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and one (1) print shall be returned to the Planning Board for its records. 
(P)  If the Planning Board or Council approves the final plat, such approval shall be shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate: 
Certificate of Approval for Recording. 
I hereby certify that this subdivision plat has been found to comply with the Subdivision Regulations of Morehead City, North Carolina, and that this plat has been approved by the Planning Board/Council for recording in the Officer of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County. 
___________ 
Municipal Clerk 
Morehead City, North Carolina 
___________ 
Date 
(Q)  The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the Register of Deeds of Carteret County within ninety (90) days of approval by the Planning Board or Council, or such approval shall be null and void. One (1) reproducible tracing as recorded by the Register of Deeds shall be returned to the Municipal Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2006-64, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 2008-55, §§ 1-3, 5, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2009-02, §§ 9, 10, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 2011-21, §§ 1-3, 7-12-2011; Ord. No. 2011-22, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-2011) 
4-30 - Townhouse Developments 
4-30.1  General requirements. In addition to the requirements contained in subsection 4-30.2, townhouse developments shall meet any other applicable ordinance requirements, including requirements contained in section 12-1 if the townhouse development is located in a PD district; section 12-2 if the property is located in the CD or DB district; section 13-2 if located in a district which permits multifamily dwelling(s) and which is located in a district other than CD, DB, or PD; and any applicable ordinances related to the subdivision of property. 
4-30.2  Requirements for townhouse development. 
(A)  Townhouse development approval procedures. 
(1)  CD and DB district. A final plat of the development shall be submitted for review by the Planning Board pursuant to Article 4 of this Ordinance and in conformance with subsection 4-30.2(B) for any townhouse development proposed to be located in the CD or DB district. 
(2)  PD district. Townhouse developments located in the planned development district shall be subject to the approval procedures contained in section 12-1 planned development district. 
(3)  All other districts. Townhouse developments located in all other zoning districts shall be subject to the subdivision approval procedures contained in section 4-28 approval procedure for minor subdivisions and 4-29 procedure for review of major subdivisions, as applicable. 
(B)  Site plan. A site plan shall show all requirements of section 12-1 if the townhouse development is located in the PD district, section 12-2 if the property is located in the CD or DB district, or section 13-2 of this Ordinance if located in a district which permits multifamily dwelling(s) and which is located in a district other than CD, DB, or PD, and shall include the location of the buildings, streets, alleys, walks, parking areas, recreation areas and facilities, and numbered and dimensional residential sites. The site plan shall also show the common areas, if any, to be conveyed to a nonprofit corporate homeowners' association, the members of which shall be all of the owners of the residential sites within the development. 
(C)  Townhouse lot. The site plan shall number and show the locations and dimensions of townhouse lots within the development. A townhouse lot shall be that property intended for conveyance to a fee simple owner after the construction thereon of a single family residence and shall be sufficient in size to contain the residence located thereon. The townhouse lot may be of any larger size desired by the developer which meets any applicable standards of this Ordinance. If applicable, lot "frontage" shall be an open space properly restricted through a homeowners' association to insure adequate access if, in the opinion of the town, a public street is within an acceptable distance and would allow adequate community services. 
(D)  Common areas. All areas which are shown on the site plan other than public streets and townhouse lots shall be shown and designated as common areas and shall be conveyed by the developer to the homeowners' association. 
(E)  Covenants and restrictions. The developer shall file with the application for preliminary approval a declaration of covenants and restrictions applicable to the common areas, if any are required by the Ordinances and Regulations of Morehead City, the homeowners' association and townhouse lots. The restrictions shall contain, but not be limited to, provisions for the following: 
(1)  Homeowners' Association. If the plan of development includes common areas or a common maintenance of residences or lots, a homeowners' association shall be mandatory and shall be organized and in legal existence prior to the sale of any residence in the development. 
(2)  Membership. If a homeowners' association is organized, membership in the homeowners' association shall be mandatory for each original purchaser and each successive purchaser of a residence. 
(3)  Responsibilities. The homeowners' association shall be responsible for the payment of premiums for liability insurance and local taxes on common areas, maintenance of recreational and other facilities located on the common areas and payment for capital improvements made to or for the benefit of the common areas. 
(4)  Assessments. The homeowners' association shall be empowered to levy assessments against the owners of residences within the development for the payment of expenditures made by the homeowners' association for the times set forth in the preceding subparagraph and the covenants and restrictions shall provide that any such assessments not paid by the owner against whom such are assessed shall constitute a lien on the residence of the owner. 
(5)  Easements. Easements over the common areas, if any, for access, ingress, and egress from and to public streets and walkways and easements for enjoyment of the common areas, as well as for parking, shall be granted to each owner of a residence. 
(6)  Walls. All walls between individual residences shall conform to the requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code and provisions for the maintenance thereof and restoration in the event of destruction or damage shall be established. 
(F)  Phased development. Townhouse development may be developed in sections or phases provided that: 
(1)  The entire project, including phase or section lines and sequencing receives approval with the preliminary plat. Nothing herein shall prohibit an unrecorded phase or section from containing inappropriate densities, setbacks, and off-street parking spaces and open space provided that any such phase or section at the time of its recordation is combined with other recorded phases or sections of the development so that the recombined properties conform to the density, setback, off-street parking, and open space requirement of this Ordinance. 
(2)  The number of dwelling units in the recorded section or phase conforms to the density requirements for the zoning district; in the recorded section of phase, the buildings are located so that all setbacks, including peripheral yards, are met, and off-street parking requirements for the developed portion are observed. Any recorded portion shall conform to all the requirements of a legal lot. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, § 3, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2018-O-15, §§ 1-9, 8-14-2018) 
4-31 - Completing Developments in Phases 
4-31.1  If a development is constructed in phases or stages in accordance with this section, the provisions of section 4-2 (No Occupancy, Use, or Sale of Lots Until Requirements Fulfilled) and section 4-11 shall apply to each phase as if it were the entire development. 
4-31.2  As a prerequisite to taking advantage of the provisions of subsection 4-12.1, the developer shall submit plans that clearly show the various phases or stages of the proposed development and the requirements of this Ordinance that will be satisfied with respect to each phase or stage. 
4-31.3  If a development that is to be built in phases or stages includes improvements that are designed to relate to, benefit, or be used by the entire development (such as a swimming pool or tennis courts in a residential development) then, as part of his application for development approval, the developer shall submit a proposed schedule for completion of such improvements. The schedule shall relate completion of such improvements to completion of one (1) or more phases or stages of the entire development. Once a schedule has been approved and made part of the permit by the permit-issuing authority, no land may be used, no buildings may be occupied, and no subdivision lots may be sold except in accordance with the schedule approved as part of the permit, provided that: 
(A)  If the improvement is one required by the Ordinance then the developer may utilize the provisions of subsection 4-11.1 or 4-11.3; 
(B)  If the improvement is an amenity not required by this Ordinance or is provided in response to a condition imposed by the Board, then the developer may utilize the provisions of subsection 4-11.2. 
(Ord. No. 2007-50, § 2, 12-11-2007) 
4-32 - Information to be Contained in or Depicted on Preliminary and Final Plats 
    The preliminary and final plat shall depict or contain the information indicated in the following table: 
Minor Major P F S P F Title Block 
 a) Subdivision Name 
 b) Location by Township, County and State 
 c) Date of Survey 
 d) Date of Plat Preparation 
 e) Numerical and Graphic Scale 
 f) Zoning Designation 
 g) Name of Surveyor, Engineer, Land Planner, Architect X X X X X Vicinity Map X X X X X Corporate Boundaries of Town, Township, County (if applicable) X X X X X Name, Address, Phone Number of Owner(s), Surveyor, Engineer, Land Planner, Architect X X X X X Registration numbers and seals of Professional Engineer and Registered Land Surveyor X X X X X North arrow and orientation X X X X X Bearings and distances of subdivision boundaries X X X X X Names of adjoining subdivisions and/or property owners X X X X X Existing property lines on tract to be subdivided and abutting property lines on adjoining tracts X X X X X Total acreage of tract to be subdivided X X X X X Total number of lots X X X X X Minimum lot size X X X X X Total acreage in parks, recreation areas, and other nonresidential uses X X X X X Minimum building setback lines X X X X X Zoning classification of adjoining properties X X X X X Existing buildings or other structures including culverts, water courses, storm drains, etc. X X X X X Consecutively numbered lots and blocks X X X X X Approximate lot lines and dimensions X X X Exact lot lines and dimensions X X Location of CAMA AECs and 404 wetlands, flood hazard zones, and natural features affecting the site X X X X X Topographic map with contour intervals no greater than 2' at a scale of not less than 1" = 100' for existing and finished grade elevations X X List of square footage per lot with a notation of the square footage of wetlands and remaining area per lot X X X X Street Information 
 a) Proposed layout 
 b) Existing and platted streets on adjoining property 
 c) Right-of-way, locations and dimensions 
 d) Pavement widths 
 e) Approximate grades 
 f) Typical street cross-section 
 g) Proposed street names 
 h) Type of street dedication (public) 
 i) Site distances 
 j) Street length 
 k) Street disclosure statement X X Engineering data for all street corners and curves X X Location and dimensions of any: 
 a) Utility and other easements 
 b) Landscape and screening areas 
 c) Parks and recreation areas 
 d) School sites 
 e) Areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public use 
 f) Drainage easements 
 g) Public or private water lines 
 h) Public or private sanitary sewer lines X X X X Profiles based upon mean sea level datum for sanitary sewers and storm sewers X X X X Name and location of any property listed on the National Register of Historic Places X X X DOT driveway permit, if required X Any necessary water and sewer utility plans X X Copy of proposed deed restrictions and restrictive covenants, if any X X X X Letter from Stormwater Management approving the stormwater management plan, if required by state X X Lot-by-lot evaluation letter from the Carteret County Environmental Health Department, if not connecting into approved public sewage disposal system X X Letter approving Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, if required by state X X Major CAMA Permit, if required X X Digital copy of map (i.e., PDF, JPEG) X X X X Landscaping Plan prepared in accordance with Article 15 X X  
Note: S = Sketch P = Preliminary F = Final 
(Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2007-53, § 1, 11-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-55, § 6, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2009-38, § 1, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 1, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017) 
PART III. - PROVISIONS FOR STATUTORY VESTED RIGHT 

4-33 - Purpose 
    The purpose of sections 4-33 through 4-39 are to implement the provisions of G.S. 160A-385.1 pursuant to which a statutory zoning vested right is established upon the approval of a site specific development plan. 
4-34 - Establishment of a Zoning Vested Right 
4-34.1  A zoning vested right shall be deemed established upon the valid approval, or conditional approval, by the City Council or Board of Adjustment, as applicable, of a site specific development plan, following notice and public hearing. 
4-34.2  The approving authority may approve a site specific development plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
4-34.3  Notwithstanding subsections 4-34.1 and 4-34.2, approval of a site specific development plan with the condition that a variance be obtained shall not confer a zoning vested right unless and until the necessary variance is obtained. 
4-34.4  A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the approval authority's action or ordinance relating thereto. 
4-34.5  The establishment of a zoning vested right shall not preclude the application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but does not affect the allowable type or intensity of use or ordinances or regulations that are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land use regulations by the town, including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes. Otherwise applicable new or amended regulations shall become effective with respect to property that is subject to a site specific development plan upon the expiration or termination of the vested right in accordance with this Ordinance. 
4-34.6  A zoning vested right is not a personal right, but shall attach to and run with the applicable property. After approval of a site specific development plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be entitled to exercise such right while applicable. 
4-35 - Approval Procedures and Approval Authority 
4-35.1  Except as otherwise provided in this section, an application for site specific development plan approval shall be processed in accordance with the procedures established by ordinance and shall be considered by the designated approval authority for the specific type of zoning or land use permit or approval for which application is made. 
4-35.2  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 4-35.1, if the authority to issue a particular zoning or land use permit or approval has been delegated by ordinance to a Board, committee, or administrative official other than the City Council, Board of Adjustment, or other planning agency designated to perform any or all of the duties of the Board of Adjustment in order to obtain a zoning vested right, the applicant must request in writing at the time of application that the application be considered and acted on by the City Council, following notice and a public hearing as provided in G.S. 160A-364. 
4-35.3  All applications for vested rights shall be reviewed and commented on by the Planning Board prior to the public hearing. 
4-35.4  In order for a zoning vested right to be established upon approval of a site-specific development plan, the applicant must indicate at the time of application, on a form to be provided by the town, that a zoning vested right is being sought. 
4-35.5  Each map, plat, site plan, or other document evidencing a site-specific development plan shall contain the following notation: "Approval of this plan establishes a zoning vested right under G.S. 160A-385.1. Unless terminated at an earlier date, the zoning vested right shall be valid until (date)" and shall be signed by the City Clerk. 
4-35.6  A vested rights certificate will be issued following approval or conditional approval of the site-specific development plan containing the date of approval, if any. Such certificate shall be signed by the City Clerk and the applicant and shall be recorded in the register of deeds' office in a timely manner. 
4-35.7  Following approval or conditional approval of a site-specific development plan, nothing in this Ordinance shall exempt such a plan from subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the original approval, provided that such reviews and approvals are not inconsistent with the original approval. 
4-35.8  Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the revocation of the original approval or other remedies for failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the approval or the unified development ordinance. 
4-36 - Duration and Termination 
4-36.1  Duration. 
(A)  A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this Ordinance shall remain vested for period of two (2) years unless specifically and unambiguously provided otherwise pursuant to subsection 4-34.2. This vesting shall not be extended by any amendments or modifications to a site-specific development plan unless expressly provided by the approval authority at the time the amendment or modification is approved. 
(B)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 4-36.1(A), the approval authority may provide that rights shall be vested for a period exceeding two (2) years but not exceeding five (5) years where warranted in light of all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the size of the development, the level of investment, the need for or desirability of the development, economic cycles, and market conditions. These determinations shall be in the sound sole discretion of the approval authority at the time the site-specific development plan is approved. 
(C)  Upon issuance of a building permit, the expiration provisions of G.S. 160A-418 and the revocation provisions of G.S. 160A-422 shall apply, except that a building permit shall not expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a zoning vested right under this section is outstanding. 
4-36.2  Termination. A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this Ordinance shall terminate: 
(A)  At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to buildings and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been filed; 
(B)  With the written consent of the affected landowner; 
(C)  Upon findings by the City Council, by ordinance after notice and a public hearing, that natural or manmade hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as contemplated in the site-specific development plan; 
(D)  Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for all costs, expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including, but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing and all architectural, planning, marketing, legal, and other consultant's fees incurred after approval by the town, together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid. Compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the property which is caused by such action; 
(E)  Upon finding by the City Council, by ordinance after notice and a hearing, that the landowner or his representative intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which made a difference in the approval by the approval authority of the site-specific development plan; or 
(F)  Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or regulations that precludes development as contemplated in the site-specific development plan, in which case the approval authority may modify the affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or federal law has a fundamental effect on the plan, by ordinance after notice and hearing. 
4-37 - Voluntary Annexation 
    A petition for annexation filed with the town under G.S. 160A-31 or G.S. 160A-58.1 shall contain a signed statement declaring whether or not any zoning vested right with respect to the properties subject to the petition has been established under G.S. 160A-385.1 or G.S. 153A-344.1, or the failure to sign a statement declaring whether or not a zoning vested right shall be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, § 4, 6-14-2005) 
4-38 - Limitations and Repealer 
4-38.1  Nothing in this Ordinance is intended or shall be deemed to create any vested right other than those established pursuant to G.S. 160A-385.1 is repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
4-38.2  In the event that G.S. 160A-385.1 is repealed, this Ordinance (Ordinance No. 1991-21) shall be deemed repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
4-39 - Conflicts with Other Ordinances and Effective Date 
4-39.1  If the terms of this Article (Ordinance No. 1991-21) conflict with the provisions of any other article, the terms of this Article shall govern. 
4-39.2  This Ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
ARTICLE 5. - APPEALS, VARIANCES, INTERPRETATIONS 
PART I. - GENERAL 

5-1 - Requests to be Heard Expeditiously 
    As provided in section 4-17, the Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide all appeals, variance requests, and requests for interpretations as expeditiously as possible, consistent with the need to follow regularly established agenda procedures, provide notice in accordance with Article 6, and obtain the necessary information to make sound decisions. 
PART II. - APPEALS 

5-2 - Procedure for Filing an Appeal 
5-2.1  Any person who has standing under G.S. 160A-393(d) or the Town may appeal a decision to the Board of Adjustment. An appeal is taken by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal. 
5-2.2  The Town official who made the decision shall give written notice to the owner of the property that is the subject of the decision and to the party who sought the decision, if different from the owner. The written notice shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail. 
5-2.3  The owner or other party shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the written notice within which to file an appeal. Any other person with standing to appeal shall have thirty (30) days from receipt from any source of actual or constructive notice of the decision within which to file an appeal. It is the responsibility of the property owner or the party who sought the decision to give constructive notice to all persons with standing to appeal. Constructive notice of the decision shall consist of posting a sign containing the words "Zoning Decision" or "Subdivision Decision" in letters at least six (6) inches high and identifying the means to contact an official for information about the decision. The sign should be prominently posted on the property that is the subject of the decision for a minimum of ten (10) days. 
5-2.4  The Town official who made the decision shall transmit to the Board all documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. The official shall also provide a copy of the record to the appellant and to the owner of the property that is the subject of the appeal if the appellant is not the owner. 
5-2.5  An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order stays enforcement of the action appealed from unless the official who made the decision certifies to the Board of Adjustment after notice of appeal has been filed that because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property or because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with the enforcement of the Ordinance. In that case, enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with the official a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to hear the appeal within fifteen (15) days after such request is filed. 
5-2.6  The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm (wholly or partly) or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and shall make any order, requirement, decision, or determination that in its opinion should be made in the case before it. To this end, the Board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 11-16, 1-14-2014) 
PART III. - VARIANCES 

5-3 - Procedure for Submitting an Application for a Variance 
5-3.1  An application for a variance shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustment by filing a copy of the application with the administrator in the Planning Department. Applications shall be handled in the same manner as applications for special use permits in conformity with the provisions of Section 4-3, 4-4, and 4-9. 
5-3.2  Variance criteria: 
(A)  Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property. 
(B)  The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance. 
(C)  The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship. 
(D)  The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of the ordinance such that public safety is secured and substantial justice is achieved. 
(E)  No change in permitted uses may be authorized by variance. 
5-3.3  Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance, provided that the conditions are reasonably related to the variance. 
5-3.4  The nature of the variance and any conditions attached to it shall be entered on the face of the zoning permit, or the zoning permit may simply note the issuance of the variance and refer to the written record of the variance for further information. All such conditions are enforceable in the same manner as any other applicable requirement of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 7, 1-10-2006; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 12, 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 17-23, 1-14-2014) 
5-4 - Board Action on Appeals, Quasi-judicial Matters, and Variances 
5-4.1  Appeals and Quasi-Judicial Matters other than Variances. A majority of the members shall be required to decide any quasi-judicial matter other than a variance or to determine an appeal made in the nature of certiorari. 
5-4.2  Variances. The concurring vote of four-fifths (?) of the Board shall be necessary to grant a variance. 
5-4.3  Vacant positions on the Board and members who are disqualified from voting on the matter shall not be considered members of the Board for calculation of the requisite majority if there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members. 
5-4.4  Quasi-Judicial Decisions and Judicial Review. The Board shall determine contested facts and make its decision within a reasonable time. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision shall be reduced to writing and reflect the Board's determination of contested facts and application to the applicable standards. The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the Board. A quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing the written decision with the Clerk to the Board. The decision of the Board shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, property owner and to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy, prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The Clerk shall provide notice and certify that proper notice has been made. When first-class mail is used to deliver notice, three (3) days shall be added to the time to file the petition. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, §§ 5, 6, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 24-28, 1-14-2014) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2014-03, § 24, adopted January 14, 2014, amended section 5-4 to read as set out herein. Previously section 5-4 was titled Board Action on Appeals and Variances. 
ARTICLE 6. - HEARING PROCEDURES FOR APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS 

6-1 - Hearing Required on Appeals and Applications 
6-1.1  Before making a decision on an appeal or an application for a variance, special-use permit, or a petition from the planning staff to revoke a special-use permit, the Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall hold a hearing on the appeal or application. 
6-1.2  The Board of Adjustment shall follow quasi-judicial procedures when deciding appeals and requests for variances and special use permits. 
6-1.3  Appropriate conditions may be placed upon any variance or special use permit provided that the conditions are reasonably related to the variance or special use permit. 
6-1.4  The hearing Board may continue the hearing until a subsequent meeting and may keep the hearing open to take additional information up to the point a final decision is made. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 30-32, 1-14-2014) 
6-2 - Notice of Hearing 
    The administrator shall give notice of any hearing required by section 6-1 as follows: 
6-2.1  The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least once a week for two (2) successive calendar weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the area. The notice shall be published the first time not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty-five (25) days before the date fixed for the hearing. In computing such period, the day of publication is not to be included but the day of the hearing shall be included. 
6-2.2  The notice required by this section shall state the date, time, and place of the hearing, reasonably identify the lot that is the subject of the application or appeal, and give a brief description of the action requested or proposed. 
6-2.3  Notice of hearings shall be mailed to the person or entity whose appeal, application, or request is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of the property that is the subject of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; to the owners of all parcels of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject of the hearing; and to any other persons entitled to receive notice as provided by this Ordinance. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the City may rely on the County tax listings to determine owners of property entitled to mailed notice. The notice must be mailed at least ten (10) days, but not more than twenty-five (25) days, prior to the date of the hearing. Within that same period, the City shall post a notice of the hearing on the site that is the subject of the hearing or on an adjacent street or highway right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, § 7, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 33, 1-14-2014) 
6-3 - Evidence 
6-3.1  The provisions of this section apply to all hearings for which a notice is required by section 6-1. 
6-3.2  All persons who intend to present evidence to the permit-issuing Board, rather than arguments only, shall be sworn. 
6-3.3  All findings and conclusions necessary to the issuance or denial of the requested permit or appeal (crucial findings) shall be based upon reliable evidence. Competent evidence (evidence admissible in a court of law) shall be preferred whenever reasonably available, but in no case may crucial findings be based solely upon incompetent evidence unless competent evidence is not reasonably available, the evidence in question appears to be particularly reliable, and the matter at issue is not seriously disputed. 
6-4 - Modification of Application at Hearing 
6-4.1  In response to questions or comments by persons appearing at the hearing or to suggestions or recommendations by the City Council or Board of Adjustment, the applicant may agree to modify his application, including the plans and specifications submitted. 
6-4.2  Unless such modifications are so substantial or extensive that the Board cannot reasonably be expected to perceive the nature and impact of the proposed changes without revised plans before it, the Board may approve the application with the stipulation that the permit will not be issued until plans reflecting the agreed upon changes are submitted to the planning staff. 
6-5 - Reserved 
Editor's note- Sections 7 through 9 of Ordinance No. 2008-55, adopted November 4, 2008, removed §§ 6-5-6-5.2, which pertained to tape recordings of hearings, and derived from Ordinance No. 2001-19, adopted June 12, 2001. 
6-6 - Burden of Proof in Appeals and Variances 
6-6.1  When an appeal is taken to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with section 5-2, the administrator shall have the initial burden of presenting to the Board sufficient evidence and argument to justify the order or decision appealed from. The burden of presenting evidence and argument to the contrary then shifts to the appellant, who shall also have the burden of persuasion. 
6-6.2  The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to allow the Board of Adjustment to reach the conclusions set forth in subsection 5-3.2, as well as the burden of persuasion on those issues, remains with the applicant seeking the variance. 
ARTICLE 7. - ENFORCEMENT AND REVIEW 

7-1 - Complaints Regarding Violations 
    Whenever the administrator receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of this Ordinance, he shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and inform the complainant in writing what actions have been or will be taken. 
7-2 - Persons Liable 
    The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this Ordinance may be held responsible for the violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein provided. 
7-3 - Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations 
7-3.1  If the administrator finds that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he shall send a written notice to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Additional written notices may be sent at the administrator's discretion. 
7-3.2  The final written notice (and the initial written notice may be the final notice) shall state what action the administrator intends to take if the violation is not corrected and shall advise that the administrator's decision or order may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Article 5. 
7-3.3  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases when delay would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this Ordinance or pose a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the administrator may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the penalties or remedies authorized in section 7-4. 
7-4 - Penalties and Remedies for Violations 
7-4.1  Violations of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of any conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special-use permits, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to fifty dollars ($50.00), or a maximum thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both. 
7-4.2  Any act constituting a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or a failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of any conditions and safeguards established in connection with the grants of variances or special-use permits, shall also subject the offender to a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If the offender fails to pay this penalty within thirty (30) days after being cited for a violation, the penalty may be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt. A civil penalty may not be appealed to the Board of Adjustment if the offender was sent a final notice of violation in accordance with section 7-3 and did not take an appeal to the Board of Adjustment within the prescribed time. 
7-4.3  This Ordinance may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable action. 
7-4.4  Each day that any violation continues after notification by the administrator that such violation exists shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of the penalties and remedies specified in this section. 
7-4.5  Any one (1), all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce this Ordinance. 
7-5 - Permit Revocation 
7-5.1  A zoning or special-use permit may be revoked by the permit-issuing authority (in accordance with the provisions of this Article) if the permit recipient fails to develop or maintain the property in accordance with the plans submitted, the requirements of this Ordinance, or any additional requirements lawfully imposed by the permit-issuing Board. 
7-5.2  Before a special-use permit may be revoked, all of the notice and hearing and other requirements of Article 6 shall be complied with. The notice shall inform the permit recipient of the alleged grounds for the revocation. 
7-5.3  Before a zoning permit may be revoked, the administrator shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons for the revocation and of his right to appeal the decision in accordance with this Ordinance. If the permit is revoked, the administrator shall provide to the permittee a written statement of the decision and the reasons therefor. 
7-5.4  No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in the manner authorized by any zoning or special-use permit after such permit has been revoked in accordance with this Ordinance. 
7-6 - Judicial Review 
7-6.1  Every final decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of Carteret County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. 
7-6.2  The petition for the writ of certiorari must be filed with the Carteret County Clerk of Court within thirty (30) days after the Board's decision. 
7-6.3  A copy of the writ of certiorari shall be served upon the Town of Morehead City. 
ARTICLE 8. - NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS 

8-1 - Intent 
    This section places restrictions on the use and development of land by establishing minimum standards. In many instances, land and improvements were developed or proposals for the use of land were initiated prior to the adoption of this Ordinance. These uses may not meet the minimum standards contained in this Ordinance because they were developed under no specific standards or under standards which were less restrictive. The City Council recognizes that the strict application of these standards to such uses may create certain hardships for the property owner. The City Council also recognizes that these uses may be allowed to continue in use in accordance with the spirit of this Ordinance even though not meeting the Ordinance standards. Therefore, the uses or situations described below are accorded a nonconforming status with all the specific privileges and limitations set forth to govern their existence. 
8-2 - Nonconforming Lots 
    A nonconforming lot is a lot which does not conform to the size requirements of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated in this Ordinance. 
    A nonconforming vacant lot may be used for any of the uses permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located if the use of the lot meets the following standards: 
8-2.1  The minimum requirements for front, side and rear yards, height of structures, and unobstructed open space for the particular district must be met; 
8-2.2  Two-family and multifamily dwellings must meet the minimum lot standards in section 13-1; 
8-2.3  The lot in question does not abut a lot which could be combined with it to make it conforming which is under common ownership; 
8-2.4  A legally recorded plat or deed shall be required prior to obtaining any building permits. 
8-3 - Nonconforming Structures 
    A nonconforming structure is a structure which does not meet the minimum requirements for area, front, side or rear yard setbacks, height requirements or which exceeds the allowable lot coverage for the district in which it is located. A nonconforming structure may be improved or expanded in accordance with the following standards: 
8-3.1  Any improvement or expansion of any nonconforming structure on sides meeting minimum setbacks must also comply with the minimum setback requirements of the Ordinance for front, side and rear yard for the district in which the lot is located. Improvements or expansion of any nonconforming structure on sides not meeting minimum setbacks may be allowed provided, the addition encroaches no closer to the property line than the existing (nonconforming) outside wall of the original structure. In no case may maximum lot coverage or height limits be exceeded. Adding additional living space on a second floor within existing exterior dimensions is not considered as increasing the nonconformity even if the exterior dimensions do not meet the current setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2003-41, § 1, 11-20-2003) 
8-4 - Reconstruction, Restoration, and Replacement of Damaged Nonconforming Structures 
8-4.1  No special use permit required from the Board of Adjustment. The rebuilding, reconstruction, restoration, or replacement of any zoning nonconforming structure which was damaged or partially destroyed by: the exercise of eminent domain; man-caused acts such as fire, accident, explosion; or flood, lightning, wind, or other calamity or natural act, does not require a special use permit if all of the following are met: 
(A)  The cost of rebuilding, reconstructing, or restoring is less than seventy-five (75) percent of the replacement cost of the original nonconformity as determined at the time such damage or destruction occurred. 
(B)  The nature and degree of the nonconforming use or structure is not expanded, changed, or increased from that which existed prior to the damage or destruction, except as provided in section 8-3. 
(C)  A completed application for a building permit to substantially rebuild, reconstruct, or restore the nonconformity is submitted to the building inspections department within one (1) year of the date the nonconformity was damaged or destroyed. 
8-4.2  Special use permit required from Board of Adjustment. The rebuilding, reconstruction, or restoration of any zoning nonconforming structure which was damaged or partially destroyed by: the exercise of eminent domain; man-made acts such as fire, accident, explosion; or flood, lightning, wind, or other calamity or natural act, requires a special use permit from the Board of Adjustment if one (1) or more of the following apply. 
(A)  The cost of rebuilding, reconstructing, and restoring is seventy-five (75) percent or more of the replacement cost of the original nonconformity as determined at the time such damage or destruction occurred. 
(B)  A completed application for a building permit to substantially rebuild, reconstruct, or restore the nonconformity has not been submitted to the building inspection department within one (1) year of the occurrence of the damage or destruction. 
Permission may be granted for the restoration of a nonconforming structure if the Board of Adjustment finds from the evidence that the provisions of subsection 3-7.2 are met. 
8-5 - Nonconforming Uses 
    A nonconforming use is a use which existed prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or an amendment thereto, which would not be permitted by this Ordinance or an amendment thereto in the district in which it is located. This type of use may be continued subject to the following limitations: 
8-5.1  Maintenance and repairs which are necessary to keep a structure which houses a nonconforming use in a safe and sound condition must be carried out in a timely manner; 
8-5.2  Junk, scrap paper or metal, waste, discarded or salvaged material, including abandoned automobiles, shall not be considered a legal nonconforming use. 
8-6 - Resumption of Nonconforming Uses 
8-6.1  Not more than one hundred eighty days has elapsed. Reusing or restarting a zoning nonconforming use which visibly ceased or was abandoned, discontinued, or unused for a continuous period of less than one hundred eighty (180) days is allowed, provided that the nature and degree of the nonconformity will not be changed or increased from that which existed before the nonconformity became visibly abandoned, discontinued, unused or unoccupied or ceased. 
8-6.2  More than one hundred eighty days has elapsed. Any nonconforming use which has been visibly discontinued, unused, abandoned or ceased for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days or more is not allowed thereafter to resume or restart. If a site where the nonconforming use has being (been) actively offered for sale during the 180-day period and has not been sold, the Land Use Administrator may grant one (1) additional 180-day continuance from the date the nonconforming use was visibly abandoned, discontinued, became unused, unoccupied, or ceased provided the request for extension was made prior to the expiration of the initial 180-day period. The only use permitted thereafter is a use which will conform to the use regulations in the zoning district. 
8-7 - Expansion of Nonconforming Uses 
    The expansion, extension, or alteration of a nonconforming use is permitted with a special use permit from the Board of Adjustment. 
    Permission may be granted for the expansion, extension, or alteration of a nonconforming use if the Board of Adjustment finds from the evidence that the provisions of subsection 3-7.2 are met. 
8-8 - Change of Nonconforming Use 
    The change of an existing nonconforming use to another nonconforming use may be allowed by a special use permit issued by the Board of Adjustment, provided, however, that the new use will have no greater adverse effect on the surrounding property than the existing use. 
    Once a nonconforming use of a structure has been changed to a conforming use, there shall not be a return to any nonconforming use. 
8-9 - Changes in Zoning 
    Any structure or use which becomes nonconforming as a result of a change in a zoning classification or district boundary or by a change in the provisions in the Ordinance will be subject to the provisions of this section. 
ARTICLE 9. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP 
PART I. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

9-1 - Interpretation and Application 
    In interpreting and applying these regulations, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of these regulations. Except as provided herein, these regulations shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or other agreements between parties. (Wherever the provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions upon the use of the land or buildings or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits, or any easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, then the provisions of these regulations shall govern.) 
9-2 - Only One Principal Residential Use Upon Any Lot 
    There shall be no more than one (1) principal residential use upon any lot except as provided in Article 9. 
9-3 - Maintenance of Open Spaces 
    No yard shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with these regulations. No yard for one (1) principal building shall be considered as a yard for any other principal building. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, ornamental objects, and planted buffer strips shall not be construed to be encroachments on yards. Eaves shall be allowed to project into a minimum required yard no more than twenty-four (24) inches. 
9-4 - Street Access 
    No building shall be erected on a lot which is not contiguous to an open street or alley dedicated to the property owners in a subdivision or to the public or both, which street or alley has been improved in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
    Multifamily housing approved in accordance with the applicable regulations is exempt from this section. 
9-5 - Lots With Multiple Frontages 
    In the case of a corner lot having frontage on two (2) or more streets, all buildings shall be set back from such street a distance equal to the minimum front yard requirements for the district. 
9-6 - Uses Prohibited 
    If a use or class of uses is not specifically indicated as being allowed in a district, either as a matter of right or as a special use, then such use or class of uses is prohibited in such district. 
9-7 - Compliance with Coastal Area Management Act 
    Prior to the issuance of any initial zoning permit or zoning change permit, the Land Use Administrator and local CAMA permit officer shall certify that the proposed use or structure complies with development standards of the "State Guidelines for Areas of Environmental Concern" prior to issuing any zoning permit. 
Cross reference- Article 21, Coastal Area Management. 
9-8 - Rounding Off Fractions 
    When any requirements of this Ordinance results in a fraction of a unit, a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more will be rounded up and considered a whole unit. Fractions of less than one-half (1/2) will be rounded down to the next whole unit. For example, when the determination of the number of dwelling units permitted on a lot results in a fraction of a dwelling unit, a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more will be considered a dwelling unit and a fraction of less than one-half (1/2) will be disregarded. 
    This section does not apply to minimum lot size requirements. 
9-9 - Lots With Primary Access From a Publicly Dedicated Alley 
    In the event that a waterfront lot can only be accessed from an alley, the front lot line shall be considered along the waterfront, the side lot lines shall parallel the north/south alley and the rear lot line shall be opposite the front lot line. 
9-10 - Lots Abutting Waterfront Street Ends 
    A lot which abuts a waterfront street end shall be treated as a corner lot. For the purposes of defining setbacks, a corner lot shall have two (2) front lot lines and two (2) side lot lines. Front setbacks shall be met along the street front and waterfront lot lines. See section 9-14. 
9-11 - Residential Districts Established 
9-11.1  [Established.] The following residential districts are hereby established: R-5, R-5S, R-7, R-10, R-15, R-15M, R-15SM, R-20, and RMF. Each of these districts is designed and intended to secure for the persons who reside there a comfortable, healthy, safe, and pleasant environment in which to live, sheltered from incompatible and disruptive activities that properly belong in nonresidential districts. Other objectives of some of these districts are explained in the remainder of this section. 
9-11.2  R-5 Residential District. The purpose of this district shall be to maintain a minimum lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet, a density of not more than eight (8) dwelling units per acre to allow single-family dwellings and such other uses that will not interfere with the development of residences in the district and which would not be detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the areas included within the district, and to prevent the development of blight and slum conditions. 
9-11.3  R-5S Single-Family Residential District. The purpose of this district shall be to maintain a minimum lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet, a density of not more than eight (8) dwelling units per acre to allow only single-family dwellings and such other uses that will not interfere with the development of residences in the district which would not be detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the areas included within the district; and to prevent the development of blight and slum conditions. 
9-11.4  R-7 Single-Family Residential District. The purpose of this district shall be to maintain a minimum lot size of seven thousand (7,000) square feet, a density of not more than six (6) dwellings units per acre; to allow for single- and two-family dwellings and such other uses allowed as special uses which would not interfere with single-family and two-family residences in the district and which would not be detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the areas included within the district; and to prevent the development of blight and slum conditions. 
9-11.5  R-10 Single-Family Residential District. The purpose of this district shall be to maintain a minimum lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, a density of not more than four (4) dwelling units per acre; to allow for single-family dwellings and such other uses allowed as special uses which would not interfere with single-family residences in the district and which would not be detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the areas included within the district; and to prevent the development of blight and slum conditions. 
9-11.6  R-15 Single-Family Residential District. The purpose of this district shall be to maintain a minimum lot size of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, a density of not more than two and one-half (2.5) dwelling units per acre; to allow for single-family dwellings and such other uses allowed as special uses which would not interfere with single-family residences in the district and which would not be detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the area included within the district; and to prevent the development of blight and slum conditions. 
9-11.7  R-15M Single-Family Residential/Manufactured Home District. The purpose of this district shall be to maintain a minimum lot size of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, a density of not more than two and one-half (2.5) dwelling units per acre; to allow for single-family dwellings and such other uses allowed as special uses which would not interfere with single-family residences in the district and which would not be detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the area included within the district; and to prevent the development of blight and slum conditions. 
9-11.8  R-15SM Single-Family Residential/Single-Family Manufactured Home District. The purpose of this district shall be to maintain a minimum lot size of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, a density of not more than two and one-half (2.5) dwelling units per acre; to allow for single-family dwellings and single-family manufactured homes on individual lots and such other uses as listed which would not interfere with single-family in the district and which would not be detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the areas included within the district; and to prevent the development of blight and slum conditions. 
9-11.9  R-20 Single-Family Residential District. The purpose of this district shall be to maintain a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, a density of not more than two (2) dwelling units per acre; to allow for single-family dwellings and such other uses allowed as special uses which would not interfere with single-family in the district and which would not be detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the areas included within the district; and to prevent the development of blight and slum conditions. 
9-11.10  RMF Residential Multifamily District. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas deemed necessary or desirable for multifamily use and uses customarily related to multifamily residences. A residential multifamily district shall be composed of not less than three (3) contiguous acres. Existing alleys may be included in the computation of acreage. Dedicated streets shall not be computed as part of the district, and areas separated by dedicated streets shall not be considered contiguous. The entire city block shall be located entirely above the mean high water mark. 
    All contiguous additions to residential multifamily (RMF) districts shall be not less than three (3) acres unless such addition is a continuance of an existing multifamily development and is connected by a common street/parking system which is under one (1) ownership. If the contiguous addition is under the same ownership as the established multifamily development and continues the multifamily development and is connected by a common street/parking system, the addition may be less than three (3) acres. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, §§ 13, 14, 3-9-2010) 
9-12 - Commercial Districts Established 
9-12.1  [Established.] The following commercial districts are hereby established: CD, CM, DB, CN and CH. These districts are created to accomplish the purposes and serve the objectives set forth in the remainder of this section. 
9-12.2  CD Downtown Commercial District. The purpose of this district is to create an active street life; enhance the vitality of businesses and encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic by encouraging residential uses in conjunction with commercial activities; strengthen the city's economic base and provide employment opportunities close to home for the residents of the city; ensure that commercial and residential uses in a development are designed to be compatible with each other; ensure that the appearance and effects of buildings and uses are harmonious with the character of the area in which they are located. Development in the CD District is subject to the requirements set forth in section 12-2. 
9-12.3  CM Commercial Marina District. The purpose of this district is to promote the tourist and marina character of waterfront areas that attract tourists to the Morehead City area. Only those uses that will support and complement the marina and commercial fishing atmosphere shall be allowed in this district. 
9-12.4  DB Downtown Business District. The purpose of this district is to promote a diversified central business district that is pedestrian friendly and serves both city residents and visitors. It serves as a center for shopping, dining, fishing, diving and arts and entertainment. Mixed use (commercial and residential) developments that are located within the district shall be designed to be compatible with the surrounding business community. Development in the DB district is subject to the requirements set forth in section 12-2. 
9-12.5  CN Commercial Neighborhood District. The purpose of this district shall be to provide convenient shopping facilities which have a low impact on surrounding residential properties. 
9-12.6  CH Highway Commercial District. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for and encourage the proper grouping and development of roadside uses which will best accommodate the needs of the motoring public and of business demanding high volume traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 10-8-2002; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 1-4, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 2009-41, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-2009) 
9-13 - Industrial Districts Established 
9-13.1  [Established.] The following districts are hereby established primarily to accommodate enterprises engaged in the manufacturing, processing, creating, repairing, renovation, painting, cleaning, or assembling of goods, merchandise, or equipment: I and PM. These districts are created to accomplish the purposes and serve the objectives set forth in the remainder of this section. 
9-13.2  I Industrial District. The purpose of this district shall be to ensure that the public health, safety and welfare of the community is maintained by providing areas for uses which may produce excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, airborne debris, or any other objectionable characteristic. 
9-13.3  PM Port-Maritime District. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those uses associated with the operations of moving cargo and passengers. This district includes the transfer of cargo between ships and barges, trucks, trains, pipelines and docks/wharfs, as well as water, rail and motor passenger services. It is the joint responsibility of the State Port Authority, its local representatives and the Morehead City Council to work cooperatively to protect the quality of life and safety of the city's citizens and its economic competitiveness. 
(Ord. No. 2012-24, §§ 2-4, 7-10-2012) 
9-14 - Office and Institutional Districts Established 
9-14.1  [Established.] The following office and institutional districts are hereby established: O&P, MA, and IC. These districts are created to accomplish the purposes and serve the objectives set forth in the remainder of this section. 
9-14.2  O&P Office and Professional District. The purpose of this district shall be to create and maintain areas in which businesses and professional uses may be established between heavy commercial or industrial districts and residential districts or in other areas where appropriate. 
9-14.3  MA Medical Arts District. The purpose of this district shall be to create and maintain areas in which hospitals and doctors' and dentists' offices and clinics may be compatibly mixed, in order that these related uses can be near each other for doctor and patient convenience, and in order that a healthful living environment in abutting residential areas will not be encroached upon. 
9-14.4  IC Institutional Campus District. The purpose of this zoning district shall be to provide for the establishment of areas for a flexible mix of noncommercial uses related to the activities of schools, churches, and government on a tract of land not less than ten (10) acres in size with a minimum 200-foot frontage on a public road. An established district may be expanded to include contiguous lands without regard to the ten-acre minimum, so long as all land and structures within the district remain under the unified control of one (1) certified nonprofit organization or public authority. 
9-15 - Planned Development District 
9-15.1  Intent. It is the intent to establish a new planned development district (PD) for specialized purposes where tracts suitable in location, area, and character for the uses and structures proposed are to be planned and developed on a unified basis. Suitability of tracts for the development proposed shall be determined primarily by reference to the Morehead City Land Use Plan, but due consideration shall be given to the existing and prospective character of surrounding development. 
    The intent of this district is to permit flexibility from conventional development controls of use, setback, height, and minimum lot size requirements of other zoning districts while at the same time provide criteria for planned development based on performance. 
    Within the PD district, the regulations are designed to accomplish the purposes of zoning and the subdivision regulations to an equivalent or higher degree than where such regulations are designed to control unscheduled development on individual lots and to promote economical and efficient land use; an improved level of amenities, such as open space; appropriate and harmonious variety; creative design; and a better environment. 
9-15.2  Planned Development, defined. For the purposes of these regulations, a planned development shall be: 
(A)  Land under unified control and shall be planned and developed as a whole. 
(B)  In a single development operation or a definitely programmed series of development operations, including all lands and buildings. 
(C)  For principal and accessory structures and uses substantially related to the character and purposes of the district. 
(D)  Developed according to detailed plans that include, but are not limited to, streets, utilities, lots, or building sites and the like and for all buildings as intended to be located, constructed, used, and related to each other. 
(E)  Designed with a program for provision, operation, and maintenance of such areas, facilities, and improvements as will be for common use by some or all of the occupants of, or visitors to, the district, but such program will not be provided, operated, or maintained at general public expense. 
9-15.3  Planned developments are subject to the requirements set forth in section 12-1. 
9-16 - Floodplain District 
9-16.1  FP Floodplain District. The purpose of this district shall be to encourage the utilization of the floodplains by uses which would not be damaged or destroyed by high waters and to ensure proper watershed management procedures. Due to the environmentally sensitive nature of lands classified in the FP district, all uses, excepting governmental recreation uses, shall be considered as special uses. This will permit the town to review the size and scope of the project. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 13, 6-11-2013) 
PART II. - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 

9-17 - Zoning Map is a Part of this Ordinance 
    The planning area is hereby divided into districts whose locations and boundaries are shown on the official zoning map for the Town of Morehead City, which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. 
    The map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the official seal of the Town of Morehead City under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in Article 9, Part II of the Unified Development Ordinance for the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina." The date of adoption and subsequent amendments shall also be shown. 
9-18 - Replacement of the Official Zoning Map 
    In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret, the City Council may, by ordinance, adopt a new official zoning map which shall be the same in every detail as the map it supersedes. The new map shall bear the seal of the town under the following words: "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted and referred to in Article 9, Part II of the Unified Development Ordinance for the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina." The date of adoption of the new official zoning map shall also be shown. 
9-19 - Maintenance of the Official Zoning Map 
    Upon notification by the City Council that a zoning change has been made, the City Manager shall cause to be made the necessary changes on the official zoning map within seven (7) calendar days of notification. The Land Use Administrator shall be responsible for the maintenance and revision of the official zoning map after being notified by the City Manager. 
    NOTE: See Article 24 for Amendment Criteria. 
ARTICLE 10. - CONDITIONAL USE DISTRICT 

10-1 - Purpose 
    This Ordinance contains regulations which establish zoning districts and assigns land uses to one (1) or more of these districts. The Ordinance also provides standards for development which regulate lot sizes, yards, parking, and open space. There are, however, certain circumstances which often arise when a general zoning district designation would not be appropriate for a certain property, but a specific use permitted under the district would be consistent with the objectives of this Ordinance. In order to accommodate this situation, this section establishes the conditional use district process. 
    The conditional use district process is established to address those situations involving a rezoning when a particular use may be acceptable but the general classification which would allow that use would not be acceptable. It allows the City Council to approve a rezoning proposal for a specific use with reasonable conditions to assure the compatibility of the use with surrounding properties. Any use permitted under this process must also conform to the development regulations for the corresponding general zoning district. This is a voluntary procedure which is intended for firm development proposals. It is not intended or suited for securing early zoning for tentative proposals which may not be undertaken for some time. 
10-2 - Application and Review Process 
    The following process applies to the conditional use district: 
10-2.1  Application. Rezoning petitions to establish a conditional use district must be submitted to the Planning Board and will be processed in accordance with section 24-3 as well as the provisions of this section. A conditional use district classification will be considered only if the application is made by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent. All applications must include a schematic plan drawn to scale, any supporting text for the ordinance amendment and the following items: 
(A)  A boundary survey showing the total acreage, present zoning classification(s), date, and north arrow; 
(B)  The owners' names, addresses, and the tax parcel numbers of all abutting properties as shown on the tax records; 
(C)  All existing easements, reservations, and rights-of-way and all setback requirements for the zoning district requested; 
(D)  Proposed use of the land and structures. For residential uses, this should include the number of units and an outline of the area where the structures will be located. For nonresidential uses, this should include the approximate square footage of all structures and an outline of the area where the structures will be located; 
(E)  Traffic, parking, and circulation plans, showing the proposed locations and arrangement of parking spaces and access points to adjacent streets. 
10-2.2  Additional requirements. It may be necessary to request additional information in order to evaluate a proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding area. Therefore, the Planning Board and/or City Council may request additional information as it deems necessary. This information may include, but is not limited to: 
(A)  Proposed buffering, including walls, fences, or planting areas as well as treatment of any existing natural features; 
(B)  Delineation of areas within the regulatory flood zone as shown on the official FEMA flood zone maps; 
(C)  Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals or less; 
(D)  Generalized information on the number, height, size, and the location of structures; 
(E)  Proposed number and location of signs; 
(F)  Proposed phasing, if any, and approximate completion time of the project; 
(G)  A statement analyzing the reasonableness of the proposed rezoning shall be prepared for each petition for a rezoning to a special or conditional use district or other small-scale rezoning. 
The application for a conditional use district must contain information and/or site plans which indicate all of the principal and accessory uses which are proposed to be developed on the site. Subsequent to the approval of a conditional use district, only those principal and accessory uses indicated on the approved plan may be constructed on the site. Any substantial modifications to an approved plan, including any changes in the permitted principal or accessory uses, must comply with the provisions of section 10-2. 
10-2.2.1  Additional guidelines for downtown business district, except for buildings located over public trust waters. 
    As for a request for variation in the height limitations within the DB district, the following additional information must be presented to Council: 
(A)  Specific reasons as to why the allowed height is inadequate to the project proposed (e.g. roof design, flood elevation and permitting requirements); 
(B)  Advantages to be recognized by the city and the public for allowing additional height in the project (e.g. job creation, downtown revitalization benefits, parking and infrastructure capacity, tax base, etc.); 
(C)  The setback and placement of the building in relation to the setback of adjacent, opposite and surrounding buildings; 
(D)  Sketches, drawings and renderings showing general forms and proportions of buildings and structures; 
(E)  This variation in height limits shall not be used on buildings located over public trust waters. 
10-2.3  Review and approval. When considering an application for the establishment of a conditional use district, the City Council shall conduct the public hearing in a quasi-judicial manner and must follow evidentiary hearing procedures. The City Council may attach reasonable and appropriate conditions to the location, nature, and extent of the proposed use. Any conditions should relate to the relationship of the proposed use to surrounding property, proposed support facilities such as parking, buffering, the timing of development and other matters that the Council may find appropriate or that the petitioner may propose. The conditions may not include architectural review or controls. The petitioner will have a reasonable opportunity to consider and respond to any such additional requirements prior to final action by the Council. If conditions are included as part of the rezoning, the petitioner shall agree in writing to all applicable conditions within thirty (30) days of the decision. The conditional use approval will not become effective until such written agreement is recorded in the Carteret County Register of Deeds. If the petitioner does not agree to the conditions in writing within thirty (30) days following the date of the decision, the conditional use permit will be deemed null and void. 
    In evaluating an application for the establishment of a conditional use district, it is appropriate for the Council to consider the following: 
(A)  The policies and objectives of the Morehead City Land Use Plan, particularly in relation to the use, proposed site, and surrounding area; 
(B)  The potential adverse impacts to the surrounding area of, but not limited to, traffic, stormwater discharge, land values, and compatibility of land use activities. 
In the review and approval of a conditional use district, emphasis will be given to evaluation of characteristics of the specific use proposed in relationship to surrounding properties. The Council may also consider the permitted and special uses allowed under existing zoning classification in determining the appropriateness of the conditional use rezoning proposal. 
10-2.4  Effect of approval. If an application is approved, the conditional use district that is established and all conditions which may have been attached to the approval are binding on the property. All subsequent development and use of the property must be in accordance with the approved plans and conditions. 
    The intent of this type of zoning is to provide an alternate procedure for specific development proposals. It is intended that all property be rezoned only in accordance with firm plans to develop. Therefore, three (3) years from the date of approval, the Planning Board will examine development progress made in accordance with approved plans to determine if active efforts are proceeding. If it is determined by the Planning Board that active efforts to comply with the approved plan are not proceeding, a report may recommend that action be initiated to remove the conditional district in accordance with the amendment procedures outlined in Article 24. 
10-2.5  Alterations to an approved conditional use district. Changes to approved plans and conditions of development will be treated the same as changes to the zoning map and will be processed as an amendment as provided for in Article 24. However, minor changes in the detail of the approved plan which will not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property, which will not alter the uses permitted or increase the density or intensity of development, and which will not decrease the off-street parking ratio or reduce the setbacks provided at the boundary of the site may be approved by the Land Use Administrator without going through the amendment process. The Land Use Administrator, at his discretion, may elect not to allow any proposal as a minor change and will, in that event, forward the detailed application for changes to the Planning Board and City Council for their consideration. 
10-2.6  Issuance of a conditional use permit. If a petition for a conditional use district is approved, the City Council will issue a conditional use permit authorizing the use with any reasonable conditions that the City Council determines are necessary in promoting public health, safety, and general welfare and any other conditions deemed necessary. The conditional use permit shall become effective after being duly recorded in the Carteret County Register of Deeds. 
10-2.7  Permitted special uses and development requirements. Potential uses which may be considered for a conditional use district are restricted to those permitted and special uses allowed in the zone assigned to that particular piece of property. If application is made for a conditional use, those uses listed as special uses will be exempted from the normal requirement for a special use permit and replaced with a conditional use permit. Uses permitted in conditional use districts are subject to all applicable development standards and requirements for that use listed in the corresponding general zoning district. 
10-2.8  Zoning map designation. Following the Council's approval of a conditional use district, the property so zoned will be identified on the zoning maps by the appropriate parallel conditional use district designation. This designation is the general zoning district designation plus the letters "CU." 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 8, 1-10-2006; Ord. No. 2007-12, §§ 1-6, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 2009-02, §§ 11-13, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 1, 3-9-2010) 
ARTICLE 11. - PERMISSIBLE AND SPECIAL USES 

11-1 - Table of Permissible Uses 
    The Table of Permissible Uses should be read in close conjunction with the definitions of the terms set forth in section 2-2 and the other interpretative provisions set forth in the Unified Development Ordinance. The Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) is located in Appendix X for reference purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-24, § 5, 7-10-2012) 
11-2 - Use of the Designations P and S in Table of Permissible Uses 
    When used in conjunction with a particular use in the Table of Permissible Uses, the letter "P" means that the use is permissible in the indicated zone with a zoning permit issued by the administrator and the letter "S" means a special-use permit must be obtained from the Board of Adjustment. If a definition is included in this Ordinance, it is indicated in the table. An asterisk (*) indicates that additional requirements are required for that particular use. 
11-3 - Permissible Uses Not Requiring Permits 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, no zoning or special-use permit is necessary for the following uses: 
11-3.1  Streets. 
11-3.2  Electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable television, gas, water and sewer lines, wires or pipes, together with supporting poles or structures, located within a public right-of-way. 
11-3.3  Neighborhood utility facilities located within a public right-of-way with the permission of the owner (state or town) of the right-of-way. 
11-3.3  Neighborhood utility facilities located within a public right-of-way with the permission of the owner (state or town) of the right-of-way with the exception of small wireless facilities (SWF) which are subject to the requirements found under section 14-48. 
TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES AND SPECIAL USES 
Use/District (definition) R5 R5S R7 R10 R15 R15M R15SM R20 RMF O & P PD MA CD CM DB CN CH I PM FP IC Accessory building/use Yes P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Accessory outdoor displays Yes P P P P Accessory outdoor storage* P Accessory retail sales P Accessory personal services Yes S Adult day care center Yes S P S S Adult day care center, family Yes S S S S S S S S S S Adult establishment* P Amusement arcade Yes Refer to: Recreation use, indoor Animal hospital/veterinary clinic Yes S P Answering service Refer to: Communication services Arcade club S Auction house Yes P Auditorium P Automobile repair garage* Yes P P Automobile service station* Yes S S P P Bar/cocktail lounge* Yes Sc S P Barber/beauty shop Refer to: Personal services Beauty shop Refer to: Personal services Bed and breakfast Yes S P P Boardinghouse Yes S Boat ramp, regional public P Boat sales/storage Yes Refer to: Retail, marine-related (excludes commercial marinas) Boat storage P P S P Bulk storage, general: Body art studio, accessory S Agricultural products P P Bulk storage compatible with the uses in the district, not associated with any type of freight, cargo or commodities, indoor and outdoor S S Lime and fertilizer storage P P Nonhazardous materials P P Petroleum plant/storage Refer to: Fuel services Storage of bulk and break-bulk freight, cargo and commodities, indoor and outdoor P Storage of roll-on/roll-off freight, cargo and commodities, indoor and outdoor P Woodchips/wood pellets P P Bus station Refer to: Passenger transportation and incidental services Bus terminal Refer to: Passenger transportation and incidental services Business residence* Yes S P P P S Campground Refer to: Recreation use, outdoor Car wash Yes P Cargo, salvage P Cellular telephone service Refer to: Communication services Cemetery* Yes S S P P P P P S Cemetery, pet P Child day care Yes S P S S S S Child day care, afterschool Yes S P S S Child day care, home* Yes S S S S S S S S S S Church* Yes S S S S S S P P P P P S S S P Circus, carnival, fair P P Clinic Yes P P P P Club or lodge, private* Yes S S P P Cluster housing development* Yes P P P P P P P Communication services Yes P P P S P S Communication tower* Yes S P S Condominium hotel/condotel Yes P Contractor's plant/storage yard P P Convalescent home Refer to: Nursing home Courier services P Crisis response ministry center Yes S S S Distillery Yes S P Dock, pier, wharf operations and maintenance P Dock, public P P P P P S Dog training facility S Dormitory Yes S S Dredging/spoil area P Dry cleaning/laundry establishment Yes P P P Duplex Yes Refer to: Dwelling, two-family Dwelling, multifamily Yes S P S P S S Dwelling, single-family detached Yes P P P P P P P P S P S S Dwelling, staff, single-family P Dwelling, two-family (duplex) Yes P P P S P Emergency shelter mission* Yes P P Fabricating shop (majority of products sold at retail, on premises) Yes S S S P Family care home* Yes P P P P P P P S S Family shelter home Yes P P S S S S S S P Farmer's market Yes S S Financial institution Yes P P P P P Flea/farmer's market Y-Farmer's market P Fuel services S P Funeral home P P P P P Garden center Yes P Government building/use S S S S S S S S S P P S P P P P P Greenhouse/plant nursery P Health/recreational facility Yes Refer to: Recreation use, indoor Home occupation* Yes S S S S S S S S S S P S S Hospital* P Institution of higher learning Yes P P Itinerant merchant/vendor* P Junkyard* Yes S Kennel* Yes P P Laundry/dry cleaning plant P Library, museum, art gallery S S S S P P P P Maintenance building/facility P Manufactured home* Yes P P S Manufactured home park* Yes P Manufacturing and processing: Apparel and other finished textile products (SIC #23) P Asphalt, paving and roofing materials (SIC #295) P P Electronic and other electrical equipment (SIC #36) P Fabricated structural metal products (SIC #344) P Food and kindred products (SIC #20) excluding meat products (SIC #201) P Furniture and fixtures (SIC #25) P Industrial and commercial machinery and computer equipment (SIC #35) P Industrial (other) uses compatible with the permitted uses of the district S S Industrial processing associated with port services, freight, cargo and commodities P Leather and leather products (SIC #31) excluding tanning and finishing (SIC #311) P Manufacturing compatible with the permitted uses of the district S S Measuring, analyzing and controlling instruments (SIC #38) P Miscellaneous fabricated metal products (SIC #349) P Miscellaneous manufacturing industries (SIC #39) P Motorcycles, bicycles and parts (SIC #375) P Printing, publishing and allied industries (SIC #27) S P P P P Stone, clay, glass and concrete products (SIC #32) P Tobacco products (SIC #21) P Transportation equipment (SIC #37) P Woodchips/wood pellets P Marina, commercial* Yes P P P P S Marine cargo handling P P Marine research facility* S S Marine storage/repair yard Yes P P P Marine survey P Marketplace Yes S Massage parlor Yes Refer to: Adult establishment Microbrewery Yes S P Motel Yes P S P P Motor vehicle sales Yes P Nursing home Yes S P P Office, all Yes P P P P P S Office, marine-related Yes P Office, medical Yes P Office, on-site for the purpose of managing multifamily units Yes P Offices for arrangement of freight, cargo and commodities P P Outdoor vending self-service machine* Yes P P P P P P P Parking facility Yes P P P P Personal services Yes P P-a P P P Petroleum products, bulk S Printing/publishing P Public utility building/use* Yes P P P P P P P P P P P P P S P P P P P Radio services Refer to: Communication services Recreation use, governmental Yes P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Recreation use, indoor Yes P P P P S P S P Recreation use, outdoor Yes P P P P P S Recreation use, outdoor (golf course or marina only) Yes S P-b Recycling center Yes S S Recycling collection point Yes P Recycling plant Yes S S Research facility S S Rest home Refer to: Nursing home Restaurant Yes S P-a P P P P P P Restaurant, drive-in Yes P Retail, indoor Yes P-a P P P Retail, indoor with gas pumps and storage Y-Retail P P Retail, marine-related with or without outdoor storage Y-Retail P Retail, marine-related without outdoor storage P P Retail, medical-related, indoor Y-Retail P P Retail and wholesaling, indoor Yes P P P Retail and wholesaling, marine-related with or w/o outdoor storage Y-Retail P P Retail with outdoor storage Y-Retail S S School* Yes S S S S S S S S S P P Self-service storage facility Yes S P P P Ship chandler P Ship cleaning P Sidewalk cafe*~ P P Sign Yes Refer to Appendix V Sign shop P Soup kitchen Refer to: Emergency shelter mission Stevedore services P Studio P P P P Studio, art, dance, photography or music only P Tanning salon Refer to: Personal services Tattoo and/or body piercing establishment P Taxi stand P P P Theater P P P Towing/recovery storage yard* Yes S Townhouse duplex* Yes P P P S P Transportation services: Maintenance facilities for water, motor freight and railroad transportation P P Marine port terminal, including value added operations P Motor freight transportation/warehousing and associated services P Passenger transportation and associated services P P P P P Railroad transportation and associated services P P P Shipping brokers, freight and cargo P P Towing, tugboat and pilot services P Water transportation/warehousing and associated services P Travel trailer park Refer to: Recreation use, outdoor Warehousing and distribution Yes P P P Water conditioning service P P Wholesaling, marine-related S Wholesaling, warehousing P P  
~refer to additional requirements in Article 12 
*refer to additional requirements in Article 14 
a - Only permitted in PDs with ten or more acres/limited in area to 10% of built residential floor space 
b - Permitted in a PD of any size 
c - East of 10th Street (see § 14-26 for additional requirements) 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 2, 10-8-2002; Ord. No. 2003-15, § 1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 2003-17, § 1, 3-31-2003; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 2, 4-22-2004; Ord. No. 2004-44, § 1, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 2004-39, § 1, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 2006-38, § 1, 5-17-2006; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 2006-61, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 5-8, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 2007-40, § 10, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 2007-42, §§ 5, 6, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 2007-50, § 3, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2007-57, § 1, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2008-27, § 4, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 2008-28, § 1, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 2009-02, § 14, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 2009-19, § 1, 6-9-2009; Ord. No. 2009-30, § 1, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 2009-39, § 1, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-41, § 3, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 15, 3-9-2010; Ord. No. 2010-30, § 1, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-37, §§ 12-20, 9-14-2010; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 3-8-2011; Ord. No. 2011-12, § 3, 5-10-2011; Ord. No. 2011-20, § 2, 7-12-2011; Ord. No. 2011-24, § 2, 10-11-2011; Ord. No. 2012-24, §§ 6-19, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 2012-30, 8-14-2012; Ord. No. 2012-43, § 2, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2012-51, § 1, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 14, 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 2, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 2014-29, § 2, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-01, 2-10-2015; Ord. No. 2017-06, 2-14-2017; Ord. No. 2017-O-33, § 1, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-02, § 1, 3-13-2018; Ord. NO. 2018-O-03, § 5, 3-13-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-22, § 2, 12-11-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-07, § 2, 4-9-2019; Ord. No. 2019-O-08, § 1, 4-9-2019) 
ARTICLE 12. - SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS 

12-1 - Planned Development District 
12-1.1  PD districts-Where and how permitted. Planned development districts may hereafter be established by amendment to the official zoning map where tracts suitable in location and character for the uses and structures proposed are to be planned and developed on a unified basis, according to the requirements and procedures set forth herein. 
(A)  PD districts shall be designed and located in relation to arterial and collector streets so as to provide direct access without creating substantial additional traffic along minor streets in residential neighborhoods outside the district. 
(B)  PD districts shall be located in relation to sanitary sewers, water lines, storm and surface drainage systems, and other utility systems and installations in such a way that neither extension nor enlargement of such systems will be required in manner, form, character, location, degree, scale, or timing resulting in higher net public cost or earlier incursion of public cost than would development in forms generally permitted under current zoning for the area. PD districts shall be required to submit a drainage impact statement and no proposed PD district shall be permitted to file a statement of no drainage impact. In addition, PD districts shall contain in their sketch development plan all proposed drainage so as to comply with section 13-3 of this Ordinance. 
(C)  Such districts shall be located with respect to necessary public facilities so as to have access to such facilities in the same degree as would development under existing zoning and shall be so located, designed, and scaled that access for public services is equivalent to, and net cost for such services is not greater than, access and net cost for public services for development as permitted under existing zoning. However, location of PD districts may be approved if applicants will: 
(D)  Provide private facilities, utilities, and services approved by appropriate public agencies as substituting on an equivalent basis for public utilities, facilities, and services and assure their satisfactory continuing operation, permanently, or until similar public utilities, facilities, and services are available and used; or 
(E)  Make provisions acceptable to the town for offsetting any added net public cost or early commitment of public funds that are made necessary by such development. 
(F)  Any applicable requirements of Article 4 of this Ordinance may apply to planned developments to preserve the purpose and intent of the planned development district and Article 4 of this Ordinance, except that streets within planned developments may be private at the discretion of the subdivider. 
In computing net public costs, difference in anticipated public installation, operation, and maintenance costs and difference in anticipated public revenue from such sources shall be considered. Expenses involved in making such determinations shall be paid by applicants. Determination shall be made by the town or by experts acceptable to the town. 
12-1.2  Minimum parcel size for PD district. The minimum amount of land (under unified control to be planned and developed as a whole) for a PD district shall be at least one (1) city block (2.18 acres) for PD's with only residential uses. Existing alleys may be included in the computation of this acreage. Dedicated streets shall not be computed as part of the project area. All additions to existing PD districts shall be at least 2.18 acres. Areas separated by dedicated streets shall not be considered contiguous. PD's with both residential and commercial uses shall contain a minimum of ten (10) contiguous areas. 
12-1.3  Procedures. A planned development shall be processed in four (4) stages: Sketch development plan, site development (master) plan, preliminary plat approval, and final plat approval. The sketch development plan shall represent the applicant's general impression of the anticipated pattern of development planned for the planned development. The site development (master) plan shall specify the uses of land and layout of landscaping, circulation, and buildings. The preliminary plat shall be submitted to ensure that the proposed development complies with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations and the final plat shall be the document on which building permits are issued and which will be recorded in the Register of Deeds office. 
    All multifamily development located within a PD district shall meet the requirements of section 13-2 of the Ordinance. 
12-1.4  Sketch development plan approval/planned development rezoning application. The sketch development plan shall be required as part of the application for rezoning in order to create a new PD district or to extend an existing PD district. Such application shall be submitted in accordance with Article 24 of this Ordinance. Additional materials which shall be required as a part of the rezoning application include: plans, maps, and studies that may reasonably be required to make the determination called for in the particular case, with sufficient copies for necessary referrals and records. In particular, the following shall be included as part of the application: 
(A)  Property owners report. A report identifying all property owners within the area of the proposed district and giving evidence of unified control of the entire area. The report shall file evidence of the agreement of all present property owners: 
(1)  To proceed with the proposed development according to the regulations in effect when the map amendment creating the PD district is passed, with such modifications as may be set by the Morehead City Council in the course of such action; and 
(2)  To bind further successors in title to any commitments made under 12-1.4(A)(1) above. 
(B)  Sketch development plan. The sketch development plan shall show: anticipated pattern of development; property lines; proposed building sites; utility easements and lines and appurtenances; as well as proposed density and adjoining property owners, existing zoning of parcel and surrounding property, and any other information required by the Planning Board. 
(C)  Review of sketch development plan/rezoning application. The Planning Board shall review the application materials as well as the sketch development plan to determine conformity with the land use plan, the existing and prospective character of surrounding development, and the requirements above. The review shall be conducted in accordance with Article 24 of this Ordinance. A drainage impact study shall be submitted with the rezoning application. 
(D)  Action by the City Council. The City Council actions shall be as provided for amendments generally in Article 24. If amendment of the land use plan is involved, the City Council shall not proceed on the PD zoning amendment until it has acted on the amendment of the land use plan. 
12-1.5  Establishment of the PD district. No building permits shall be issued in a PD district until the district has been officially established and a site development (master) plan has been submitted and approved by the City Council. An application for a building permit shall conform to the requirements of section 12-1 and shall be accompanied by all necessary federal, state, and local permits. 
12-1.6  Site development plan (master plan). A site development plan drawn to scale shall contain the following information: 
(A)  The name of the planned development; 
(B)  The exact boundary lines of the planned development by lengths and bearings and the location of intersecting boundary lines of adjoining lands; 
(C)  Scale denoted both graphically and numerically; 
(D)  The plans for utility layouts, including sewers, storm sewers, water distribution lines, natural gas, telephone and electric service, connections to existing systems or plans for individual water supply systems and sewage disposal systems. Plans must show line sizes, the location of fire hydrants, blow-offs, manholes, pumps, force mains, and gate valves; 
(E)  Street names; 
(F)  The location, purpose, and dimensions of areas to be used for uses other than residential; 
(G)  Minimum building setback lines; 
(H)  The names of owners of adjoining properties and any adjoining subdivisions of record (or proposed or under review); 
(I)  The location and dimensions of all rights-of-way, utility or other easements, riding trails, natural buffers, pedestrian or bicycle paths, and areas to be dedicated public use with a statement of the purpose of each; 
(J)  Right-of-way lines and pavement widths of all streets and the location and width of all adjacent streets and easements; 
(K)  Property lines, buildings or other structures, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains (both on the land to be subdivided and on the land immediately adjoining), corporate limits, township boundaries, and county lines; 
(L)  Sufficient engineering data to determine readily, and to be reproducible on the ground, every straight or curved boundary line, street line, lot line, right-of-way line, easement line, and setback line, including dimensions, bearings of deflection angles, radii, central angles, and tangent distances for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one-tenth (1/10) of a foot and all angles to the nearest minute. Such engineering shall be reviewed by the town engineer and any upgrading improvements required by the town shall be paid for in full by the developer; 
(M)  The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers, and control points; 
(N)  The deed restrictions or any other similar covenants; 
(O)  The date of the survey and plat preparation; 
(P)  North arrow and delineation; 
(Q)  The name and location of any property within the planned development, or within any contiguous property, that is listed in the U.S. Department of Interior's National Register of Historic Places; likewise, any property that has been designated by local ordinance as a "historic property" pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 3A; 
(R)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner, registered surveyor, land planner, architect, landscape architect, and professional engineer responsible for the subdivision and the registration number and seal of the professional engineer and registered surveyor; 
(S)  Flood hazard areas according to HUD flood insurance rate maps; 
(T)  Topographic information showing vertical contour every one (1) foot; 
(U)  Show boundaries of areas of environmental concern (CAMA); 
(V)  Total number of dwelling units: 
(1)  Total residential floor area; 
(2)  Total commercial floor area (if PD contains ten (10) or more acres); 
(3)  Total ground area; 
(4)  Total number of floors; 
(5)  Total height per building; 
(6)  Total open space areas (percentage); 
(7)  Total number of parking spaces. 
12-1.7  Site development plan (master plan) approval. Eighteen (18) copies of the site development master plan shall be submitted to the planning director not less than twenty-eight (28) calendar days before the regular Planning Board meeting at which the site development plan is to be considered. Subject to the length of the agenda and complexity of the application, late submittals may be placed on the meeting agenda with the approval of the Land Use Administrator. The planning director shall require the developer to distribute copies of the site development plan and any accompanying material to other officials and agencies concerned with the planned development including, but not limited to: technical review committee consisting of the City Manager and appropriate department heads; Carteret County Health Department; Carteret County Board of Education; district engineer of the Department of Transportation; NC Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Wilmington Regional office; U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or Division of Coastal Management; and any other agency deemed appropriate or necessary to review the site development plan as determined by the staff, Town Attorney, Planning Board, or City Council. Each member of the Planning Board shall be provided with a copy of the site development plan as well as any necessary permits or letters from the abovementioned agencies by the planning director prior to the Planning Board meeting. 
    Within seventy-five (75) days of the date that the site development plan is submitted to the planning director, the Planning Board will act to recommend approval, disapproval, or changes in the site development plan. Comments received from the various officials and agencies shall be fully considered. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the time limited (limit) shall be deemed approval of the plan. 
    Following action by the Planning Board, the site development plan shall be submitted to the City Council for final approval, disapproval, or amendment. Prior to acting upon the site development plan, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the plan at which hearing all interested parties and the public shall be given an opportunity to comment on the plan. A notice of this public hearing shall be given once a week for two (2) successive calendar weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the area. The notice shall be published the first time not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty-five (25) days before the date fixed for the hearing. In computing such period, the day of publication is not to be included but the date of the hearing shall be included. 
    If the City Council adopts some or all of the recommendations of the Planning Board for changes in the site development plan, the developer (owner) shall make such changes and resubmit the proposal not less than thirty (30) days prior to the meeting of the City Council to which consideration of the site development plan is postponed. Notice of postponed consideration and of the date, time, and place of the meeting to consider the revised site development plan shall be published at least once, not less than seven (7) days before the meeting, in a newspaper of general circulation in Carteret County qualified to accept legal advertisement. 
    In all hearings before the Planning Board and City Council, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to satisfy the hearing body that all requirements of section 12-1 of this Ordinance have been met, and that the proposal satisfies the needs of public health, safety, and welfare. 
    When, and if, the site development plan is approved, approval shall be noted over the signature of the City Clerk on not less than three (3) copies of the plan. One (1) such copy shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection, one (1) shall be retained by the applicant (developer/owner), and one (1) shall be retained by the Planning Board. 
    The planning department must have a current and updated site development plan (master plan) on file for all PD developments. Minor changes and revisions to the site development plan (master plan) may be approved administratively without additional public hearings, provided that such changes do not result in: 
(A)  A change in the density of the PD; 
(B)  A change in the design of vehicular traffic routes; 
(C)  A change in the open space dedication. 
Any changes, other than minor changes, shall only be made in accordance for the procedures for site development plan (master plan) approval. 
12-1.8  Preliminary plat approval. Application for preliminary plat approval shall be in accordance with the procedures described in section 4-27 of this Ordinance. 
    The preliminary plat shall consist of a phase or section of the site development plan (master plan) as approved by the City Council. 
    The Planning Board shall review the plat to ensure its compliance with preliminary plat requirements as set forth in the Subdivision Regulations. Upon preliminary plat approval, the applicant is authorized to commence development of the planned development. 
    The final plat for the subdivision shall be submitted not more than twenty-four (24) months after the date on which the preliminary plat was approved. One (1) twelve-month extension may be granted by the Planning Board for good cause such as substantial progress towards improvements. Preliminary plat approval shall be null and void upon expiration of the twenty-four-month period unless an extension has been granted. 
12-1.9  Final plat approval. Application for final plat approval shall be made in accordance with Article 4, Part II of this Ordinance, as amended. 
    The final plat shall be in accordance with the site development plan (master plan) and preliminary plat as approved by the Planning Board. No building permits shall be issued for development within the planned development except for planned amenities and multifamily housing until the final plat has been approved by the Planning Board and duly recorded in the Carteret County Register of Deeds office. 
    The final plat of the phase of the site development plan (master plan) shall be accompanied by a certificate of a person licensed or certified in each discipline (such as engineers, surveyors, etc.) as to the estimated cost of completing such facilities and improvements which have not been installed. The required security shall be in an amount not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the total of such estimates. 
    The security may be provided by a bond from a fidelity company licensed to do business in North Carolina and acceptable to the City Manager, by a savings account with any bank or savings and loan association insured by an agency of the United States of America and deposited in the name of the Town of Morehead City as escrow agent, by a cashier's check or bank money order on a bank or savings and loan association licensed to and doing business in North Carolina, or by an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or savings and loan association licensed to and doing business in North Carolina. 
    The condition of security shall be that if all the improvements and facilities are completed within a period of time to be specified by the Planning Board and all fees are paid when due, the security shall be void; but otherwise, the City Manager shall make demand, upon such security and use funds realized thereby to have such facilities and improvements completed, to pay such fees or otherwise to cure any default. For this purpose, the City Manager is authorized to withdraw funds from escrow and cash or negotiate any checks. For good cause shown, the Planning Board may extend any time periods specified for completion of such improvements and facilities. 
    At the time of submission of the final plat of the phase of the site development plan (master plan) to the planning director, the developer (owner) of the project shall submit to the planning director a security to guarantee the completion of all paving, streets, easements, utilities, storm sewers and other parts of the drainage system, lighting, amenities, parking areas, parks, sea walls, filling, grading, fire hydrants, sewer system (including any necessary treatment or green areas or both), any other facilities intended for the common usage of the residents or owners in the planned development district to which the site development plan is applicable, any facilities required by the City Council or the Planning Board deemed by either body to be necessary to provide adequate facilities and improvements for the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and owners of property within the site development plan or the area surrounding the same for a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet in all directions or to provide for the protection of the public resources, estuarine environment, and public facilities (including sewer systems, water system, storm sewer systems, roads, and bridges), and to pay all impact fees, tap fees, and other charges made to obtain public or municipal services. 
    Approval of the site plan shall not constitute acceptance by the Town of Morehead City for maintenance or as part of the town facilities and system of the utilities, street, parking areas, storm sewer drainage system, or any other dedicated land, facilities, or services described in the site development plan. 
    Whenever used herein, "owner," "developer," and "applicant" shall mean the person, firm, association, or corporation submitting the site development plan for approval. Only the person, persons, firm, association, or corporation owning the land upon which the site is to be developed or having a binding contract to buy the land (conditioned only upon approval of the site development plan) may make application for approval of a site development plan. 
    All costs associated with approval of the site development plan (including advertising costs) shall be paid by the applicant and approval of the site development plan shall not be given until such costs have been paid. The Planning Director and/or City Clerk may require a deposit against such costs. 
12-1.10  Dimensional requirements. 
(A)  Density. Multifamily structures thirty-five (35) feet or less in height shall meet the dimensional requirements of section 13-2 of this Ordinance. 
    Dwelling units in multistoried structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be controlled by a maximum height, maximum number of units per acre, and maximum floor area ratio (FAR). The FAR is the maximum square foot amount of total floor area including all stories permitted for each square foot of ground area. The allowable ratio and maximum height and maximum dwelling units per acre appear in the following table: 
Maximum Height Maximum FAR 70 feet 1.5  
    In no case over thirty-six (36) units per acre. 
    A minimum of twenty-eight (28) percent of the site shall be preserved for natural and useable open space. To the maximum extent possible, open space shall be contiguous with adequate ingress/egress. 
    Natural open space: Natural open space shall contain a minimum of eighteen (18) percent of the lot, tract or development area. Natural open space must remain in a naturally vegetated state or revegetated with trees, shrubs and vegetated ground cover as approved by the Planning Board. This natural open space shall not contain or be crossed by any manmade uses, including, but not limited to, buildings, streets, signs, etc. Required buffers and drainage and utility easements may be located in natural open space areas. Natural open spaces shall be maintained in a clean, trash-free condition. 
    Useable open space: A minimum of ten (10) percent of the lot, tract or development area shall be designated as useable open space. Useable open space shall be improved and maintained for active or passive recreational uses. No useable open space shall have a length, width or diameter of less than thirty (30) feet. Improvements may include playgrounds, trails, community buildings (i.e. picnic area, shelter, clubhouse), ground-level patios, tennis courts, swimming pools, etc. Wetlands or state-required retention ponds shall not be included in useable open space calculations. 
(B)  Setbacks, minimum. All buildings shall be set back ten (10) feet from the perimeter property lines. 
12-1.11  Access to water. All planned development projects adjoining public estuarine waters shall make provisions for public access. The requirements shall be consistent with the requirements for public water access for major and minor subdivisions as set forth in section 15-8 of this Ordinance. 
12-1.12  Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with the requirements of Article 20. 
12-1.13  Conveyance and maintenance of open space. All open space shown on the site development plan shall be recorded in the Carteret County Register of Deeds office and shall be conveyed by the following method. 
    By leasing or conveying title including beneficial ownership to a corporation, association, or other legal entity, the terms of such lease or other instruments of conveyance must include provisions suitable to the Planning Board for guaranteeing: 
(1)  The continued use of such land for the intended purposes; 
(2)  Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of open space land requiring maintenance; 
(3)  When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance; 
(4)  Adequate insurance protection; and 
(5)  Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation, or otherwise. 
Furthermore, the applicant shall file in the Carteret County Register of Deeds office at the time of site development plan approval, legal documents which shall produce the above guarantees and, in particular, will provide a method for restricting the use of open space for the use and enjoyment of the residents of the planned development. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, § 8, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1.e., 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 2007-40, §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 2008-55, § 4, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2009-02, §§ 15, 16, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 2011-21, § 4, 7-12-2011; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-15, § 10, 8-14-2018) 
12-2 - Additional Regulations Pertaining to the CD Commercial Downtown District and DB Downtown Business District 
12-2.1  Commercial uses prohibited in mixed use projects. The following uses are prohibited when located on a site containing both residential and commercial uses: 
(A)  Automobile service station. 
(B)  Bus station. 
[(C)  Reserved.] 
(D)  Emergency shelter mission. 
(E)  Motel. 
(F)  Reserved. 
(G)  Thrift shop. 
12-2.2  Reserved. 
12-2.3  Performance standards. In order to ensure that the residential uses in this district are not adversely impacted by the adjacent commercial uses, including, but not limited to, traffic, noise and safety impacts, no permit shall be issued for a project combining commercial and residential uses on the same site unless the following standards are met: 
(A)  Noise: 
(1)  Commercial uses shall be designed and hours of operation limited (where appropriate) so that neighboring properties are not exposed to offensive noise from traffic or late-night activity. 
(2)  Leases for residential and commercial uses shall include a provision whereby the property owner/landlord details to the tenant(s) minimum rules with respect to noise or late-night activities so as not to adversely affect neighboring property owners/tenants. 
(B)  Security. The residential units shall be designed to insure the security of residents by providing a separate and secured entrance that is directly accessible to outdoors. Nonresidential uses and residential uses shall not have common entrance hallways or common balconies or be located on the same floor. 
(C)  Lighting. All outdoor lighting for commercial uses shall be designed so as not to adversely impact surrounding residential uses. Parking areas, entrances/exits and access ways shall be illuminated to provide visibility and security during darkness. 
(D)  Odors, dust, vibration. No commercial or residential uses shall be designed or operated so as to expose neighboring properties to offensive odors, dust, electrical interference and/or vibration. 
(E)  Refuse, storage and location. A residential dumpster shall be required and shall be clearly marked for residential use only. Use by commercial uses is prohibited. Both residential and commercial dumpsters shall be screened. 
12-2.4  Development standards. 
(A)  Minimum lot size. N/A 
(B)  Residential density. The maximum number of dwelling units on a lot shall be one (1) unit for each six hundred twenty-five (625) square feet of land area. 
(C)  Building height. No building or structure in the DB or CD district shall exceed a height of seventy (70) feet, unless a conditional-use permit has been issued by the council permitting an increased height of said building or structure. 
(D)  Setbacks: 
(1)  Front. There shall be no minimum front setback required. 
(2)  Side. No side setback shall be required along the interior lot lines except where the side lot line is contiguous to a residential zone in which case the side setback shall be equal to the required residential setback for the common property line. 
(3)  Rear. No rear setback shall be required, except where the rear lot line is contiguous to a residential zone, in which case the rear setback shall be equal to the required residential setback for the common property line. 
(E)  Outdoor living space. Each dwelling unit shall be provided a minimum of fifty (50) square feet of outdoor living space (i.e. balcony, roof garden, etc.). The outdoor living space shall be located within the footprint of the building. 
(F)  Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Article 20 with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Apartment/multifamily dwelling. Two (2) spaces per unit. 
(2)  Marina. Parking spaces equal to thirty (30) percent of the number of boats for which facilities for dry storage are available plus one (1) space for each four (4) wet slips plus one (1) space for each employee. 
(3)  Motel/hotel/bed and breakfast. One (1) space per rentable room. 
(G)  Signs. In accordance with Article 19 unless otherwise stated. 
12-2.5  Right-of-way usage. 
(A)  Sale of merchandise generally : It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a location upon any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, park or city-owned or leased property for any period of time or to use such property or any part thereof as a location for or as a place of business for selling or offering for sale products or merchandise of any kind, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(B)  Mobile food vendors on city streets: 
(1)  Any person may sell or offer for sale, on the streets or alleys of the city, any food products from motorized units, bicycle carts or push carts, subject to this section. 
(2)  Vehicles from which such sales are made must be legally parked. 
(3)  The duration a vendor can be located within any city block in any one (1) day shall be limited to thirty (30) minutes. 
(4)  All sales are prohibited in public parks and within three hundred fifty (350) feet from the property line of any school. 
(5)  Sales shall be conducted during daylight hours. 
(6)  Bells may be used to advertise or announce sales. No other noise-making devices may be used to advertise or announce sales of such products. 
(7)  All necessary permits and licenses shall be obtained prior to commencement of any sales. 
(C)  Sale of merchandise on sidewalks: 
(1)  No person shall obstruct entirely or partially any sidewalk or street in the city by selling or offering for sale at auction or otherwise any goods, wares or merchandise thereon, or use any sidewalk or street for the placing thereon of any barrel, box crate, wood or other substance, except where expressly permitted by the provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city. Nothing herein shall prevent newspaper vending machines from being placed on the sidewalks when the owners thereof have complied with the rules promulgated by the city and have secured a permit. 
(a)  Permit generally. The city manager or his designee may issue permits for the display and sale of merchandise on city sidewalks and pedestrian ways in the area of the city known as the Commercial Downtown District and classified as CD and in the Downtown Business District and classified as DB. 
(b)  Application. Any merchant desiring to display and sell merchandise on the city sidewalk or pedestrian way shall prepare and file an application with the city manager or his designee, which shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the business desiring to display or sell merchandise on the sidewalk. 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the business owner. 
3.  The type of merchandise to be sold or displayed. 
4.  The hours of operation of the business. 
5.  A drawing or site plan showing the section of sidewalk or pedestrian way to be used for the sale and display of merchandise. 
6.  Evidence of adequate insurance or other forms of security to hold the city and its taxpayers harmless from claims arising out of the sale and display of merchandise, as determined by the city manager. 
7.  An indemnity statement approved by the city attorney, whereby the business owner agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents, and employees from any claim arising from the sale and display of merchandise. 
8.  A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the state or the city. Such additional information as may be requested by the city manager or his designee to determine compliance with this section. A fee as provided in the Morehead City's fee schedule to cover the cost of processing and investigating the application and issuing the permit. 
(c)  Issuance of permit. No permit for the sale and display of merchandise on the sidewalk or pedestrian way may be issued unless the application is complete and unless the following requirements are met: 
1.  The sale and display of merchandise must occur under the same name as the business and may not be opened or operated at any time when the business is closed. 
2.  The sale and display of merchandise on the sidewalk or pedestrian way must be clearly incidental to the associated business. 
3.  The placement of merchandise must be done in such a manner not to extend more than three (3) feet from the property line, provided that at least four (4) feet of unobstructed space (as measured from the street-side edge of the sidewalk) remains on the sidewalk or pedestrian way for the passage of pedestrians. Trees, poles, signs, sandwich board signs, planters, benches, hydrants, trash receptacles, tree grates, etc., are all considered obstructions. 
4.  Merchandise must be removed within four (4) hours of notice from the city. If such items are not removed upon four (4) hours' notice, the city shall have the right to remove and dispose of these items and may assess the property owner for the cost of such removal and disposal. The city shall also have the right to remove such items immediately in emergency situation. The city shall not be responsible for damage to the merchandise under any circumstances. 
5.  The owner of the business displaying or selling merchandise on the sidewalk or pedestrian way shall be responsible for repairing any incidental damage to public sidewalks resulting from the display of merchandise. 
6.  Merchandise shall only be displayed or sold when the business is open. 
(d)  Denial. A permit may be denied if it is found that the granting of the permit would not be in the public interest. Any applicant denied a permit to display or sell merchandise on the sidewalk or pedestrian way shall receive a written statement, outlining the grounds on which the denial is based. The applicant may appeal the denial of the permit to the city council within fifteen (15) working days after the date of the written denial and the city council may take such corrective action as it shall find necessary. The findings and determination of the city council shall be final. 
(e)  Permit revocation. The city manager may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this section, if he finds that the business owner has: 
1.  Deliberately misrepresented or provided false information in the permit application. 
2.  Displayed or sold the merchandise in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare; specifically including failure to keep the area clean and free of refuse. 
3.  Failed to maintain any health, business or other permit or license required by law for the operation of the business. 
4.  Before the revocation of a permit, the city manager shall notify the permit holder of his intent to revoke the permit and the reasons therefor and shall afford the permit holder a reasonable opportunity to appear and be heard on the question of such revocation. After the hearing, the city manager shall notify permit holder in writing of the decision and the reasons therefor. A decision of the city manager to revoke permit may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the provision of this ordinance. 
(f)  Term, transfer, renewal, etc. Permits issued in accordance with the provisions of this section shall: 
1.  Be issued annually in January. 
2.  Be in addition to the annual privilege license. 
3.  Not be transferable or assignable. 
(D)  Sidewalk cafes: 
(1)  Application. Any restaurant desiring to operate a sidewalk cafe shall prepare and file an application with the city manager or his designee, which shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name, address and telephone number of the restaurant desiring to operate a sidewalk cafe. 
(b)  The name, address and telephone number of the restaurant operator. 
(c)  The type of food, beverage or food product to be sold and served at the sidewalk cafe. 
(d)  The hours of operation of the restaurant and the proposed hours of operation of the sidewalk cafe. 
(e)  A drawing or site plan showing the section with dimensions of sidewalk or pedestrian way to be used for the sidewalk cafe, and the section with dimensions to be kept clear for pedestrian use, and depicting the proposed placement and dimensions of tables, chairs, umbrellas, barricades, and other furnishings on the sidewalk or pedestrian way and any proposed openings or ingress/egress points to and from the outdoor dining area. The site plan shall be accompanied by photos or drawings of all components of the outdoor dining space to include type of furniture, umbrellas and type and dimensions of barricades. 
(f)  Evidence of adequate insurance or other forms of security to hold the city and its taxpayers harmless from claims arising out of the operation of the sidewalk cafe, as determined by the city manager. The North Carolina Department of Transportation must be listed as an additional insured if the sidewalk cafe is located adjacent to a state right-of-way. 
(g)  An indemnity statement approved by the city attorney, whereby the restaurant operator agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents, and employees from any claim arising from the operation of the sidewalk cafe. The North Carolina Department of Transportation must also be included in the indemnity statement for any sidewalk cafe operation located adjacent to a state right-of-way. 
(h)  A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the state or the city, including health and ABC permits and business licenses, necessary for the operation of the restaurant business. 
(i)  Federal Highway Administration approval for those sidewalk cafes physically located along Arendell Street. 
(j)  A sworn statement describing any violation by the restaurant operator of any laws, regulations, or ordinances relating to the possession, sale, consumption or transportation of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances during the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the permit application. 
(k)  Such additional information as may be requested by the city manager or his designee to determine compliance with this section. 
(l)  A fee as provided in Morehead City's fee schedule to cover the cost of processing and investigating the application and issuing the permit. 
(2)  Issuance of permit. No permit for the operation of a sidewalk cafe may be issued unless the application is complete and unless the following requirements are met: 
(a)  The sidewalk cafe must be associated with an operating restaurant such that it is under the same management and shares the same food preparation facilities, restroom facilities and other customer convenience facilities as the restaurant. 
(b)  The sidewalk cafe must be operated under the same name as the restaurant and may not be opened or operated at any time when the restaurant is not open for business. 
(c)  The operation of the sidewalk cafe must be clearly incidental to the associated restaurant business. 
(d)  The sidewalk café permit shall be valid for no more than one year and is not transferable or assignable. 
(e)  The placement of tables, chairs and other furnishings, as shown in the drawing submitted with the site plan, must be done in such a manner not to extend more than five (5) feet from the property line, provided that at least four (4) feet of unobstructed space remains on the sidewalk or pedestrian way for the passage of pedestrians. Tables, chairs, and other furnishings associated with a sidewalk cafe located along a state right-of-way must be placed a minimum of six (6) feet from any travel lane in such a manner that at least five (5) feet of unobstructed space remains clear for the passage of pedestrians that complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Trees, poles, signs, sandwich board signs, planters, benches, hydrants, trash receptacles, tree grates, etc. are all considered obstructions. Provided, however, a tree grate shall not be considered an obstruction if: 
1.  The owner of the sidewalk cafe pays the full cost of installing a tree grate approved as complying with the Americans with Disabilities Act as an acceptable surface for pedestrians and wheelchairs; and 
2.  The owner maintains the grate so that it provides a smooth and level surface for passage. 
(f)  The area designated for the sidewalk cafe shall be physically separated from the remaining sidewalk by visible, continuous barricades with a height of at least thirty-six (36) inches and no more than forty-two (42) inches. The barricades must be constructed of materials of a finished quality, including, but not limited to, planters, picket fences or velvet ropes. 
1.  Although a wide variety of styles and designs are permitted to be used for outdoor dining barricades, metal or wood sectional fencing is encouraged due to its portability and its inability to be shifted by patrons or pedestrians. 
2.  Bases for the vertical supporting device of a barricade shall be flat and measure no more than one-half (1/2) inch above the sidewalk surface in order to not become a tripping hazard. 
3.  Planters may be used in addition to or in place of other barricade designs, provided the planter does not exceed a height of thirty-six (36) inches above the level of the sidewalk and the plants may not exceed a height of one hundred eight (108) inches (eight (8) feet) above the sidewalk. The planter should be in line with the barricade with no portion extending into the unobstructed sidewalk space. Planters with artificial plants, dead plants, only ground cover (i.e., mulch, dirt, etc.) and planters that are empty must be removed. 
4.  Barricades must be freestanding and easily removable. 
5.  Any access opening within the barrier must measure no less than forty-four (44) inches in width and should clearly distinguish the sidewalk cafe from the sidewalk or pedestrian way. 
(g)  The restaurant seeking to operate the sidewalk cafe must front on and open onto the sidewalk or pedestrian way proposed for the sidewalk café. The placement of tables, chairs and other furnishings may not extend beyond the sidewalk or pedestrian way frontage of the associated restaurant. Two (2) or more tables must be contained within visible barricades. The maximum posted speed permitted on the roadway adjacent to the right-of-way to be used for a sidewalk cafe operation shall not be greater than forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(h)  The tables, chairs, barricades and other furnishings used in the sidewalk cafe shall be of a type that is easily removed from the public right-of-way. Tables, chairs, barricades and other furnishings used in the operation of the sidewalk cafe shall not obstruct any driveway, alleyway, building entrance or exit, emergency entrance or exit, fire hydrant or standpipe, utility access, ventilation area, or ramp necessary to meet accessibility requirements under the Americans with Disabilities Act and must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of notice from the city. If such items are not removed within twenty-four (24) hours' notice, the city shall have the right to remove and dispose of these items and may assess the property owner for the cost of such removal and disposal. The city shall also have the right to remove such items immediately in emergency situations. The city shall not be responsible for damage to the public sidewalk cafe barricades and furnishings under any circumstances. 
(i)  Except as elsewhere permitted, the operation or furnishing of the sidewalk cafe shall not involve any permanent alteration to or encroachment upon any street, sidewalk or pedestrian way or to the exterior of the associated restaurant. The owner of the sidewalk cafe shall be responsible for repairing any incidental damage to public sidewalks resulting from the operation of the sidewalk cafe. 
(j)  The sidewalk cafe shall only be open when the restaurant is open. After such hours, the furnishings of the sidewalk cafe shall be removable. No person shall consume alcoholic beverages in a sidewalk cafe after such hours. 
(k)  Alcoholic beverages. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-38 of the Code of Ordinances, alcoholic beverages may be served and consumed at sidewalk cafes providing the following requirements are met: 
1.  The sidewalk café shall be part of a restaurant as defined in subsection 12-2.5(D)(4) and shall otherwise be authorized, permitted or licensed under the state law and city codes to serve and sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
2.  The portion of the sidewalk cafe where alcohol is or may be served shall be enclosed by clearly visible barricades and shall have not more than two (2) points of ingress or egress. 
3.  The sidewalk cafe must be included as part of the premises for which an ABC permit is issued pursuant to G.S. 18B-1001 for the purposes of applying and enforcing state laws regarding the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
4.  Signs shall be posted, visible at all exit points from the sidewalk cafe, that it is unlawful to remove alcoholic beverages in open and unsealed containers from the premises. 
5.  The restaurant operator shall not have violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the possession, sale, transportation or consumption of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances for the five (5) years preceding the commencement of the sale of alcoholic beverages at the sidewalk cafe. 
(l)  Denial. A permit may be denied if it is found that the granting of the permit would not be in the public interest. Any applicant denied a permit to operate a sidewalk cafe shall receive a written statement, outlining the grounds on which the denial is based. The applicant may appeal the denial of the permit to the city council within fifteen (15) working days after the date of the written denial and the city council may take such corrective action as it shall find necessary. The findings and determination of the city council shall be final. 
(m)  Permit revocation. The city manager may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this section, if he finds that the restaurant operator has: 
1.  Deliberately misrepresented or provided false information in the permit application. 
2.  Violated any provision of the Morehead City codes or county health department regulations. 
3.  Violated any law, regulation or ordinance regarding the possession, sale, transportation or consumption of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances. 
4.  Operated the sidewalk cafe in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, specifically including failure to keep the sidewalk cafe area clean and free of refuse. 
5.  Failed to maintain any health, business or other permit or license required by law for the operation of a restaurant business. Before the revocation of a permit, the city manager shall notify the permit holder of his intent to revoke the permit and the reasons therefor and shall afford the permit holder a reasonable opportunity to appear and be heard on the question of such revocation. After the hearing, the city manager shall notify permit holder in writing of the decision and the reasons therefor. A decision of the city manager to revoke permit may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the provision of this Ordinance. 
(n)  Reserved. 
(o)  Furniture and fixtures. A wide range of furniture styles, colors and materials are permitted, however smaller, space-efficient furniture is recommended. 
1.  All furniture and fixtures must be maintained in good visual appearance, without visible fading, dents, tears, rust, corrosion or chipped or peeling paint. 
2.  All furniture and fixtures must be maintained in a clean condition at all times. 
3.  All furniture and fixtures must be durable and of sufficiently sturdy construction as not to blow over with normal winds. 
4.  Furniture and fixtures shall not be secured to trees, lampposts, street signs or any other street infrastructure whether during restaurant operating hours or at times when the restaurant is closed. 
5.  Furniture other than tables, chairs and umbrellas is prohibited in sidewalk cafes. 
6.  Tables: 
a.  The size and shape of tables strongly affects the functionality of an outdoor dining area. 
b.  Square or rectangular tables are encouraged because they fit flush against a building's wall and can permit more useable surface area for patrons while at the same time, leave more space available for pedestrians. 
c.  Smaller, space-efficient tables are encouraged over larger tables. 
d.  Tables may be colored or of a natural material. Plastic tables shall not be permitted unless covered with a tablecloth. 
7.  Chairs: 
a.  Chairs may be colored or of a natural unpainted material and may be upholstered. White plastic or fluorescent chairs are not permitted. 
b.  All chairs used within a particular establishment's outdoor seating area must match each other by being of visually similar design, construction and color. 
c.  Seating capacity is limited to 50% of the interior seating capacity of the associated restaurant. 
8.  Umbrellas: 
a.  Umbrellas that are appropriately designed and sized are permitted. 
b.  Umbrellas must be free of advertisements and be contained within the outdoor dining area with the lowest dimension, including fringe and other ornamentation, being at least seven (7) feet above the sidewalk surface and no higher than ten (10) feet above the level of the sidewalk. 
c.  Umbrellas and other shading devices shall not infringe on the free movement of pedestrians along the sidewalk. 
d.  Umbrella colors must blend appropriately with the surrounding built environment and are recommended to be of one solid color. 
e.  Market style umbrellas are encouraged. 
f.  Umbrella covers must not be made of a rigid material. 
9.  Fixtures-Misters and gas heaters: 
a.  Misters for cooling and gas heaters for heating shall be permitted. 
(3)  Pedestrian way. An improved walk or passageway intended for use by pedestrians, but not adjacent to any city street. 
(4)  Restaurant. For purposes of subsection 12-2.5(D), a restaurant located along a state right-of-way is defined as a food or lodging establishment that prepares and serves drinks or food as regulated by the N.C. Commission for Public Health pursuant to G.S. 130A-247. A restaurant located on a city street is defined for purposes of subsection 12-2.5(D) as an establishment, such as a retail store, which has a lunch counter or other section where food and beverage is sold to be consumed on the premises. This definition does not include food vendors selling food as part of a festival or nonprofit event. 
(5)  Restaurant operator. The person, firm or corporation operating a restaurant and associated sidewalk cafe. As used in this section, this definition includes the owner and manager, if different from the owner of the restaurant and associated sidewalk cafe. 
(6)  Sidewalk. That portion of a public street between the curb line, or the lateral lines of the roadway if there is no curb and the adjacent property line that is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(7)  Premises. All areas, whether inside or outside the licensed premises, where the permittee has control of the property through a lease, deed or other legal process in accordance with G.S. 18B-101(12a). 
12-2.6  Solid waste receptacles on sidewalks. The city's public works director may issue a permit for the placement of privately owned receptacles for trash and garbage at specified locations along publicly owned rights-of-way on a sidewalk, sidewalk area, alley or shoulder, provided the location and placement of the receptacles do not endanger the public health and safety. No more than two (2) receptacles shall be permitted along any one (1) side of a street within any four hundred (400) lineal feet of right-of-way. Upon issuance of a permit, the owner shall accept full responsibility and liability for maintaining and emptying the receptacles, and shall comply with all conditions to the permit. 
12-2.7  Public benches, chairs, planters and other street furniture on sidewalks. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, place or maintain any benches, chairs, planters or other street furniture on any publicly owned rights-of-way except that property owners may submit written requests to the city manager for the installation of street furniture, inclusive of benches, chairs, planters or other street furniture in front of their property or business establishment. The cost of the street furniture and installation will be at cost as outlined in the city's fee schedule. The following criteria shall be met: 
(A)  The use of benches, chairs or planters and other street furniture should be designed to enhance and blend in with the surroundings. Street furniture shall not be permitted if it endangers the public health and safety or prohibits pedestrian passage along the public right-of-way entrance to any establishment. 
(B)  No street furniture may be placed in any location whereby the clear, unobstructed space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four (4) feet as measured from the street edge of the sidewalk. Trees, poles, signs, hydrants, trash receptacles, tree grates, etc. are all considered obstructions. 
(C)  Street furniture shall be anchored and becomes city property upon installation. 
(D)  The owner of the building in front of which the street furniture is placed is required to maintain the street furniture and the area surrounding its placement in a clean and safe condition. 
    Application for street furniture and installation shall be made on forms provided by the city to the public works department. The application shall be accompanied by information showing the type of furniture to be placed and its proposed location. In addition to any application fees, the applicant shall be responsible for the cost and installation of the street furniture. The amount of such fees shall be set forth in the city's fee schedule. 
    Permits issued for street furniture pursuant to this section shall be considered separate from permits and requirements for other right-of-way usage permits such as sidewalk cafes and sandwich board signs. The city manager, or designee, may limit the number of permits available at each business location. 
    Permits issued pursuant to this section may be revoked due to public need of the right-of-way, noncompliance with the provisions of this section, or any other reason deemed sufficient to the city. The city shall have the right to remove and dispose of such street furniture. 
    The use of the term "street furniture" in this section shall include benches, chairs, planters and other street furniture. 
12-2.8  Newspaper vending racks on sidewalks. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, place, maintain, or operate any newspaper vending rack on any publicly owned rights-of-way on a sidewalk, sidewalk area, shoulder or alley without first having obtained a permit from the city. The city manager, or designee, may issue a permit for the placement of newspaper vending racks at designated locations along publicly owned rights-of-way on a sidewalk, sidewalk area, shoulder or alley provided the following criteria are met: 
(A)  The location should be at least twenty (20) feet from any intersection and at least five (5) feet from any crosswalk or fire hydrant. 
(B)  No newspaper vending rack may be placed where the unobstructed space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four (4) feet. Trees, poles, signs, hydrants, trash receptacles, tree grates, etc. are all considered obstructions. 
(C)  Racks displaying different newspapers are encouraged to locate together. 
(D)  No newspaper vending rack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein. 
(E)  Newspaper vending racks may not be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any pole, sign or other fixture located in the public right-of-way, with the exception of other newspaper vending racks. 
(F)  All newspaper vending racks will be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, each newspaper vending rack shall be serviced and maintained so that: 
(1)  It is free of dirt and grease. 
(2)  It is free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereon. 
(3)  It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereon. 
(4)  The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration. 
(5)  The paper and cardboard parts or inserts thereof are free of tears, peeling or fading. 
(6)  The structural parts are not broken or misshapen. 
(G)  The owner or lessee of the newspaper vending rack is also required to maintain the area surrounding the rack in clean condition and to remove all unsold newspapers regularly. 
(H)  If the use of the rack is discontinued for thirty (30) consecutive days, it shall be declared abandoned and may be removed and disposed of by the city. The city shall have the right to remove and dispose of such vending rack and may assess the owner or lessee of the vending rack for the cost of removal and disposal. 
(I)  Any person, firm or corporation receiving a permit to locate a newspaper vending rack on a publicly owned right-of-way shall have the permit number, name, address and telephone number affixed in a permanent waterproof manner to the rack in a place where such information may be easily seen. 
(J)  Applications for a permit shall be made on forms provided by the public works department. An annual permit fee shall be paid by the owner or lessee of the vending rack for the placement of each newspaper rack at an approved location. The amount of the fee shall be set forth in the city's fee schedule. 
(K)  Permits issued pursuant to this section may be revoked due to public need of the right-of-way or noncompliance with the provisions of this section. Before revocation of a permit, the city manager or designee, shall notify the permit holder of the city's intent to revoke the permit and the reasons and shall afford the permit holder a fifteen-day period to appear and be heard on the question of such revocation. After the hearing, the city manager or designee shall notify the permit holder in writing of the decision and the reasons therefor. 
12-2.9  Awnings and canopies. No awning or canopy shall be erected, suspended or maintained over or across any street or public sidewalk by any person until a permit has been duly issued by the city. 
    A person desiring a permit as required in this section shall file an application therefor with the Planning Department. Such application shall be accompanied by drawings and specifications indicating the location, place of erection, suspension or maintenance, method of fastening and full dimensions. 
    A permit for the erection, suspension or maintenance of an awning or canopy issued pursuant to an application filed as provided in this section shall indicate the location, place of erection, suspension or maintenance, method of fastening and full dimensions and shall also include such other terms and conditions as the city may deem proper. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, suspend or maintain over or across any sidewalk or public street, or any part of either, any awning or canopy unless such awning or canopy is securely fastened to a building and firmly supported by adequate metal braces and brackets and with such vertical supports as may be required by the city in the interest of public safety. 
    No part of the awning or canopy shall be lower than nine (9) feet from the surface of the sidewalk or street. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 3, 10-8-2002; Ord. No. 2002-35, § 1, 10-8-2002; Ord. No. 2006-62, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 2006-73, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 9, 10, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1.d., 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 2009-40, § 1, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 2011-12, §§ 4, 5, 5-10-2011; Ord. No. 2013-13, §§ 1-31, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 2013-21, §§ 15-18, 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 2014-07, §§ 1-7, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 3, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 2015-19, §§ 1-10, 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-O-02, § 2, 3-13-2018) 
ARTICLE 13. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

13-1 - Schedule of Development Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 
(Square Feet) Minimum Lot Width 
(Linear Feet) Minimum Front Setback 
(Linear Feet) Minimum Side Setback 
(Linear Feet) Minimum Rear Setback 
(Linear Feet) Maximum 
Height 
(Feet) Maximum 
Lot 
Coverage District First 
Unit Second 
Unit Multi- 
family First 
Unit Second 
Unit Multi- 
family First 
Unit Second 
Unit Multi- 
family First 
Unit Second 
Unit Multi- 
family First 
Unit Second 
Unit Multi- 
family R5 5,000 
7,000 
**** 2,500 43,560 50 
50 * 15 
25 
**** * 7 
10 
**** * 15 
15 * 50 
50 40% 
40% R5S 5,000 
7,000 
**** 50 
50 15 
25 
**** 7 
10 
**** 15 
15 50 
50 40% 
40% R7 7,000 3,500 65 10 25 10 15 50 40% R10 10,000 70 20 10 25 50 40% R15 15,000 80 20 10 25 50 40% R15M 15,000 80 20 10 25 50 40% R15SM 15,000 80 20 10 25 50 40% R20 20,000 100 30 10 25 50 40% RMF 18,000 * 65 20 * 25 * 10 4 * 20 * 50 40% O&P 5,000 2,500 50 15 
****** 7 15 70 40% PD ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 70 ** MA 25 *** *** 70 40% CD ***** ***** ***** None ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** 70 N/A CM 10 *** *** 70 50% DB ***** ***** ***** None ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** 70 N/A CN 25 *** *** 50 40% CH 25 *** *** 70 40% I 25 *** *** 40% PM 25 *** *** 40% FP 30 *** *** 35 40% IC 435,600 50 15 30 50 40%  
*    See section 13-2 for multifamily dimensional requirements. 
**   See section 12-1 for planned development requirements. 
***  Where abutting an R district a permitted or special use must meet the identical requirement of the abutting yard in that district. 
**** Dimensional requirements for lots subdivided after April 26, 1994 
*****See section 12-2 for CD and DB development requirements. 
******No minimum required on Bridges Street from 4th Street to 13th Street. 
    No structure located within one hundred (100) feet of an abutting single-family residential zoning classification shall exceed a height of fifty (50) feet (section 14-39). 
    Increased height permitted with receipt of a conditional use permit from council (section 12-2.4(C)). 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 4, 10-8-2002; Ord. No. 2003-29, § 1, 6-18-2003; Ord. No. 2003-34, § 1, 6-18-2003; Ord. No. 2006-63, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 11, 12, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1.a.-f., 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 2007-50, § 4, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2009-40, § 2, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-41, § 4, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-07, §§ 2-6, 3-9-2010; Ord. No. 2012-24, §§ 20, 21, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 2018-O-02, § 3, 3-13-2018) 
13-2 - Multifamily Dwelling Requirements 
13-2.1  The requirements of this section shall be applied to all multifamily dwellings and developments in all zoning districts allowing "multifamily dwellings" as either a permitted use or a special use, except as noted in this or other sections of this Ordinance. 
    Prior to any construction on any lot over eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet, a comprehensive site plan, accompanied by a survey of the property with the seal of a registered land surveyor or engineer, shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval showing: 
(A)  Compliance with all development requirements of this Ordinance; 
(B)  The location of proposed waste container sites; and 
(C)  The location and general design of all proposed buildings, open spaces, watercourses, traffic lanes, parking areas, lighting plans, recreation facilities, specific drainage plans, and signs. 
    The site plan shall be accompanied by a drainage impact study of the site and all downstream properties as regards surface water runoff. The study shall be performed by a registered land surveyor or registered engineer. All proposed drainage for the site shall be set forth in the impact study and shall comply with section 13-3 of this Ordinance. 
    Except in the case of special-use approval, if required, these eighteen (18) copies of the site plan shall be completed and submitted at least twenty-eight (28) calendar days prior to the date of the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting. Subject to the length of the agenda and complexity of the application, late submittals may be placed on the meeting agenda with the approval of the Land Use Administrator. The Planning Board, in an advisory capacity to the Building Inspector, shall conduct its review to determine compliance with all zoning requirements. If the plan is disapproved, the applicant shall be informed in writing concerning deficiencies and the applicant shall be required to cause the redrafting of the site plan to be accomplished before resubmittal for approval. If the site plan is approved or conditionally approved, one copy of the site plan shall be returned to the applicant signifying approval or stating the conditions that must be met before the issuance of a building permit can be considered by the Building Inspector. The Planning Board shall retain one copy for its minutes and transmit one signed copy (noted if conditional) to the Land Use Administrator. 
    Site plan review shall only be conducted for approval or disapproval based on demonstrated compliance with the requirements of this ordinance or other applicable codes. Conditions may be made for the delivery of documentary evidence from other governmental agencies that must grant approval or for making minor modifications to correct site plan deficiencies. Furthermore, the Planning Board may give advisory opinions on general aspects of a site plan. 
13-2.2  Development standards. Minimum lot size for multifamily use shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Each lot for multifamily use shall provide: 
(A)  First unit. Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(B)  Each additional unit of two (2) or more bedrooms. Three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(C)  Each additional one-bedroom unit. Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
(D)  Parking. All parking spaces shall be not less than nine (9) feet in width and not less than eighteen (18) feet in length. See subsection 20-3.1 for required parking. 
No multifamily development shall locate parking in such a manner as to cause the backing of vehicles onto or off of public streets, roads, or highways; provided, however, that where an individual driveway is intended to serve an individual unit and extends from an attached, enclosed garage to a minor residential street, individual curb-cuts may be permitted by the Land Use Administrator. 
(E)  Open spaces. It is the purpose and intent of this subsection that open spaces of sufficient area and content be maintained to improve the livability of all multifamily uses with the intended and permitted higher population densities. With the approval of the Planning Board, open spaces may be established in any required yard or area to be developed as multifamily except as restricted in this Ordinance. A minimum of twenty-eight (28) percent of the site shall be reserved for natural and useable open space. To the maximum extent possible, open space shall be contiguous with adequate ingress/egress. 
(1)  Natural Open Space: Natural open space shall contain a minimum of eighteen (18) percent of the lot, tract, or development area. Natural open space must remain in a naturally vegetated state or revegetated with trees, shrubs and vegetated ground cover as approved by the Planning Board. This natural open space shall not contain or be crossed by any manmade uses, including, but not limited to, buildings, streets, signs, etc. Required buffers and drainage and utility easements may be located in natural open space areas. Natural open spaces shall be maintained in a clean, trash-free condition. 
(2)  Useable Open Space: A minimum of ten (10) percent of the lot, tract or development area shall be designated as useable open space. Useable open space shall be improved and maintained for active or passive recreational uses. No useable open space shall have a length, width or diameter of less than thirty (30) feet in any direction. Improvements may include playgrounds, trails, community buildings (i.e. picnic area, shelter, clubhouse), ground-level patios, tennis courts, swimming pools, etc. Wetlands or state-required retention ponds shall not be included in useable open space calculations. 
(F)  Height limit. Fifty (50) feet above the average finished grade, with the exception of the specific standards set out in the planned development district for buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(G)  Minimum front yard. Twenty-five (25) feet with the exception of planned developments (PD) which is ten (10) feet. 
(H)  Minimum side yard. Minimum eight (8) feet for one side only and twenty (20) feet minimum for two-side aggregate (combined) for the first story in height; add five (5) feet to each side yard for each additional story in height. On corner lots, the side yard abutting the street shall be no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Planned developments (PD) are required to have a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet. 
(I)  Minimum rear yard. Twenty-five (25) feet for first story in height; add five (5) feet to rear yard for each additional story in height. Planned developments (PD) are required to have a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet. 
(J)  Curb cuts. Curb cuts shall be spaced not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet apart. If a project has less than one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage, only one curb cut shall be allowed for the entire project. 
(K)  Outside lighting. Multifamily housing development shall be required to install on-site, exterior lighting to light parking lots, rear areas, and developed recreation areas. An outdoor lighting plan shall be submitted separately from the site plan and shall show the location, the height above grade, and the type of illumination (such as incandescent, halogen, high pressure sodium, etc.). The plan shall show the distribution and density levels of illumination for each exterior fixture in a horizontal plane, producing a contouring map (isolux diagram) with foot-candles indicated. This information is available from the manufacturer of the specified fixture. The lighting plan shall eliminate dark spots as well as minimize glare and spillage into adjoining lots. The minimum light level shall be no less than 0.2 foot-candles (FC) to 0.7 FC minimum with a uniformity (average/minimum) ratio of 4:1. All light levels are measured at ground level. The specified minimum FC value above 0.2 FC means that the lowest light level point or location must not be less than the minimum stated FC value. An average to minimum uniformity ration of 4:1 means that the average FC to minimum FC ratio cannot be worse (greater) than 4:1. 
(L)  Public water access. All multifamily development projects adjoining public estuarine waters shall make provisions for public access. Where bulkheads are constructed along mean high water, boardwalks or other similar structures may be used to provide access. 
    If requested by the developer, the Council may accept a fee in lieu of providing public water access. The Council will use factors such as proximity of other local public water accesses, likelihood of public utilizing public water access on the site, whether the site has traditionally been used as a public water access point, etc. to determine whether to accept the fee in lieu of dedication. 
    If the Council determines it is acceptable for the developer to pay a fee in lieu of dedication, the amount shall be based on one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per unit/lot, not to exceed seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00). 
13-2.3  Townhouse development. Townhouse development may be allowed in any district listing multifamily dwelling as a permitted or special use. 
(Ord. No. 2006-64, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 2006-71, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 2007-08, § 3, 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 2007-40, §§ 3, 4, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 2011-21, § 5, 7-12-2011) 
13-3 - Drainage Requirements 
    All storm drainage shall be adequately designed so that roads may be maintained without excessive cost, and so as to prevent flooding on private property from storm runoff of the design frequency. The minimum design frequency shall be as follows: 
13-3.1  Storm sewer collector-Ten (10) years. 
13-3.2  Cross drainage-Twenty-five (25) years. 
    In areas where ditch grades or quantities of flow make it impracticable to establish and maintain vegetation of such type and density that erosion will be substantially prohibited and normal flow will not be impeded, an erosion-resistant lining, such as paving or rock riprap, shall be required. 
    Subsurface drainage shall be adequate to maintain a stable subgrade. 
    Culverts shall be installed and maintained by the property owner so as to be capable of handling surface waters from upstream development as well as site development in accordance with the engineering requirements for the project. 
    Storm drainage ditches shall have side slopes of at least two (2) to three (3) feet of horizontal distance for each one foot of vertical distance or in the discretion of the town engineer. Said ditches shall be maintained by the property owner and be kept free of trees and other obstructions. 
13-4 - General Development Standards 
13-4.1  Unsuitable or dangerous site conditions. 
(A)  Lots unsuitable for residential or commercial development due to erosion, topographical features, drainage characteristics, or other reasons that result in a site being unsuitable or dangerous for development shall not be platted for such use until such conditions are corrected. 
(B)  Lots located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction which have not been determined suitable or which are unsuitable for septic tanks shall be so marked on the final plat unless such lots are to be served by an approved disposal system. 
13-4.2  Disposal areas. 
(A)  Areas which have been used for disposal of solid waste shall not be subdivided unless tests by the Carteret County Health Department, a structural engineer, and a soils expert determine that the land is suitable for construction purposes. 
13-4.3  Flood damage. 
(A)  All subdivisions shall be consistent with Article 18 Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
(B)  All subdivisions shall locate any public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems so as to minimize flood damage. 
13-4.4  Federal and state regulations. 
(A)  All lots, structures, utilities, and filling shall comply with any applicable state and federal regulations, including but not limited to, the Coastal Area Management Act (CAMA) and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, Code of Federal Regulations. 
13-4.5  Silt fences required. 
(A)  Silt fences shall be required to be installed and maintained for any land disturbing activity until ground cover is established. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017) 
ARTICLE 14. - EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS, AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN USES 

14-1 - Fences and Retaining Walls 
    It is the intent of this section to regulate materials, location, height and maintenance of fences and retaining walls to prevent nuisances and protect the safety and general welfare of the public. 
14-1.1  Permit required. 
(A)  No person may construct or cause to be constructed or erected any fence or retaining wall without first obtaining a fence permit. 
(B)  No person may repair or replace or cause to be repaired or replaced, in whole or in part, a fence or retaining wall without first obtaining a fence permit. 
(C)  Temporary, construction and agricultural fences associated with a bona fide farm are exempt from obtaining a permit. 
14-1.2  Location. 
(A)  Fences and retaining walls shall not be installed within easements. 
(B)  Property owners are responsible for installation of fences and retaining walls on their property. If the exact location of property lines is unknown, a survey may be required. 
(C)  Plantings may only be placed within drainage and utility easements with the approval of the City's Public Services Director. 
(D)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that fences and retaining walls do not alter or impede the natural flow of water in any stream, creek, drainage swale, or ditch. 
14-1.3  Height. 
(A)  For purposes of this section, solid fence is defined as having less than fifty percent (50%) opening as viewed from outside the fence. 
(B)  When a fence transitions from one height to another, the height of the fence will be measured from the ground to the tallest portion of the fence, excluding support posts. 
(C)  Fence height will be measured from the average grade three (3) feet on each side of the fence. 
(D)  Residential districts: 
(1)  Solid fences located within a front yard may not exceed three (3) feet in height. No fence may exceed a height of four (4) feet in a front yard. 
(2)  No fences in remaining yards of residential districts may exceed a height of six (6) feet. 
(E)  Districts other than residential: 
(1)  Solid fences located within a front yard may not exceed three (3) feet in height. Properties zoned CD or DB are exempt from this requirement. 
(2)  Fences in yards of districts other than residential may not exceed a height of eight (8) feet. 
(F)  Retaining walls proposed for the exclusive purpose of retaining fill material above naturally occurring grades shall not exceed two (2) feet in height as measured from the lowest ground elevation to the top of the retaining wall. Fill material shall not be added to the site for the sole purpose of allowing a retaining wall to be taller than two (2) feet. Any runoff created by permitted filling shall be directed toward the street or a designated and approved drainage area, not to adjacent properties. The applicant and/or property owner is responsible for containing and/or properly directing any runoff. Projects for which a valid state stormwater permit have been issued are exempt from the maximum retaining wall height requirements of subsection 14-1.3(F) and shall be limited to the maximum height requirements for fences as contained in subsection 14-1.3(A), (B), (C), (D), and (E). 
(G)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit public utility companies from installing security fencing to protect utility sites and equipment from trespass or access by the public. Necessary fencing for utility sites/equipment shall be limited to eight (8) feet in height in any yard. 
14-1.4  Maintenance. 
(A)  Any fence or retaining wall which is, or has become dangerous to public safety, health or welfare, is considered a public nuisance. 
(B)  Fences and retaining walls shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or danger or to constitute a nuisance, public or private. 
14-1.5  Additional. 
(A)  In no event shall any fence, retaining wall, or other structure or planting be placed or maintained in a location or manner relative to a public or private street, alley, driveway or other means of ingress or egress such that the sight of on-coming vehicular or pedestrian traffic is impaired for users of such means of ingress and egress. 
(B)  Fences and privacy screens shall only be installed with finish sides facing away from the property (i.e. construction side in). All fence posts must be located on the side of the fence facing the fence owner's property. 
(C)  No fence erected within the city limits shall be electrically charged except fencing designed to be installed underground (invisible) to retain pets. 
(D)  Fences and privacy screens shall be constructed of new or like new materials that are designed for the intended purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2008-56, §§ 2-28, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2012-48, § 1, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 4, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 2018-O-09, §§ 5-11, 6-18-2018) 
14-2 - Structures Excluded From Height Limitations 
    The height limits of these regulations shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, or dome; an ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy; a monument; a water tower; a transmission tower; a chimney or smokestack; a conveyor; a flag pole; a radio or television tower, mast, or aerial. The height limits of these regulations shall not apply to the community hospital, community college and institutions of higher learning with university affiliations because these uses are paramount to the public health, education and welfare of the town citizens and town visitors; the public cost to relocate these uses would be prohibitive; and, the amount of land available for such uses is limited within existing boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, § 1, 3-13-2007) 
14-3 - Adjustments in Front Yard Setback Requirements 
(A)  If twenty-five (25) percent or more of the lots within the same district on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than that required in section 13-1 of this Ordinance, and no building varies more than six (6) feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum average setback so established by the existing buildings, but this regulation shall not require a front setback of greater than fifty (50) feet. 
(B)  Unenclosed porches and steps shall be permitted to be located within the front setbacks of the R5 and R5S Districts provided that the unenclosed porches contain no walls or screening. 
(Ord. No. 2007-38, §§ 1-3, 7-10-2007) 
14-4 - Substandard Lots of Record 
    Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance which has an area and/or a width which is less than required by this Ordinance shall be subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
14-4.1  Adjoining lots. Where two (2) or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in one ownership at any time after the adoption of this Ordinance, and such lots individually are less than the minimum square footage and/or have less than the minimum width required in the district in which they are located, then such group of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted area and width for the district in which located. 
14-4.2  Lot not meeting minimum lot size requirements. Except as set forth in subsection 14-4.1 above, in any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations which has an area or a width which is less than required by these regulations may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling in an R district. 
14-5 - Temporary Field Office 
    A temporary field office may be permitted by a special ninety-day renewable permit issued by the Land Use Administrator provided: 
14-5.1  That no living quarters be maintained in such temporary field office; and 
14-5.2  That the temporary field office be used only in conjunction with construction activity. 
14-6 - Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles as Temporary Residences or Business Locations 
    If any building which conforms to the permitted or special uses for the zoning district in which it is situated is destroyed (or rendered unfit for the purpose it was being used prior to such destruction or damage) by fire, flood, windstorm, or other act of God, it shall be lawful for the Land Use Administrator to issue a temporary renewable permit to the person owning such building or occupying it as a residence or for business or commercial purposes to locate a manufactured home or recreational vehicle on the lot occupied by such destroyed or damaged building and to use the same for a period not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days for the same purpose as had the destroyed or damaged building immediately prior to the destruction or damage. No more than one family shall occupy a manufactured home or recreational vehicle for residential purposes and no more than one manufactured home or recreational vehicle shall be permitted on any residential lot. Temporary manufactured homes and recreational vehicles permitted under this section shall be subject to the following: 
(A)  No manufactured home or recreational vehicle authorized under this section shall be permitted to be located upon any town property, parking lot operated or supervised by the town, or right-of-way of any town street or alley. 
(B)  Temporary manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must be properly connected to an approved wastewater system or have a means to properly remove all wastewater and must have a permanent power source. 
(C)  Temporary manufactured homes and recreational vehicles located within a special flood hazard area must meet the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance requirements contained in Article 18 of this Ordinance. 
    A permit issued under this section may be extended by the Land Use Administrator for good cause such as substantial progress towards improvements. The maximum number of extensions that may be granted shall be limited to two extensions of one hundred and twenty (120) days each. 
    For purposes of section 14-6, "recreational vehicle" shall include mobile campers, buses, trailers, and other vehicles, whether motorized or not, which are designed and appropriate for human occupation as living quarters and which have plumbing, sanitary waste storage/disposal facilities, a permanent power source, bedding, and sitting and storage areas. Outside storage is not allowed under this section. Tents, lean-tos, sheds, shacks, or other temporary structures or similar facilities which are not contained within or incorporated into a mobile vehicle shall not be permitted under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 17, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 16, 3-9-2010; Ord. No. 2018-O-17, § 1, 11-13-2018) 
14-7 - Family Care Homes 
    Family care homes shall not be located nearer to each other than one-half mile. 
14-8 - Cemeteries 
    A cemetery shall meet the minimum requirements of the North Carolina Division of Health Services. 
State Law reference- Cemeteries, G.S. Chapter 65; public health, G.S. Chapter 130A. 
14-9 - Churches 
14-9.1  A church or other place of worship may be allowed in an R district subject to the requirements of the district, any other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and provided that: 
(A)  The structure shall have minimum side and rear yards of fifty (50) feet and a front yard at least twenty-five (25) feet greater than that required for single-family residences within the district. 
(B)  See subsection 20-3.2 for parking requirements. 
14-9.2  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2003-38, §§ 1, 2, 8-13-2003; Ord. No. 2014-25, § 1, 6-10-2014) 
14-10 - Home Occupations 
14-10.1  Type A. A Type A home occupation is one where the residents use their home as a place of work; however, no employees or customers come to the site. No traffic shall be generated by Type A home occupations in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. Type A home occupations shall be permitted in all residential districts. Examples include: artists, crafts people, writers, consultants, appraisers and home offices that utilize technology rather than direct customer contact as the primary means of doing business. 
14-10.2  Type B. A Type B home occupation is one where either one (1) employee or customers come to the site. A special use permit issued by the Board of Adjustment shall be required prior to establishing a Type B home occupation. Examples include: beauticians, home child day cares, home adult day cares. 
14-10.3  General requirements. 
(A)  No more than twenty (20) percent of the heated floor space of the principal dwelling shall be used for the home occupation. 
(B)  The home shall continue to be used principally as a dwelling. The dwelling and site must remain residential in appearance and characteristics. Internal or external changes that will make the dwelling appear less residential in nature or function are prohibited. Examples of such prohibited alterations include construction of parking lots or adding commercial-like exterior lighting. 
(C)  The occupation shall not be visible from the street. 
(D)  No outside signs in excess of two (2) square feet in size shall be displayed on the premises. 
(E)  The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance or any undue disturbance in the neighborhood. Noise, vibration and odor, etc., other than that which can be expected of a normal household shall be considered a nuisance or undue disturbance. 
(F)  Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the principal (main) dwelling. Detached and/or accessory buildings shall not be included as part of the principal building. 
(G)  Deliveries. Truck deliveries or pick-ups of supplies or products associated with business activities are limited to those normally servicing residential neighborhoods. 
(H)  Trucks and vehicles. No more than one light truck or vehicle per resident associated with the home occupation may be parked at the site. 
(I)  Parking shall be in accordance with Article 20. Any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off street and not located in any required yard. No additional driveways to serve such home occupation shall be permitted. 
(J)  A secondary outside access may be provided, however, all home occupations shall provide an access to the remaining portion of the residence. 
14-10.4  Prohibited uses. 
(A)  Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines (such as autos, motorcycles, scooters, marine engines, lawn mowers, chain saws and other small engines) or of large appliances (such as washing machines, dryers and refrigerators) or water crafts (such as jet skis) or any other similar type of work. 
(B)  Accessory home occupations may not serve as headquarters of dispatch centers where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations. 
14-10.5  Additional Type B home occupation regulations. 
(A)  A Type B accessory home occupation is prohibited in duplexes, triplexes and multifamily developments. 
(B)  A Type B home occupation shall be permitted only in single-family dwellings. 
(C)  Hours. Customers may visit the site only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(D)  Retail sales. Retail sales of goods must be entirely accessory to any services provided on the site (i.e., such as hair care products sold as an accessory to hair cutting). 
(E)  Number of Type B home occupations. No more than one Type B home occupation per dwelling unit is permitted. 
14-11 - Hospitals 
    A hospital may be permitted in an MA district subject to the requirements of the district and provided that: 
14-11.1  The lot size shall be not less than two (2) acres; and 
14-11.2  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11, § 5, 4-8-2014) 
14-12 - Junkyards 
    A junkyard may be permitted as a special use in the Industrial (I) district subject to the requirements of the district and provided that: 
14-12.1  The junkyard shall be set back at least two (2) times the distance from the right-of-way line as required in the front setback requirements; and 
14-12.2  The junkyard shall be fenced with a visual screen eight (8) feet in height in order that no junk can be seen from the street or surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 2012-24, §§ 22, 23, 7-10-2012) 
Cross reference- Abandoned or junked motor vehicles, § 9-126 et seq. 
14-13 - Home Child Day Care Centers, Preschools, and Nurseries 
    Home child day care centers, preschools, and nurseries may be allowed in an R district subject to the requirements of the district; provided, that: 
14-13.1  Off-street parking and loading requirements in this Ordinance must be met; 
14-13.2  Indoor and outdoor space requirements shall be in accordance with the applicable General Statutes; 
14-13.3  The entire play area shall be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of at least four (4) feet and constructed in such a manner that maximum safety to the children is ensured. 
14-14 - Manufactured Home Parks 
    A manufactured home park may be permitted in an R-15M district subject to the requirements of the district and provided that: 
14-14.1  The minimum manufactured home park size shall be 2.18 acres or a typical city block. 
14-14.2  The park shall have minimum side and rear yards of twenty (20) feet and a front yard of at least thirty (30) feet greater than that required for uses permitted as a right in the district. 
14-14.3  A manufactured home shall not be occupied by more than one family. 
14-14.4  Each manufactured home shall be connected to a community water system and to a community sewage disposal system or an individual septic system approved by the Carteret County Health Department. 
14-14.5  The minimum lot or stall size shall be not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet and the minimum stall width shall be no less than forty (40) feet for a single wide lot and shall be no less than fifty-four (54) feet in width for a double wide lot. 
14-14.6  The minimum front and rear setback requirement for a stall shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
14-14.7  The minimum side yard setback requirement for a stall shall be eight (8) feet. 
14-14.8  An unobstructed right-of-way of at least thirty (30) feet wide shall be provided to serve all manufactured home stalls. Within such right-of-way there shall be at least a twenty-two foot paved road, paved in accordance with the standards set forth in the Morehead City Subdivision Regulations. 
14-14.9  Where centrally located waste cans are used, they shall be no further than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any lot. 
14-14.10  Each trailer [manufactured home] stall shall be clearly defined by means of concrete or steel or iron pipe markers placed at all corners. 
14-14.11  At least two hundred (200) square feet for each manufactured home stall in the park shall be provided in one or more locations for community playground and recreation purposes. Such location shall be approved by the Planning Board. 
14-14.12  A buffer shall be required around the perimeter of the manufactured home park in accordance with section 15-1. 
14-14.13  All manufactured homes must be skirted such that no area beneath the manufactured home is visible from any direction within sixty (60) days of placement in the park. 
14-14.14  Approval of manufactured home parks. 
(A)  For the establishment, maintenance, construction, or alteration of a manufactured home park that affects the number of sites within the park, a manufactured home park plan shall be prepared and submitted to the Planning Board and City Council for approval. The plan shall be submitted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance. No plan is required when minor facility improvements (not including public facilities) are proposed in an existing manufactured home park as long as the number of manufactured home lots is not affected. 
(B)  Manufactured home park plan. The plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch and shall meet the plat requirements as described in this Ordinance. 
14-14.15  No manufactured home park shall be occupied by a greater number of manufactured homes than that authorized on the approved plan. No manufactured home park shall be enlarged or extended except in compliance with this section. 
14-14.16  All dimensional requirements shall be in accordance with and each manufactured home park shall operate in accordance with rules and regulations of the Carteret County Health Department relative to the location, sanitation, and operation of manufactured home parks. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, §§ 17-30, 3-9-2010; Ord. No. 2010-16, § 1, 5-11-2010) 
14-15 - Trailers, Trailer Parks 
14-15.1  No trailer shall be permitted under any circumstances in either the residential or business zones; however, individual trailers may be used for temporary office or utility purposes in the business zones with written permission of the City Manager for a duration of not more than six (6) months for each permit. This subsection shall not include in its prohibition temporary field offices as defined in section 14-5 of this Ordinance. 
14-15.2  Only individual trailers for dwelling purposes shall be permitted within the Industrial (I) district, provided all ordinances of the town are complied with; however, individual trailers may be used for temporary office or utility purposes in the Industrial (I) district with the written permission of the City Manager for a duration of not more than six (6) months for each permit. 
14-15.3  Special areas in the industrial zones specifically set apart for use as trailer parks, courts, or camps for dwelling purposes shall be permitted within the town or in the perimeter zoning area, provided all ordinances of the town, the Unified Development Ordinance and all area regulations are complied with. 
14-15.4  It shall be unlawful to park or leave standing upon any town property, parking lot operated or supervised by the town, or right-of-way of any town street or alley, any manufactured home, camper, trailer, recreational vehicle or tent, for the purpose of occupying the same, temporarily or permanently, or for the purposes of preparing or consuming food in, on, or around such vehicle, manufactured home, tent, or camper. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, § 9, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 31, 3-9-2010; Ord. No. 2012-24, § 24, 7-10-2012) 
14-16 - Private Clubs/Lodges 
    A private club or lodge may be permitted in an R district subject to the requirements of the district and provided that: 
14-16.1  All new sites shall be no less than two (2) acres in size; 
14-16.2  The structures shall have minimum side and rear setbacks of fifty (50) feet and a front yard of at least twenty-five (25) feet greater than that required for single-family residences within the district; and 
14-16.3  Provisions for food, refreshment, and entertainment for club members and their guests may be allowed in conjunction with such use if the Board of Adjustment determines that said provisions will not constitute a nuisance. 
14-17 - Public Utility Buildings and Uses 
    Public utility buildings and uses such as sewage lift stations, pump stations, electrical substations, etc., which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to surrounding neighbors or to other uses permitted in the district may be permitted in any district. Public buildings and uses in this case shall not be construed to include post offices, armories, schools, churches, etc. 
14-18 - School 
    A public or private school may be allowed in an R district subject to the requirements of the district and provided that: 
14-18.1  All structures shall have minimum side and rear yard(s) of fifty (50) feet and a front yard at least twenty-five (25) feet greater than that required for single-family residences within the district; 
14-18.2  An off-street loading area that is based on the size of the school and current planning standards; and 
14-18.3  The school site should meet the following minimum standards: 
(A)  Public elementary school. Ten (10) acres plus one acre for each one hundred (100) enrollment. 
(B)  Public junior high (middle) school. Fifteen (15) acres plus one acre for each one hundred (100) enrollment. 
(C)  Public senior high school. Thirty (30) acres plus one acre for each one hundred (100) enrollment. 
(D)  Private schools. No acreage requirement, but must meet all applicable sections of this Ordinance. 
14-19 - Kennels 
    Kennels may be permitted in certain districts subject to the requirements of the district and the following: 
14-19.1  The minimum lot size shall be one acre and the building shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line. 
14-19.2  Kennels shall be enclosed by a sound-proof barrier and be screened. 
14-20 - Business Residence 
    A business residence may be established in the CD, O&P, CN, CH, and DB districts subject to the requirements of the district and the following limitations: 
14-20.1  Not more than one (1) residence shall be permitted for each structure in the O&P, CN, and CH districts. Business residences located in the CD and DB district shall be permitted to have one (1) dwelling per six hundred twenty-five (625) square feet of land area. Density for buildings located over the water will be computed at one (1) unit per six hundred twenty-five (625) square feet of the building footprint; 
14-20.2  The residence in the O&P, CN, and CH districts shall not exceed the gross floor area of the business operation; 
14-20.3  Residences may be located above the business, but in no case shall be located in the front yard of the business; and 
14-20.4  Any residence must be in the same structure as the business. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, 10-8-2002; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 13, 14, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 2015-01, 2-10-2015) 
14-21 - Overnight Camping Trailer 
    Overnight camping trailers are permitted to be stored unoccupied on lots in any district. They are permitted to be occupied in overnight camping trailer parks. 
14-22 - Emergency Shelter Mission 
    Emergency shelter missions may be permitted in the CD and DB districts provided that: 
14-22.1  The emergency shelter mission is located no closer than one-half mile to a public or private school; 
14-22.2  The emergency shelter mission is located no closer than one-half mile to another emergency shelter mission; 
14-22.3  Sleeping quarters shall not be permitted unless the emergency shelter mission includes a soup kitchen and the number of beds shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the maximum seating capacity of the soup kitchen; 
14-22.4  In the event that sleeping quarters are included as part of the emergency shelter mission, the facility shall be staffed twenty-four (24) hours per day when the beds are in use and the length of stay per individual shall be limited to not more than thirty (30) calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § 15, 2-13-2007) 
14-23 - Cluster Development 
    Cluster housing may be permitted in any R district with the exception of R-5S; provided, that: 
14-23.1  The density of the cluster housing does not exceed the maximum density requirements of the district in which it is to be located. 
14-23.2  The minimum lot size for a cluster housing development is 2.15 acres. 
14-23.3  Cluster development lots shall be required to meet the setback requirements for the district in which it is established. 
14-23.4  Lot sizes may not be reduced by more than fifty (50) percent of the minimum lot size requirement for the district in which it is located. 
14-23.5  The minimum setback requirements for the perimeter of the property are as follows: 
Front: 40 feet. 
Side: 40 feet. 
Rear: 40 feet. 
14-23.6  Zero lot line may be permitted within cluster housing developments; provided, that at least one side setback for the district is met. (Example: If the side setback requirement for the zoning district is fifteen (15) feet per side, the cluster homes may not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to another residential structure.) At no point shall it be less than ten (10) feet between structures. 
14-23.7  Approval of cluster housing developments shall be in accordance with the procedures outlined in the Subdivision Regulations. 
14-23.8  Open space shall be deeded to the homeowners' association and shall not be developed except as passive recreational areas. 
14-24 - Commercial Marina 
    Activities and possible uses on the marina property shall be limited to wet boat storage, drystack boat storage, boat service and repairs, boat accessory sales, ship's store, coffee shop, boat trailer parking areas, automobile parking areas, launching ramps, piers, and boat petroleum service areas subject to the following requirements: 
14-24.1  If drystack boat storage buildings are located as part of the commercial marina, it shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet from any property line unless such property line abuts the water. Also, a buffer shall be required between the building and any adjacent property lines in accordance with these regulations. 
14-24.2  Pump out facilities are required. 
14-25 - Automobile Repair Garages/Automobile Service Stations 
    Automobile repair garages and automobile service stations may be permitted in commercial and industrial districts subject to the district regulations and the following limitations: 
14-25.1  Gasoline pumps and other appliances shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line. 
14-25.2  When an automobile repair garage or automobile service station adjoins a residential district, the underground storage tanks shall be located a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the property line. 
14-25.3  All underground storage tank facilities shall comply with all federal, state, and local regulations. 
14-25.4  Also, a buffer shall be required between the building and any adjacent property lines in accordance with these regulations. 
14-26 - Bars and Cocktail Lounges 
14-26.1  No bar or cocktail lounge shall be permitted to be located within one-quarter (1/4) mile of an existing or proposed church, school or day care facility. If the bar or cocktail lounge is located on Arendell Street or Evans Street between 4th and 10th Street, the minimum distance between an existing or proposed church, school or day care facility shall be three hundred (300) feet. 
14-26.2  Live entertainment shall be permitted in bars and cocktail lounges, provided that it shall occur inside the enclosed building. 
14-26.3  Any bar or cocktail lounge applying for approval as a special use in the CD or DB district shall be subject to any approved design criteria. Cocktail lounges shall not be permitted on any lot in the CD or DB district that directly abuts or is directly across the street from a residentially zoned parcel. 
14-26.4  No bar or cocktail lounge located in the CD or DB district shall play, operate or cause to be played or operated, any amplified or nonamplified musical instrument or sound reproductive device in a manner that causes a noise disturbance on any neighboring premises or public area. For the purposes of this section, a noise disturbance shall be presumed to exist where the sound or noise caused by any activity described herein is plainly audible within any occupied structure not the source of sound or within any public area more than sixty (60) feet from the property line of the applicant's establishment from 10:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
14-26.5  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prevent its patrons from loitering on public or private property in the vicinity of the applicant's establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-41, § 2, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 16, 17, 2-13-2007) 
14-27 - Yard Sales 
14-27.1  Yard sales may be permitted in residential districts, provided that not more than two (2) yard sales occur at the same location within a one-year period. 
14-27.2  Items sold during the yard sale shall not have been acquired for the sole purpose of reselling. 
14-28 - Adult Establishments and Cabarets 
    An adult establishment, or an adult cabaret, may be permitted in a Commercial Highway (CH) district subject to the requirements of the district and provided that: 
14-28.1  All sites shall be no less than two (2) acres in size. 
14-28.2  The structure shall have minimum front, side, and rear setbacks of at least fifty (50) feet. 
14-28.3  No adult establishment shall be permitted within thirteen hundred twenty (1,320) feet of an established adult establishment (see note). 
14-28.4  No adult establishment shall be permitted within thirteen hundred twenty (1,320) feet of a church, school, public park, or existing child day care facility nor within five hundred (500) feet of any residential zoning district (see note); 
14-28.5  No aspect of an adult establishment, as defined under G.S. 144-202.10, or an adult cabaret shall be permitted within any district other than a Commercial Highway (CH) district. 
NOTE: Measurements shall be taken from the exterior property line and will be measured by a straight line to the nearest point on the property line of another adult establishment, church, school, public park, existing day care facility, or residential zoning district boundary. 
14-29 - Relocation of Existing Buildings 
    The Building Inspector shall inspect each structure proposed to be relocated prior to issuing a permit to move a building to determine if the building to be moved is structurally sound. 
14-30 - Logging Operations 
    Any logging operation on a parcel of land five (5) acres or greater shall be required to leave a minimum fifteen-foot buffer between the logging operation and abutting residential property lines. Buffers shall be vegetated, either left in a natural state or be replanted with not less than two (2) rows spaced not more than ten (10) feet apart of loblolly or long leaf pines spaced on not more than seven-foot centers. Pine seedlings shall be planted. 
    Any logging operation done in conjunction with an approved development plan shall be exempt from this requirement. 
14-31 - Accessory Uses or Buildings 
    An accessory use or building as defined in this Ordinance shall be governed by the following requirements: 
14-31.1  All accessory uses and buildings shall be required to meet the setback requirements established in section 13-1, except that such buildings and uses may be located in the rear yard of any R district, provided it is located at a distance of not less than five (5) feet from the rear and side lot lines. 
14-31.2  Accessory uses and buildings may consist of the following structures: 
(A)  Garage; 
(B  Greenhouse; 
(C)  Playhouse; 
(D)  Pump house; 
(E)  Recreational area; 
(F)  Storage shed; 
(G)  Swimming pool-Swimming pools shall be installed in accordance with applicable North Carolina State Building Codes; 
(H)  Tool shed; 
(I)  Workshop; 
(J)  Dog pen; 
(K)  Antenna; 
(L)  Docks and piers subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Only one dock or pier may be located on a residential lot. 
(2)  Docks and piers shall be single (one deck only), private and noncommercial. 
(3)  Without a primary structure, no more than two (2) water craft may be docked at any one time per residential lot. 
(4)  All docks shall be built in accordance with the Coastal Area Management Act (CAMA) regulations. 
(5)  Docks shall be built in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(6)  No living quarters, boathouses, or recreational buildings or structures shall be placed on a dock or pier nor shall any houseboat, boat, or floating structure be moored at the dock or pier to be used as a residence except they may be so used for periods not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days nor more than twenty (20) days in any calendar month. 
(7)  Docks and piers must be maintained in a good and safe condition. 
(8)  Within twenty-four (24) hours of any work on a pier or dock, all building materials used to build, repair, or for maintenance of the pier or dock shall be cleared away from the shore, bottom and water to proper disposal area. Nails left on the shore or bottom constitute a particular danger. Storage of materials must be such so as to prevent them from being floated on high or storm tides. 
(9)  All federal and state laws and regulations concerning piers and docks shall be observed and obeyed. 
(10)  Exception: Common Docks. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 3 above, the owner(s) of a 100% interest in a waterfront lot, or multiple adjoining waterfront lots, where such lot or lots are located within a single block platted and shown on the official map of the Town of Morehead City (Map Book 1, Page 131, Carteret County Registry), may submit to the Town an application for an accessory use dock which will be a "common dock" for use by the contiguous waterfront lot owners and non-waterfront lot owners within the same platted block. Each waterfront lot shall be limited to two (2) boat slips and each non-waterfront lot shall be limited to one (1) boat slip provided the total number of boat slips does not exceed nine (9). The application must be accompanied by the following: 
(a)  An application processing fee in accordance with the City's Fee Schedule. 
(b)  A drawing indicating the configuration, dimensions and location of the common dock to be constructed and the location of the lots of all participating owners. 
(c)  All necessary CAMA and other governmental permits required for construction of the common dock. 
(d)  A written instrument, suitable for recording in the records of the Carteret County Register of Deeds, signed by all participating, contiguous waterfront owners and all of the participating owner(s) of other lots in the same platted block who will share use of the common dock (collectively "participating owners"). The instrument shall include: 
(i)  Provision for the management, maintenance and upkeep of the dock structure, utilities, and all access ways. 
(ii)  Prohibition of trash, debris, and storage in the easements or on the common dock. 
(iii)  Provision for easements and cross easements where necessary to be used by participating owners for access to and maintenance of the common dock. 
(iv)  Restrictions limiting use of the common dock to no more than one slip per participating non-waterfront lot, and two slips per participating waterfront lot, such slips to be used only by that participating lot owner, only, and prohibition of slip rental, lease, or occupation by a vessel not owned by a guest to temporarily use a slip to which that lot owner has a right of occupancy for not more than ten days per calendar year. 
(v)  Provision for signage, legible from both land and water, indicating that the common dock is private property and not for public use. 
(vi)  A means to distribute the costs of maintenance and upkeep of the common dock among the users and to enforce collection of such funding. 
(vii)  A method for providing insurance policies for protection against injuries and property damage from hazards and negligence. 
(viii)  A list of all participating lot numbers which must include all waterfront lots that will have their riparian areas affected, and a provision that all heirs, successors, and assigns of such lot owners shall be bound by the instrument's provisions. 
(ix)  Provision of a method for assignment of boat slips on a one to one, or one to two basis for each relevant lot. 
(x)  Provision that all future deeds associated with the relevant lots shall reference and be bound by the terms of the instrument. 
(xi)  Provision for creation and enforcement of Rules and Regulations applicable to the use of the common docks and easement areas. 
(xii)  Prohibition of nuisances, whether from active or passive activities, including, but not limited to, activity which is noisy, producing noxious fumes or odors or otherwise interfering with the peace and quiet of the owners within that block. 
(xiii)  That each waterfront owner associated with the common dock has or shall release their appurtenant littoral rights. 
(xiv)  That in the event that all lot owners unanimously agree to release all of their rights to and use of the common dock, the instrument shall be cancelled of record, the littoral rights of the waterfront shall be restored, and the common dock shall be removed or reconfigured and brought back into compliance with the Town's ordinances for individual lot accessory dock structures. 
(xv)  Provision granting the Town of Morehead City the right to enter upon the properties of the participating owners and the common dock for purposes of inspection and enforcement of the provisions of the instrument, such inspection and enforcement not being an obligation, but rather within the sole discretion of the Town. 
(xvi)  Provision that all participating owners will provide to each other and, upon request, to the Town, a list of all vessels owned by the participating owners and the slips assigned to each and shall maintain that list so that it remains current. 
(xvii)  Provision that the Town of Morehead City, at the collective expense of the participating owners, may remove and store, or fully dispose of, any obstruction to any easement area and any vessel occupying a slip which is not shown on the list of vessels provided to the Town or confirmed in writing upon request as being a vessel owned by a guest of a participating owner. 
(e)  Common docks must adhere to and comply with items 2, and 4 through 9, of 14-31.2, subsection L, as provided above. 
(M)  Communication tower on a parcel where a public utility electrical substation exists subject to the requirements of section 14-45. 
14-31.3  For properties zoned R5 or R5S, accessory buildings/uses may be located on a separate (adjacent) lot if the property is under common ownership, even if separated by an alley or right-of-way, subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  In no case are signs allowed on a separate lot as an accessory use. 
(B)  If power, water, sewer or other utility lines will cross an alley or right-of-way, any necessary easement must be obtained from the entity having control of the area to be crossed. 
(C)  In no case may the accessory building be occupied as a dwelling. 
(D)  If the principal use requires a special use, then a special use permit is required for the accessory building/use. 
(E)  District development standards (i.e., setbacks, lot coverage, height, etc.) must be met and the exemption for accessory buildings/uses in the rear yard of R districts does not apply. 
(F)  If the two (2) lots are separated by an alley, the alley may not be blocked from the public use. 
(G)  If the accessory use would require screening or landscaping on the same lot as the principal use, then the screening or landscaping requirements would apply on the separate lot. 
(H)  There shall be no separate electrical meter allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-56, § 29, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2012-31, §§ 2-10, 8-14-2012; Ord. No. 2012-43, § 3, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 19, 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 2015-18, §§ 1-23, 6-9-2015) 
14-32 - Manufactured Homes 
14-32.1  General requirements. 
(A)  General. Prior to release of electricity, the Building Inspector or his/her agent shall inspect the premises for compliance with these regulations. A wind zone designation map and third party inspection agency tag are required for any homes moved into or within Morehead City's jurisdiction. 
14-32.2  Exterior structure. 
(A)  General. The exterior of a structure shall be in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. When located on privately owned lots, the towing apparatus and transporting lights shall be removed. The home shall be permanently placed on a foundation and that foundation shall be enclosed, screened, or underpinned with weather and rot-resistant materials and maintained in good condition. 
(B)  Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, and trim, shall be in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be weather-resistant and tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be repaired if necessary and stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. 
(C)  Structural members. All structural members shall be free from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(D)  Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks and loose or rotting materials and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated, where required, to prevent deterioration. The exterior of the home shall be of brick, stone, vinyl siding, aluminum lap siding, wood lap siding, or other acceptable exterior siding materials. 
(E)  Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and free of defects that could or does admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roofs shall have a minimum of 2:12 pitch and be finished with a type of covering that is commonly used in standard residential construction. 
(F)  Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather-tight. All glazing materials shall be free from cracks and holes. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
(G)  Doors. All doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be in good condition. 
(H)  Light, ventilation, plumbing facilities, mechanical, electrical, fire safety, and sanitation. The provisions of this section shall be in accordance with those provisions and requirements of Article 23 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, §§ 1-13, 1-25-2010) 
14-33 - Marine Research Facility 
    Marine research facilities located within the CD district must provide a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the building square footage for educational or retail purposes, accessible to the general public. 
14-34 - Stables, Private 
    Private stables housing horses, mules or ponies may be located within an R district by permitted use subject to the following limitations: 
14-34.1  The minimum lot size is two (2) acres. The number of horses allowed shall be limited to one horse for the first two (2) acres then one horse per acre. 
14-34.2  In no case shall private stables be the principal use of a lot/tract. 
14-34.3  All animals shall be confined within a fenced enclosure constructed for such use and maintained in good repair. 
14-34.4  The minimum setback for all private stables shall be as follows: 
2-3 acres 50 feet 3-4 acres 75 feet 4-5 acres 100 feet 5-6 acres 125 feet Above 6 acres 150 feet  
(Ord. No. 2003-11, § 2, 3-11-2003) 
14-35 - Stables, Public 
    Public stables housing horses, mules or ponies may be located within an R district by special use or within CN as a permitted use subject to the following limitations: 
14-35.1  The minimum lot size is five (5) acres. The number of horses allowed shall be limited to one horse for the first two (2) acres then one horse per acre. 
14-35.2  Public stables may, where appropriate, be the principal use of a lot/tract. 
14-35.3  All animals shall be confined within a fenced enclosure constructed for such use and maintained in good repair. 
14-35.4  The minimum setback for all public stables shall be as follows: 
2-3 acres 50 feet 3-4 acres 75 feet 4-5 acres 100 feet 5-6 acres 125 feet Above 6 acres 150 feet  
(Ord. No. 2003-11, § 2, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 2012-24, § 25, 7-10-2012) 
14-36 - Towing/Recovery Storage Yard 
    The use may not be allowed on properties where the use itself will front on any major or minor thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 2004-05, § 3, 4-22-2004) 
14-37 - Accessory Outdoor Storage 
    Accessory outdoor storage is permitted in the highway commercial district subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The outdoor storage area is screened from adjoining and adjacent properties with plantings. Plantings shall be evergreens, planted on five-foot centers, to form a hedge and be installed at a minimum height of six (6) feet. 
(b)  The outdoor storage area is located no closer to the street than the wall of the principal use building that is closest to the street. 
(c)  The outdoor storage area is not the principal use of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 2004-44, § 2, 12-14-2004; Ord. No. 2009-38, §§ 2, 3, 9-8-2009) 
14-38 - Storage Containers 
14-38.1  Storage containers (less than 120 days). Storage containers proposed to be located on site for one hundred twenty (120) days per calendar year or less shall be required to meet the following requirements: 
(a)  The storage container is not located within any required setback unless it is screened from view; 
(b)  The storage container is not placed on any required parking spaces; and 
(c)  The storage container does not block any travel or fire lanes. 
14-38.2  Storage containers (more than 120 days). Storage containers shall be permitted on a site for longer than one hundred twenty (120) calendar days per year provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Storage containers are restricted to the following zoning districts: all commercial and industrial districts. 
(b)  Storage containers shall not be permitted within residential districts. 
(c)  A maximum of one (1) permanent storage container per site shall be permitted on lots of one (1) acre or less. One (1) additional storage container per acre may be permitted for lots greater than one (1) acre. 
(d)  Storage containers shall not be stacked vertically. 
(e)  Storage containers shall be maintained in good condition, free from structural damage, rust and deterioration. Containers shall be painted tan, brown, dark forest green or light gray. 
(f)  Storage containers shall be used for storage purposes only. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  All storage containers shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way or private street and any residential use or residential zoning district. Screening shall be accomplished by a wooden privacy fence or a brick or stucco screen wall at a height no greater than or less than six (6) feet. The exterior of the face or wall shall be lined with foundation plantings that reach a minimum of three (3) feet in height at maturity and spaced appropriately for the species. 
(i)  Storage containers shall meet all building setback requirements and shall be located on the rear half of the lot. 
(j)  Storage containers shall not be permitted in any required parking areas, loading areas or buffers. 
(k)  Storage containers shall not be permitted to be rented or leased to use not located on the same lot. 
(l)  The maximum allowable dimensions of a storage container are forty (40) feet in length, eight (8) feet in width and ten (10) feet in height. 
(m)  Businesses desiring to locate a storage container shall be required to submit a site plan showing the proposed location and its relationship to the overall site. The plan shall indicate how the container meets all permanent requirements including stormwater, traffic circulation, screening/buffering requirements and any other applicable City, state or federal regulation. 
14-38.3  Exemptions. Any storage containers located on a construction site shall be exempt from these regulations unless such storage containers remain after the permitted work is completed. 
(a)  This section shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. 
(b)  If any subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 2, 4-12-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02, § 18, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 20, 6-11-2013) 
14-39 - Height Restrictions When Abutting a Single-Family Residential District, Including R5 
14-39.1  No structure located within one hundred (100) feet of an abutting single-family residential zoning classification shall exceed a height of fifty (50) feet. The one hundred (100) feet is measured from the property line of the residentially-zoned property, except that if a commercial property is located across the street from the single-family residential and the street (right-of-way) width is less than one hundred (100) feet, then the one hundred (100) feet is measured from the commercial property line. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, §§ 1, 2, 3-13-2007) 
14-40 - Outdoor Vending Self-Service Machines 
14-40.1  General requirements. All outdoor vending self-service machines as defined in this Ordinance shall be governed by the following requirements: 
(A)  Shall not be placed in a location so as to impede access, block parking areas or create an unsafe condition; 
(B)  Shall include a four-foot walkway installed and maintained to provide adequate walking area; 
(C)  Shall not be placed in the public right-of-way; 
(D)  Shall be connected to public utilities if water and/or sewer is required; 
(E)  Shall not result in the use of exposed conduits, piping, or overhead utility connections; 
(F)  Shall not be situated adjacent to any wall that is a lower height than that of the machine; 
(G)  Shall not exceed a height of seventy-nine (79) inches unless located in an outdoor vending self-service kiosk; and 
(H)  Shall not exceed a width of ninety-six (96) inches unless located in an outdoor vending self-service kiosk. 
14-40.2  Accessory outdoor vending self-service machine. Accessory outdoor vending self-service machines shall not be located any distance greater than twelve (12) inches from the outside wall of the principal structure unless the architecture or building form provides a covered, contained area for the location of accessory outdoor vending self-service machines, not including covered sidewalks. 
14-40.3  Outdoor vending self-service kiosks. Outdoor vending self-service machines that are not accessory shall be installed/grouped in an outdoor vending self-service kiosk which shall be permitted subject to the requirements of this Ordinance and the following conditions: 
(A)  Shall establish a planted buffer area with a minimum width of twenty-four (24) inches around three (3) sides of the kiosk with evergreen shrubs planted on not less than eighteen-inch centers; and 
(B)  Kiosk safety barriers shall be covered with wood or brick facade. 
14-40.4  Freestanding manufactured ice vending machines. Freestanding manufactured ice vending machines shall be permitted subject to the requirements of this Ordinance and the following conditions: 
(A)  Shall meet minimum setback requirements; 
(B)  Shall not be permitted in any required parking areas, loading areas, or buffers; 
(C)  A roof structure constructed of either metal or wood (not fabric) shall be required to screen the mechanical equipment and other rooftop appurtenances; 
(D)  A planted buffer area with a minimum width of twenty-four (24) inches shall be established around three (3) sides of the base of the unit with evergreen shrubs planted on not less than eighteen-inch centers; 
(E)  Shall meet signage requirements of Article 19, and 
(F)  Safety barriers shall be covered with wood or brick facade. 
(Ord. No. 2008-27, §§ 5-25, 6-10-2008) 
14-41 - Townhouse Duplex 
(A)  A townhouse duplex must meet all standards set forth in this Ordinance for a two-family dwelling (duplex). Construction of a townhouse duplex shall be in accordance with the building code requirements for townhouses. 
(B)  Existing duplex lots may be developed as townhouse duplex by submitting to the Planning Department a recordable plat showing the duplex dwelling as constructed on the lot, with the land lying directly under each of the two (2) units being described by metes and bounds thereon, together with a jurat confirmation from the City's Building Inspector that the units have been constructed in accordance with the building code requirements for townhouses. Such submission shall not be considered a subdivision of property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-42, §§ 2-4, 9-11-2007) 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ordinance No. 2008-27, adopted June 10, 2008, added provisions designated as § 14-40. Inasmuch as there already exists a section so numbered, to avoid duplication, and at the discretion of the editor, existing § 14-40 has been renumbered as § 14-41. 
14-42 - Solar Panels 
    To the maximum extent feasible, solar panels shall be sized and located so as not to project over the peak of the roof to which the panels are attached and shall only project five (5) feet above a flat roof. All solar panels shall require a building permit and must conform to all state and local building codes and zoning ordinances. 
14-42.1  Freestanding solar panels. Freestanding panels that are not attached to the structure will be considered accessory use to the main structure. Freestanding solar panels shall conform to all state and local building codes and zoning ordinances. Freestanding solar panels are limited in height to that of the highest part of the roof of the primary structure and the total square foot area of the panels will be calculated as part of the allowable lot coverage. Panels shall be situated as to minimize glare pollution to adjoining property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2009-29, §§ 1-3, 9-8-2009) 
14-43 - Itinerant Merchant 
    Signage, merchandise, and/or displays may not be located within required parking spaces, required landscape areas, or travel paths/vehicle access areas in a manner which could impede travel. 
(Ord. No. 2009-39, § 2, 9-8-2009) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ordinance No. 2009-39, adopted September 8, 2009, added provisions designated as § 14-42. Inasmuch as there already exists a section so numbered, to avoid duplication, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as § 14-43. 
14-44 - Dog Training Facilities 
14-44.1  A minimum of seven hundred (700) square feet of building or land area is required to train up to five (5) dogs at a time. An additional one hundred forty (140) square foot area is required per each additional dog. 
14-44.2  Boarding, breeding, selling, and/or grooming shall not be permitted as part of a dog training facility. Such activities are permitted in kennels as defined under Article 2-2.140. 
14-44.3  Dogs entering and/or exiting the dog training facility shall be leashed and under the control of the dog owner or handler. 
14-44.4  Outdoor dog training facilities may be permitted subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
(A)  Training shall occur within a secure fenced area; 
(B)  Outdoor dog training areas shall be screened; and 
(C)  Outdoor dog training facilities shall not be permitted in the CD (Downtown Commercial) district. 
(Ord. No. 2011-24, §§ 3-10, 10-11-2011) 
14-45 - Communication Towers 
14-45.1  Communication towers are permitted in accordance with Article 11 except that communication towers are a permitted accessory use on a parcel that contains a public utility electrical substation. 
14-45.2  Provided that the overall height of the communication tower is not increased, additional antennas and related buildings and support structures may be added to the communication tower for third parties so long as the tower and related ground equipment is within the existing fenced area with an approved landscape buffer and the most current ANSI inspection report and a structural analysis by a licensed North Carolina professional engineer is submitted certifying that the communication tower has sufficient structural capacity to support additional antennas and related equipment. 
14-45.3  Maintenance: Communication towers shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or danger. Upon request of the building inspector, the communication tower owner shall provide the most current ANSI inspection report and a structural analysis that the communication tower is being operated and maintained in accordance with the building code provisions in effect when the communication tower was constructed. 
14-45.4  Height: No new communication tower or co-location shall exceed five hundred (500) feet above grade or preconstruction ground level. New communication towers taller than two hundred seventy-five (275) feet are prohibited in all residential zoning districts, residential subdivisions, group housing developments, manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks, but new colocations are permitted. 
14-45.5  Setbacks: 
14-45.5.1  All proposed communication towers shall provide an engineer's certification that the fall zone is fully contained within the parcel upon which the communication tower is installed. 
14-45.5.2  No dwelling units, whether existing or proposed, may be located within the fall zone of any new communication tower. 
14-45.5.3  Any accessory structure shall be located so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on which it is situated. 
(Ord. No. 2012-43, §§ 4-12, 12-11-2012) 
State Law reference- Local regulation of cell towers, G.S. 160A-400.50-160A-400.53. 
14-46 - Accessory Body Art Studio 
14-46.1  Accessory Body Art Studio is permitted in the DB district subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  The primary (non-body art) business use shall be located in the storefront of the building. 
(B)  The accessory body art studio shall not be visible from outside the building. 
(C)  No accessory body art studio shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a church, daycare or school. 
(D)  The minimum separation between businesses with accessory body art studios is three hundred (300) feet. 
(E)  Accessory body art studios shall not be located in a business serving beer or alcohol. 
(F)  No more than thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the building shall be occupied by an accessory body art studio, with seventy (70) percent of the gross area being occupied by the primary (non-body art business). 
(G)  The body art studio use shall be shielded from view by persons within the primary business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-33, §§ 2-10, 10-10-2017) 
14-47 - Arcade Club. 
    Arcade Club is permitted in accordance with Article 11 subject to the following conditions. 
14-47.1  Alcohol service areas shall not be visible from the outside of the business. 
14-47.2  No arcade club shall play, operate, or caused to be played or operated, any amplified or non-amplified musical instrument or sound reproductive device in a manner that causes a nuisance on any neighboring premises or public area. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-07, §§ 3-5, 4-9-2019) 
14-48 - Small Wireless Facilities (SWF) 
14-48.1  Purpose 
(A)  Promote the health, safety, and welfare of the public and minimize impacts of SWF on surrounding land uses; 
(B)  Establish standards for location, structural integrity, and compatibility; 
(C)  Encourage the location and co-location of equipment on existing structures in order to reduce the need for new towers or other structures, thereby minimizing visual clutter, public safety impacts, and effects upon the natural environment and wildlife; 
(D)  Accommodate the growing need and demand for wireless communications services while protecting the aesthetics and character of the town and its neighborhoods; 
(E)  Encourage coordination between suppliers and providers of telecommunications services to maximize use of existing SWF and structures; 
(F)  Establish predictable and balanced regulations within the authority reserved for local land use determination; 
(G)  Respond to the mandates of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, North Carolina Statutes Section 160A-400.50 et seq., and other applicable federal and state laws limiting local discretion to regulate the location of SWF; 
(H)  Encourage concealed technologies and the use of public lands, buildings, and structures as locations for SWF; 
(I)  Recognize that the permitting, construction, modification, maintenance and operation of SWF facilities are declared to be matters of statewide concern and interest to the extent specifically addressed in North Carolina Statutes, Chapter 160A-400.50 through 160A-400.57. 
(J)  Minimize the impacts of SWF in the right-of-way (ROW) and on surrounding land uses by establishing standards for location structural integrity specific to the climate conditions of the Town. 
14-48.2  Definitions - For the purposes of this Section 14-48 ONLY, the following definitions apply: 
(A)  Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits, receives, or transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communications services. 
(B)  Applicable codes. The North Carolina State Building Code and any other uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization together with state or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to address imminent threats of destruction of property or injury to persons. 
(C)  Application. A written request that is submitted by an applicant to a city for a permit to co-locate wireless facilities or to approve the installation, modification, or replacement of a utility pole, Town utility pole, or wireless support structure. 
(D)  Base station. A station at a specific site authorized to communicate with mobile stations, generally consisting of radio receivers, antennas, coaxial cables, power supplies, and other associated electronics. 
(E)  Co-location. The placement, installation, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of small wireless facilities on, under, within, or on the surface of the earth adjacent to existing structures, including utility poles, town utility poles, buildings, and other structures capable of structurally supporting the attachment of wireless facilities in compliance with applicable codes. The term "co-location" does not include the installation of new utility poles, town utility poles, or wireless support structures. 
(F)  Equipment compound. An area surrounding or near the base of a wireless support structure within which a wireless facility is located. 
(G)  Fall zone. The area in which a wireless support structure may be expected to fall in the event of a structural failure, as measured by engineering standards. 
(H)  Micro wireless facility. A small wireless facility that is no larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
(I)  Right-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, or alley dedicated for compatible use, owned, leased or operated by the town, as shown on the official map of the town, as it may be amended from time to time, including any public street or alley that is not a part of the State highway system. 
(J)  Small wireless facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements, if enclosed, could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet. 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no more than 28 cubic feet. For purposes of this sub-section, the following types of ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, or other support structures. 
(K)  Town utility pole. A pole owned by the Town of Morehead City in the town right-of-way that provides lighting, traffic control, or a similar function. 
(L)  Utility pole. A structure that is designed for and used to carry lines, cables, wires, lighting facilities, or small wireless facilities for telephone, cable television, electricity, lighting, or wireless services. 
(M)  Wireless facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: 
(1)  equipment associated with wireless communications and 
(2)  radio transceivers, antennas, wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term shall not include any of the following: 
(a)  The structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to which the equipment is co-located. 
(b)  Wireline backhaul facilities. 
(c)  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or town utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. 
(N)  Wireless infrastructure provider. Any person with a certificate to provide telecommunications service in the state who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures for small wireless facilities but that does not provide wireless services. 
(O)  Wireless provider. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
(P)  Wireless services. Any services, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using wireless facilities. 
(Q)  Wireless services provider. A person who provides wireless services. 
(R)  Wireless support structure. A new or existing structure, such as a monopole, lattice tower, or guyed tower that is designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. A utility pole or a town utility pole is not a wireless support structure. 
Any term used herein not otherwise defined above shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 2-2. 
14-48.3  Applicability. To the extent of or preempted by State or Federal law and regulations, the requirements of this Section apply EXCLUSIVELY to small wireless facilities and micro wireless facilities located within a town right-of-way in any zoning district or outside a town right-of-way on property not located within single-family zoning districts. 
14-48.4  General Requirements. 
(A)  Signage. A name plate sign no larger than four (4) inches by six (6) inches shall be installed in a visible location and include: 
(1)  Party responsible for operation and maintenance of facility; 
(2)  Emergency contact information including phone number; and 
(3)  Signage identifying voltage dangers shall be in accordance with the National Electric Code. No other signage shall be permitted on any small wireless facility or micro wireless facility regulated under this Section. 
(B)  Lighting. No lighting shall be provided on any small wireless or micro wireless facility regulated under this section except for lighting that is an element of the concealment features of the small wireless facility (i.e. a street light or park light which also contains a small wireless facility). 
(C)  Interference with Public Safety and Wireless Meter Reading Communications. 
(1)  No small wireless facility or micro wireless facility shall interfere with public safety radio or wireless meter reading frequencies. 
(2)  In the event a wireless service provider is notified by the town that its facility is creating such interference, the provider shall investigate and mitigate the interference in accordance with the procedures set forth in the joint wireless industry-public safety "Enhanced Best Practices Guide", released by the FCC in Appendix D of the FCC 04-168 released August 6, 2004, as amended. 
(3)  In the event that the interference is not resolved within 24 hours of town notification, the provider shall take the facility offline and resolve the interference issue before restoring the facility operations. 
(4)  Failure to initiate an appropriate response within 24 hours of the town's notification and failure to mitigate the interference shall result in the provider and property owner being jointly and severally responsible for reimbursing the town for all costs associated with ascertaining and resolving the interference. 
(D)  Locating in Public Right-of-Way or on Private Property not located in Single-Family Residential Districts. 
(1)  Wireless providers may co-locate small wireless facilities upon public rights-of-way or on private property not located in Single Family Residential Districts. A wireless provider may place, maintain, modify, operate or replace associated utility poles, town utility poles, conduit, cable or related appurtenances and facilities upon any public right-of-way or on private property not located in single-family residential districts subject to review and approval process in Section 14-48.4(D) below and provided the following requirements are met: 
(a)  Each new utility pole and each modified or replacement utility pole or town utility pole installed in the right-of-way or each new wireless support structure on private property not located in a single-family residential district shall not exceed 50 feet above ground level, except in areas zoned for single-family residential development with underground utilities the maximum height shall not exceed 40 feet above ground level; and, 
(b)  Each co-located small wireless facility in the right-of-way shall not extend more than 10 feet above the utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless support structure on which it is co-located.; and, 
(c)  Each new small wireless facility not in the right-of-way shall not extend more than 10 feet above the nearest utility pole or town utility pole in the closest right-of-way to the proposed structure. 
(d)  Each new small wireless facility shall not conflict with any utilities located within the public right-of-way; and, 
(e)  No small wireless facility shall be located so as to impede traffic movement onto or off of the right-of-way. 
(2)  Each new small wireless facility shall cause all equipment and meters to be located either inside the pole structure if feasible, or if not, located adjacent to the pole structure in a cabinet vaulted underground where feasible or if not feasible due to the water table, in a cabinet concealed through the use of paint or landscaping consistent with the immediately adjacent area or through public art work or vinyl "wraps" containing designs consistent with the town's public art initiative in applicable locations. All transmission or feed lines shall be located either underground or within the pole structure. Except as provided herein, no meters, equipment or lines shall be affixed to the pole structure except for the antenna, which shall be concealed in a shroud structure. 
(3)  When no other solution is feasible, equipment boxes, including meters, for small wireless facilities may be attached on the pole at a height that does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, public views, and traffic signs or signals. 
(4)  The request to co-locate on a town utility pole may only be denied if there is insufficient capacity or for safety, reliability and generally applicable engineering practices and those limitations cannot be remedied for a reasonable cost by the town, which would be reimbursed by the wireless provider. 
(5)  The town shall not require more make-ready work than that required to meet the applicable codes or standards. 
(6)  As-built construction drawings shall be provided to the town for all structures, equipment, cable, pipes and conduit located within the public right-of-way or within a public or town-owned easement. For fiber optic cable, the number of strands of fiber in the conduit must be included. 
(7)  If any town utilities or other infrastructure is relocated within the right-of-way as part of the construction, the town shall have final approval of the design and engineering of such relocated items. 
(8)  No new wireless communication facility regulated pursuant to Section 14-45 shall be located in the public right-of-way. 
(9)  Whenever a wireless provider locates a small wireless facility in the right-of-way near an occupied structure or single-family residential structure, no pole, equipment, antenna or other structure shall be: 
(a)  Placed directly in front of the residence; and 
(b)  Located such that views to the street from the residence or occupied structure are significantly blocked. 
(10)  If the right-of-way has residential or occupied structures on only one (1) side, the small wireless facility shall be located on the opposite side of the street whenever possible. 
(11)  The town reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained other utilities and infrastructure, either underground or overhead that may be deemed necessary or proper by the town in the portion of the right-of-way occupied by the small cell wireless facility. 
(12)  Wireless facilities shall be constructed and maintained so as not to interfere with, displace, damage, inhibit or destroy any other utilities or facilities. 
(13)  Wireless providers must repair all damage to town rights-of-way directly caused by their activities and to return the right-of-way to its functional equivalence before the damage. Failure to make repairs within a reasonable time after written notice will result in the town making the repairs and recovering the cost. 
(14)  Service vehicles shall not be parked in a manner that will disrupt traffic flow. 
(15)  The fee for the use of the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the most up-to-date town fee schedule. 
(16)  As-built construction drawings shall be provided to the town for all structures, equipment, cable, pipes and conduit located within the public right-of-way or within a public or town-owned utility or multi-purpose easement, which must include for fiber optic cable the number of strands of fiber in the cable. 
(17)  Spacing requirements for small wireless facilities. All small wireless facilities located in districts of any kind with adjacent residential structures shall be placed in the right of way at locations where there is at least 100 feet from the base of the facility to any residential structure. Whenever small wireless facilities must be placed in a right-of-way with residential uses on one (1) or both sides, neither poles, equipment, antennas or other structures shall be placed in front of a residential structure. If a right-of-way has residential structures on only one (1) side, the small wireless facilities shall be located on the opposite side of the right-of-way whenever possible. All small wireless facilities shall be located in such a way that they do not interfere with views from residential structures. 
(18)  Tree topping (removal of tree crown) or the improper pruning of trees is prohibited. Any proposed pruning or removal of trees shrubs or other landscaping already existing in the ROW must be noted in the application and must be approved by the town. 
(E)  Sounds. 
(1)  No unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells, buzzers or the like are permitted. Emergency generators are allowed. Sound levels shall not exceed 65 decibels as measured at the property boundaries for the facility. 
(F)  Equipment Compounds/Cabinets/Boxes for Small Wireless Facilities on Private Property not in Single-Family Residential Districts. 
(1)  The equipment compound shall be screened in accordance with Article 15-5.1(C)(1) Screen "A". 
(2)  Equipment cabinets: 
(a)  shall not be visible from pedestrian and vehicular right-of-way views; and, 
(b)  may be provided within the principal building on the lot, behind a screen, on a rooftop, or on the ground. 
(3)  Equipment compounds shall be constructed in a manner that enhances effects on the landscape and adjacent properties, with specific design considerations as to the height, scale, color, texture and architectural design of nearby buildings. 
(4)  Equipment boxes for small cell wireless facilities shall be located no farther than five (5) feet from the base of the structure and shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(5)  When no other solution is feasible or practical, equipment boxes, including meters, for small cell wireless facilities may be attached on the pole at a height that does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, public views, and traffic signs or signals. 
(6)  Electronic Equipment shall be contained within twenty-eight (28) cubic feet of space in either: 
(a)  Equipment cabinets; 
(b)  Equipment boxes; or, 
(c)  Equipment shelters. 
(G)  Separation Distances. 
(1)  To enhance physical safety and enhance the visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of antennas and associated above-ground equipment of a small wireless facility, no new small wireless facility in the city right-of-way shall be located within one hundred and sixty (160) feet of any existing utility pole or town utility pole which a wireless provider has the right to use on reasonable terms and conditions and which does not impose technical limitations or material additional costs on the wireless provider. If a wireless provider is unwilling to meet this requirement, it shall provide written certification as to the unavailability of the existing alternative, the unreasonable terms and conditions, the technical limitations or material additional costs precluding use of the existing alternate structure. 
(H)  Inspections for Structural Integrity. 
(1)  All small wireless facility owners shall submit a report certifying structural and electrical integrity annually to the town sealed by a registered professional engineer certifying that the structure has been inspected pursuant to the applicable building and safety codes and is structurally sound. 
(2)  Because of the environment in which Morehead City is located, more frequent inspections may be required if there is evidence that the small wireless facility has a safety problem or is exposed to extraordinary conditions. 
(3)  Inspections shall be conducted by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of North Carolina. Based upon the results of the inspection, repairs to and/or removal of the facility may be required. 
(4)  In the event that required records and reports are not submitted, the town shall issue a notice of violation and provide a time frame to either repair or remove the facility. 
[I]  Reserved. 
(J)  Design/Concealment. 
(1)  All small wireless facilities, whether within or outside a right-of-way, shall be constructed in a manner that enhances effects on the landscape and adjacent properties, with specific design considerations as to the height, scale, color, texture and architectural design of nearby buildings. 
(2)  The appropriate means of concealment will be determined on a case-by-case basis dependent upon the location, aesthetics, design and developed features in the vicinity of the new facility. 
(3)  Concealment types listed below are preferred and are in no particular order: 
(a)  Decorative or standard street light or banner pole; 
(b)  Flag pole with a flag that is proportional in size to the height and girth of the tower; 
(c)  Tree of a type naturally occurring or normally found in geographic area; or 
(d)  Other architectural or art feature. 
(4)  Antenna attachments, including painted antenna and feed lines, shall match the color and blend with the concealed tower and the local environment. 
(5)  Where feasible, antennas should be shrouded and placed directly above, or incorporated with, the vertical design elements of the utility pole or wireless support structure to maximize concealment. 
(6)  All cables shall be installed internally. Where internal mounting is not possible, surface mounted wires shall be enclosed within conduit or a similar cable cover and shall be painted to match the structure or building upon which the facility is mounted. 
(K)  Co-locations. 
(1)  Co-locations on existing utility poles, town utility poles or wireless support structures, where feasible, are preferred over installation of new wireless support structures or utility poles. 
(2)  New antenna mounts shall be flush-mounted onto existing structures where flush mounting was a condition of the original approval, unless it is demonstrated through radio frequency (RF) propagation analysis that flush-mounted antennas will not meet the network objectives of the desired coverage area, or unless the applicant demonstrates that flush-mounting would interfere with existing antenna mounting or coax arrangements that were previously approved. 
(3)  Equipment cabinets shall be subject to the setback requirements of the underlying zoning district for primary structures. 
(4)  When a co-located or combined antenna is to be located on a nonconforming building or structure, then the existing setback shall prevail. 
(5)  A co-located antenna or antenna array: 
(a)  shall not exceed the maximum allowable height; or, 
(b)  Increase the height of a small wireless facility by more than 10 feet above the utility pole, town utility pole or wireless support structure upon which it is located. 
(6)  Setbacks: 
(a)  At a minimum, new small wireless facilities and associated accessory uses shall be subject to the principle structure setbacks of the underlying zoning district; and, 
(b)  All new small wireless facilities shall provide an engineer's certification that the fall zone is fully contained within the parcel or leased area upon which the facility is installed. 
(7)  Height. 
(a)  Each new utility pole and each modified or replacement utility pole or town utility pole installed shall not exceed 50 feet above ground level, except in areas zoned for single-family residential development with underground utilities the maximum height shall not exceed 40 feet above ground level; and, 
(b)  Each co-located small wireless facility shall not extend more than 10 feet above the utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless support structure on which it is co-located. 
(8)  Structural Standards. 
(a)  All new small wireless facilities shall be constructed and maintained to meet the structural standards of ANSI/EIA/TIA-G (as amended) Series III, Exposure C or Exposure D, as applicable. 
14-48.5  Applications and Permitting. 
(A)  General: No small wireless facility shall be installed, constructed, altered, added to, or permitted unless the applicant has: 
(1)  Shown compliance with all the requirements of this Section; 
(2)  Received site plan approval from the City; 
(3)  Been issued proper federal, state and local permits; and, 
(4)  Shown compliance with all applicable code and permit requirements. 
(B)  Submittal Requirements: No application shall be deemed complete unless it is accompanied by the applicable completed application forms and application and review fee (where applicable), includes the required submittals and is attested to by the authorized agent submitting the application on behalf of the applicant, certifying the truth and accuracy of the information provided in the application. Application for small wireless facilities shall include the following: 
(1)  An aerial map showing the location of the proposed or existing support structure to which the SWF is proposed to be attached, or from which a small wireless facility is proposed to be removed. 
(2)  An accurate site plan which verifies compliance with the applicable Ordinance requirements and identifies any easements and includes the type and location of existing utilities. 
(3)  Fees; 
(4)  If the applicant is not the owner or person in control of the small wireless facility and/or site, an attestation that the owner or person in control of the small wireless facility and/or site has consented to the proposed facility or modification. 
(5)  The current and/or intended wireless service provider(s), as applicable for the application, shall be indicated on the site plan with documentation provided by the service provider(s). 
(6)  Documentation shall be provided by an expert in radio-frequency interference (RFI) that the proposed small wireless facility, or co-location or modification to an existing small wireless facility, will not cause radio frequency interference with the town's public safety and meter reading equipment and is compliant with applicable federal regulations concerning public exposure to RFI. 
(7)  Photo simulation from at least two (2) reasonable line-of-site locations near the proposed project sites. The photo simulations must be taken from the viewpoints of the greatest pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(8)  Documentation, sealed by a registered professional engineer with wireless communication facility experience meets: 
(a)  The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) requirements for all proposed improvements; 
(b)  FCC radio frequency emission standards; and, 
(c)  All applicable federal, state and local regulations, including health and safety requirements. 
14-48.6  Application Process-Small Wireless Facilities. The applicant may file a consolidated application for no more than 25 separate facilities. The town may: 
(A)  Remove small wireless co-locations from a consolidated application and treat separately for which: 
(1)  Incomplete information is provided; or, 
(2)  The location has been denied. 
(B)  The town may issue permits for each approved co-location. 
(C)  Upon receipt of the permit application, the permit shall be deemed complete unless the town provides notice identifying the deficiencies in writing within 10 days of submission. 
(D)  Once the application is deemed complete, the town has 45 days to approve or deny the application. If the town fails to approve or deny the application within 45 days, it shall be deemed approved. 
(E)  Applications may only be denied if it does not meet the following: 
(1)  The town's applicable codes; 
(2)  The town's regulations related to: 
(a)  Public safety; 
(b)  Objective design standards for decorative utility poles, town utility poles or reasonable and nondiscriminatory concealment requirements including: 
(c)  Screening/landscaping for ground mounted equipment; 
(d)  Public safety/reasonable spacing requirements concerning the location of ground mounted equipment; and, 
(e)  Historic preservation requirements. 
(F)  In the event the application is denied, the town must: 
(1)  Document the basis for a denial, including specific Code provisions; and, 
(2)  Send documentation to the applicant on or before the date of denial. 
(G)  The applicant may cure the deficiencies and submit a revised application within 30 days of the denial date with no additional application fees. 
(H)  The town has 30 days from the resubmittal date to approve or deny the revised application and the review shall be limited to only the deficiencies cited in the prior denial letter. 
(I)  Application fees shall be in accordance with the town's fee schedule, as amended. 
(J)  The town reserves the right to require, in its sole discretion, a supplemental review by independent experts for any application. The cost for technical consulting shall be the responsibility of the applicant, not to exceed the limits allowed by NC General Statutes. 
(K)  All small wireless facilities applications shall include the following information: 
(1)  Attestation that the small wireless facilities to be co-located on the utility pole, town utility pole or wireless support structure shall be activated for use by a wireless services provider no later than one (1) year from the permit issuance date, unless: 
(a)  The town and wireless provider agree to extend the time; or, 
(b)  A delay is caused by a lack of commercial power to the site. 
14-48.7  Exemptions. No application or permit or fees are due for: 
(A)  The routine maintenance of small wireless facilities; 
(B)  The replacement of small wireless facilities with small wireless facilities that are the same size or smaller; or 
(C)  The installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles or town utility poles in compliance with applicable codes by or for a communications service provider authorized to occupy the city rights-of-way and who is remitting taxes under G.S. 105-164.4(a)(4c) or G.S. 105-164.4(a)(6). 
14-48.8  Variance/Appeals. 
(A)  The purpose of this Section is to ensure that land use decisions with respect to siting of personal wireless service facilities comply with 47 USC 332(c)(7)(B). Any party aggrieved by an administrative siting decision made pursuant to Section 14-48 may exercise their appeal rights in accordance with Article 5-2. All appeals are heard by the Board of Adjustment. 
(B)  Due to unique characteristics specific to a single application, such as terrain, existing infrastructure, or other factors unique to a particular location, strict application of a specific development standard for siting of a small wireless facility could have the effect of unreasonably discriminating among providers of functionally equivalent services within the meaning of 47 USC 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(I) or of prohibiting personal wireless services within the meaning of 47 USC 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II). In such a case, the applicant (so long as the applicant is a provider of personal wireless services who will be using the facility) may seek a variance from such standard under this Section. 
(C)  Considerations for a variance are limited to the following development standards: 
(1)  Flush mounting requirements; 
(2)  Maximum height of antenna above utility pole/base station/supporting structure; 
(3)  Separation distances; and, 
(4)  Landscaping/Screening/Concealment. 
(D)  Consideration of increased financial costs are not unique characteristics and shall not constitute a valid basis for a variance. 
(E)  To obtain a variance under this Section, the provider must demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that: 
(1)  Due to the characteristics specific and unique to the particular facility and location, strict application of the development standard would not permit the applicant to address a demonstrable coverage gap/capacity shortfall or would result in unreasonable discrimination among providers of functionally equivalent services; or, 
(2)  There is no reasonable alternative available, to address the demonstrable coverage gap/capacity shortfall or to avoid unreasonable discrimination among providers of functionally equivalent services, including but not limited to use of another site, co-location on another facility, or modification of the proposed facility so as to meet the applicable standard; or, 
(3)  The extent of the variance proposed is the minimum necessary to address the demonstrable coverage gap or to avoid unreasonable discrimination among providers of functionally equivalent services, as confirmed by qualified independent third party review of the proposal; or, 
(4)  To obtain a variance to the screening requirements, the applicant must demonstrate that due to characteristics specific and unique to the particular facility and its location, strict application of screening requirement would be less aesthetically pleasing or effective for concealment than the alternative sought by the variance. 
14-48.9  Abandonment of Facilities. 
(A)  Town may require provider to remove an abandoned wireless facility within 180 days of abandonment. Should the wireless services provider fail to timely remove the abandoned wireless facility, the town may cause such wireless facility to be removed and may recover actual cost of removal, including legal fees. 
(B)  Abandoned means: at the earlier of the date that the wireless services provider indicates that it is abandoning such facility or the date that is 180 days after the date that such wireless facility ceases to transmit a signal, unless the wireless services provider gives the town reasonable evidence that it is diligently working to place such wireless facility back into service. 
14-48.10  Rates for Use of Town Utility Poles Within the Right-of-Way. A wireless provider who places a small wireless facility on a town utility pole within a right-of-way in accordance with this Section shall: 
(A)  Execute a license agreement with the town; and 
(B)  Pay to the town an annual recurring rate (as defined by the town's fee schedule) per year, or any such higher rate permitted under FCC rules, state or federal law and as set forth in the license agreement, for the use of such utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-08, § 2, 4-9-2019) 
ARTICLE 15. - LANDSCAPING, RECREATION, AND OPEN SPACE 

15-1 - Purpose 
15-1.1  To encourage high quality design in development, structures, and the use of land through proper siting of structures and uses; 
15-1.2  To provide flexibility in achieving the desired standards of development; 
15-1.3  To protect and enhance the natural environment; 
15-1.4  To establish landscaping standards for property proposed for development; 
15-1.5  To establish requirements for open space, recreation, and water access areas in new subdivisions; 
15-1.6  To enhance the appearance of the Town; 
15-1.7  To protect public and private investment; 
15-1.8  To mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent property when the use or development of the adjacent property is significantly different in character, density, or intensity by maintaining a provision for screening between certain districts and/or uses; 
15-1.9  To reduce adverse impacts of development such as dirt, litter, traffic, noise, odor, glare of lights, etc.; and 
15-1.10  To encourage the preservation of existing trees, when feasible. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017) 
15-2 - Applicability 
15-2.1  Landscaping and screening requirements are applicable in accordance with section 15-5 and in the following situations: 
(A)  New development/construction. Landscaping and screening requirements shall be provided for the entire property under development. 
(B)  Expansion of on-site building area. 
(1)  When on-site building area is increased by less than fifty (50) percent, the landscaping and screening requirements of section 15-5 shall be provided to meet the requirements within the project area. 
(2)  When on-site building area is increased by fifty (50) percent or more, the landscaping and screening requirements of section 15-5 shall be provided for the entire site as if it were a new development. 
(3)  Where existing parking areas, existing buildings, or driveways prevent the development of a full screen, screening shall be provided to the maximum extent possible. 
(C)  Expansion of a parking facility. If a parking area is expanded, the area undergoing expansion must comply with the current landscaping requirements. 
(D)  Reconfiguration/restriping of existing parking area. If a parking area is expanded, the area undergoing expansion must comply with the current landscaping requirements. 
(E)  Screens apply only when a property under development shares a common boundary line with a different zoning classification as determined in Table 15-5.1. 
(F)  In the event that screening and landscaping requirements apply along the same property line, the minimum screening requirements shall be applicable along the area in which the requirements overlap. 
15-2.2  Recreation and open space areas are required for subdivisions in accordance with section 15-7. 
15-2.3  Water access areas are required for subdivisions in accordance with section 15-8. 
15-2.4  Applicability to Town and other Governmental Entities. The landscaping and screening provisions of this article shall apply to the Town of Morehead City and to any other governmental entities owning property within Morehead City planning areas. 
15-2.5  Residential Lot Exemption. Individual single-family and two-family (duplex) residential lots are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
15-2.6  Installation or Security Required. The landscaping and screening required under this article shall be installed or the installation shall be guaranteed by a bond, letter of credit, cash, or other security approved by the Land Use Administrator prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
15-2.7  Effective Date. Property for which a building permit has been issued by the Planning and Inspections Department and plans that have received site development plan approval prior to the effective date of this section shall not be subject to its provisions. However, any property for which the building permit or site development approval has lapsed will be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017) 
15-3 - General Landscaping and Screening Requirements 
15-3.1  Locational Requirements: 
(A)  No landscaping or screening shall be located in such a manner which interferes with the sight distance required at any roadway or driveway intersection. 
(B)  The landscaping and planting requirements of this section shall not be construed to allow plantings or growth to extend into a sight triangle to a degree that would hinder safety. 
(C)  Landscaping or screening located within a sight triangle shall be limited to a maximum height of three (3) feet. 
(D)  No plantings, landscaping, or screening required under this article shall be located within any portion of an existing or dedicated public or private street, alley, right-of-way, or utility easement. 
(E)  Plantings should be established and maintained in such a manner as to minimize the potential for interference with utility lines and other utility infrastructure. 
(F)  Required screens and landscape strips may be included within or combined with the required minimum setback yards as established in section 13-1.1 of this Ordinance. 
15-3.2  Landscape Area Specifications: 
(A)  All landscape areas shall be seeded or planted with grass or ground cover unless ground cover is already established. 
(B)  Plantings shall generally be spaced equidistant throughout screen and landscape areas in such a way to facilitate the creation of a visual screen. 
(C)  Minimum planting sizes shall be in accordance with Table 15-3.1. 
(D)  Existing plant materials that meet the requirements of this section may be counted toward the plant materials requirements. 
Table 15-3.1 Minimum Planting Sizes 
Planting Type Minimum Planting Size Canopy Tree 1.5" Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) Understory Tree 0.75" DBH or minimum 8' height multi-trunk (min. 3 trunks) Evergreen 6' height Shrub 15" height  
15-3.3  Planting Type Specifications: 
(A)  Recommended understory and canopy trees are provided under Appendix VI. 
(B)  Substitution of plant species from those listed in Appendix VI may be approved provided that: 
(1)  The planting type is approved by the Land Use Administrator and that the substitution is noted on the approved landscape plan; 
(2)  The plantings are selected based upon species that are highly adapted to the climate of Morehead City and to the soils, drainage patterns, wind, and other conditions of the particular site; 
(3)  The information provided demonstrates that the plant to be substituted is of like-kind with the required plant type (i.e. canopy tree, understory tree, shrub); and 
(4)  The minimum planting size requirements of Table 15-3.1 are met at the time of planting. 
15-3.4  Prohibited Use of Required Landscaping and Screening Areas: 
(A)  Landscaping and screening areas shall not contain the following uses: 
(1)  Useable or active recreation areas; 
(2)  Parking; 
(3)  Storage containers; 
(4)  Signage, merchandise, and/or displays associated with itinerant merchant operations; 
(5)  Accessory buildings and uses except as allowed under subsection 15-2.1(B)(3); 
(6)  Any other use unless excepted in subsection 15-3.4(B) below. 
(B)  Exceptions from subsection 15-3.4(A) above include uses specifically required by or permitted under this Ordinance or as needed for underground utilities, stormwater retention areas, or pedestrian or vehicular access to adjoining property or to street rights-of-way or alleys. 
15-3.5  Certain uses have additional landscaping requirements which are contained under Article 14. 
15-3.6  Maintenance Requirements: 
(A)  If a landscaping plan is approved by the Town, periodic inspections may be conducted by Morehead City staff in order to determine the continued effectiveness of required landscaping and screening; 
(B)  Approved landscaping and screening shall be maintained by the property owner in perpetuity to continue its effectiveness unless a revised landscaping plan is approved in accordance with the requirements of Article 15 which allows for the revision of planting locations and specifications. 
(C)  Replacement plants shall be the same type as those being replaced unless approval is granted by the Land Use Administrator to plant alternate species in accordance with this article. 
(D)  Failure to maintain or replace landscaping materials that have died, become diseased, or are damaged shall result in enforcement action in accordance with Article 7. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017) 
15-4 - Preservation of Existing Trees and Vegetation 
15-4.1  Protecting Existing Trees 
(A)  Tree Preservation Credit in Lieu of Tree Installation: Tree preservation credits may be utilized to preserve existing trees in lieu of planting some or all of the required plantings on a site in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Required protection of credited trees: 
(a)  Prior to any grading or construction on the property, a temporary fence shall be constructed around any tree which is to receive credit. 
(b)  The fence shall extend from the trunk sixteen inches for each one (1) inch of trunk diameter. 
(c)  No heavy equipment shall be used or stored within the area enclosed by the temporary fence. 
(d)  No building materials or soil shall be stored within the area enclosed by the temporary fence except in accordance with subsection 15-4.1(A)(1)(g). 
(e)  Installation of underground utilities shall not be permitted within the area enclosed by the temporary fence. 
(f)  Road and foundation grade cuts shall not be located within the area enclosed by the temporary fence. 
(g)  Fill may be placed within the fenced area subject to the following: 
1  The material must consist of good topsoil, high in organic matter and of loamy texture. 
2  The fill must be of an appropriate depth for the tree type with an absolute maximum depth of six (6) inches. 
3  Fill placed within the fenced area must be placed by hand to ensure that there is no compaction of the soil. 
4  Soil shall not be placed immediately adjacent to the trunk. 
(2)  Each tree preservation credit may be counted as either a required understory tree or shrub. 
(3)  Plants credited under this section may be located outside of the landscape area for which credit is sought if it is determined by the Land Use Administrator that the overall landscaping on the site will provide adequate screening between significantly different uses. 
(4)  Existing trees are eligible for tree preservation credits in accordance with Table 15-4.1. 
Table 15-4.1 Tree Preservation Credits 
Existing Tree DBH Tree Preservation Credits 6 to 11.99 inches 6 12 to 17.99 7 18 inches plus 8  
15-4.2  Tree Removal 
(A)  Tree Removal in Rights-of-Way and Public Areas within the Corporate Limits: Refer to Section 20-11 of the Town of Morehead City Code of Ordinances. 
(B)  Tree Removal by Public Services Department: Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the Public Services Department from removing, pruning, or clearing trees and other vegetation from rights-of-way or easements. 
(C)  Tree Removal by Public Utility Companies: Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit public utility companies from removing, pruning, or clearing trees and other vegetation from rights-of-way and easements for purposes of maintaining service upon lands in which it has acquired an easement or right-of-way. 
(D)  Tree Removal as a Forestry or Agricultural Activity: Removal of trees shall be permitted as a forestry or agricultural activity, provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Applicable permits shall be obtained before trees are removed, including a zoning permit from the Morehead City Planning and Inspections Department. 
(2)  A minimum of fifteen (15) undisturbed natural buffer shall be maintained along all perimeter property lines, unless other buffers are required by this Ordinance. 
(E)  Removal of Protected Trees on Private Property. All protected trees shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  A proposed development which encompasses a parcel(s) which is one (1) acre in size or less; 
(2)  A proposed development which is dedicated as a school site, playing field, or non-wooded recreation area. 
(3)  A subdivision or re-subdivision; and 
(4)  Trees that are diseased or infested should be removed and replaced or treated to prevent the transmission of disease or infestation, to prevent danger from falling trees, or to prevent potential injury to life and property. 
(5)  Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships exist resulting from the interpretation or enforcement of this subsection, the Land Use Administrator may waive, modify, or delay the enforcement of the provisions of section 15-4 upon written request by the property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner. At no time shall an owner be denied reasonable, economically beneficial use of property. 
(a)  To qualify for an exemption due to a hardship, a property owner must provide the following: 
1  Feasibility of alternate development plans; 
2  Current value of the property in relation to the original cost; 
3  Current property taxes; and 
4  Offers to purchase. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017) 
15-5 - Screening and Landscaping Requirements 
15-5.1  Screening Requirements. 
(A)  Table 15-5.1 indicates the type of landscape screen required based upon the zoning and use classifications of subsection 15-5.1(B). 
Table 15-5.1 Type of Screening Required 
Abutting Zone or Use Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Zone or Use 
of Property 
under 
Development Group 1 Group 2 A Group 3 B A Group 4 C C A  
(B)  The grouping of zoning districts and uses for purposes of interpreting Table 15-5.1 shall be: 
(1)  Group 1: R5, R5S, R7, R10, R15, R15M, R15SM, R20. 
(2)  Group 2: RMF, PD, multifamily developments with density greater than ten units per acre and manufactured home parks. 
(3)  Group 3: OP, MA, CD, CM, DB, CN, CH, FP, IC. 
(4)  Group 4: I, PM. 
(C)  Landscape Screen Specifications. 
(1)  Screen "A": Following are the minimum requirements for a Screen "A": 
(a)  Five-foot minimum screen yard width established along the outer edge of the property line that separates the two zoning classifications; and 
(b)  Row of evergreens: 
1  Evergreens must be placed no more than five (5) feet apart to form a continuous hedge along the length of the screen, and 
2  Evergreens must be no less than six (6) feet in height at the time of planting; and 
(c)  Must meet either one of the requirements below: 
1  Fence or wall constructed in a durable fashion of brick, stone, masonry materials, wood posts and planks, or any combination of the aforesaid materials with no more than twenty-five (25) percent of a fence surface left open, with the open areas distributed equally over the entirety of the fence. The fence shall be equivalent to the maximum height permitted under section 14-1 of this Ordinance for each yard. The finished side of the fence shall face abutting property; or 
2  Four-foot (minimum) tall berm with maximum slope of 3:1. Berms exceeding six (6) feet in height shall have a minimum slope of 4:1. All berms shall be stabilized to prevent erosion and shall be landscaped with shrubs placed not more than five (5) feet apart; and 
(d)  A combination of evergreen ground cover, mulch, shell, rock, and/or low-growing evergreen shrubs or other ground cover as approved by the Land Use Administrator shall cover the balance of the screening yard. 

Example of Screen Type "A"
(2)  Screen "B": Following are the minimum requirements for a Screen "B": 
(a)  Must meet the Screen "A" requirements of subsection 15-5.1(D)(1); and 
(b)  Additional five-foot screen width for a combined total screen yard width of ten (10) feet with an additional staggered row of evergreens: 
1  Additional staggered row of evergreens: Evergreens must be placed no more than thirty (30) feet apart. 
2  Evergreens must be no less than six (6) feet in height at the time of planting and must be capable of growth to at least fifteen (15) feet in height based upon the plant species and cultivar. 

Example of Screen Type "B"
(3)  Screen "C": Following are the minimum requirements for a Screen "C": 
(a)  Must meet the Screen "A" requirements of subsection 15-5.1(D)(1); and 
(b)  Additional five-foot screen width for a combined total screen yard width of ten (10) feet including an additional staggered row of evergreens: 
1  Evergreens must be placed no more than fifteen (15) feet apart. 
2  Evergreens must be no less than six (6) feet in height at the time of planting and must be capable of growth to at least twenty (20) feet in height based upon the plant species and cultivar. 

Example of Screen Type "C"
15-5.2  Landscape Strip Requirements. 
(A)  10' Landscape Strip: 
(1)  Required along the property line(s) which abut all rights-of-way on individual lots and along the property line(s) which abut major and minor thoroughfares in new major or minor subdivisions; and 
(2)  Must meet the following requirements per one hundred (100) linear feet: 
(a)  1 canopy or 2 understory trees and 
(b)  12 shrubs; and 
(3)  A combination of evergreen ground cover, mulch, shell, rock, and/or low-growing evergreen shrubs or other ground cover as approved by the Land Use Administrator shall cover the landscape strip along its entire length. 
(B)  2.5' Landscape Strip: Required along the edge of off-street parking areas, alleys, vehicular access areas, internal driveways for parking areas which provide parking for five (5) or more vehicles. 
(1)  Must meet the following requirements per one hundred (100) linear feet; 
(a)  1 canopy tree or 2 understory trees; and 
(b)  6 shrubs. 
(2)  A combination of evergreen ground cover, mulch, shell, rock, and/or low-growing evergreen shrubs or other ground cover as approved by the Land Use Administrator shall cover the landscape strip along its entire length. 

Example of 10' and 2.5' Landscape Strips
(3)  Bollards and chains may be used in the Downtown Business (DB) and Downtown Commercial (CD) districts in lieu of meeting the requirements of subsection 15-5.2(B)(1) and 15-5.2(B)(2) above. The design and materials must be approved by the Morehead City Public Services Department. 

Type of Bollard and Chain Permitted in DB and CD Districts
15-5.3  Interior Parking Area Landscaping. Required in parking areas between parking spaces, at the end of parking bays, or in tree islands for new or redeveloped parking areas 
(A)  Must meet the following requirements per twelve (12) parking spaces: 
(1)  1 canopy or 2 understory trees 
(B)  Parking area planting areas shall have a minimum area of two hundred (200) square feet and may not be less than seven (7) feet in any dimension. 
(C)  Parking spaces must be located within the designated distance of a landscaped area as specified in Table 15-5.2. 
Table 15-5.2 Parking Area Planters 
Size of Parking Area Planter 
(Sq. Ft.) Number of Trees in Planter Distance Parking Space may be Located from Landscaped Area (Ft.) 200-499 1 canopy or 2 understory 100 500-899 2 canopy or 4 understory 130 900+ 3 canopy or 6 understory 150  
(D)  Grouping of trees required under subsection 15-5.3 is encouraged, even if this would reduce the number of landscape islands otherwise built within the parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017) 
15-6 - Landscape Plan Requirements 
15-6.1  When required. A landscape plan is required in the following situations: 
(A)  As part of submittal for a building permit for new construction, when applicable; 
(B)  As part of a request for zoning site plan review, when applicable; 
(C)  When a landscape screen, landscape strip, or interior parking area landscaping is required as stipulated under section 15-5; 
(D)  As part of a request for multifamily plan review; 
(E)  As part of a request for special- or conditional-use permit, when requested by staff; and 
(F)  Any other situation in which the requirements of this article area applicable. 
15-6.2  Required information. Landscape plans shall contain the following information: 
(A)  Location(s) of proposed landscape screens, landscape strips, and interior parking area landscaping; 
(B)  The location, species, and size of proposed plantings, landscape materials, and other landscape area materials (e.g. fences, berms, etc.); 
(C)  Calculations verifying the required and proposed number of plantings per landscape area. 
(D)  If tree preservation credits are requested, detailed information concerning the trees requested for credit must be provided and the requirements of subsection 15-4.1(A) shall be met. 
(E)  The location of existing or proposed power lines or other utilities with potential to interfere with existing or proposed landscape areas. 
(F)  If the development is located within the corporate limits and/or is tying into the Town water system and is to include an irrigation system, information about the type and coverage of the irrigation system. 
(G)  Other information determined by Planning and Inspections Department staff to be necessary to facilitate review of the landscape plan. 
15-6.3  Planning Board Approval of Certain Landscape Plans. Planning Board approval shall be required for the following landscape plans: 
(A)  Landscaping plans for which the total area encompassed within the project parcel(s) is five (5) acres or greater. 
(B)  Landscaping plans for multifamily developments for which Planning Board approval is required under section 13-2. 
(C)  Landscaping plans for which an alternate approval is requested. The process for alternate landscaping plan approval is provided under section 15-6.4 below. 
15-6.4  Major modification of the landscaping requirements of sections 15-3, 15-4, and 15-5. In lieu of compliance with the landscaping and screening requirements of sections 15-3, 15-4, and/or 15-5, an applicant may request that an alternate landscaping plan be approved by the Planning Board. 
(A)  The Planning Board has the authority to vary any requirements of sections 15-3, 15-4, and 15-5 in accordance with this subsection. 
(B)  In order for an alternate landscaping plan approval to be granted, one or more of the following conditions must exist: 
(1)  The site involves space limitations or unusually-shaped parcels; 
(2)  The topography, soil, vegetation, or other site conditions are such that full compliance is impossible or impractical; 
(3)  The landscaping, if installed, would be located adjacent to a public alley; 
(4)  Natural vegetation or other site conditions, if undisturbed during the development process, can meet or exceed the vegetation which is required; and/or 
(5)  Safety conditions, such as the presence of overhead utility lines, are involved. 
(C)  A request for alternate landscaping plan to vary the requirements of sections 15-3, 15-4, and/or 15-5 must include the following: 
(1)  A detailed site plan prepared in accordance with subsection 15-6.2; 
(2)  Information as to how the proposal will enhance the appearance of the property and provide protection of public and private investment; 
(3)  Justification as to why an alternate landscaping plan is appropriate based upon the conditions set forth in subsection 15-6.4(B); 
(4)  Detailed information explaining which requirements will be met and which requirements are requested for modification; and 
(5)  Information that demonstrates the proposal will meet or exceed the intent of the requirements of this article. 
15-6.5  Minor modification of landscaping requirements. Minor modification from the requirements of Article 15 may be approved or disapproved administratively by the Land Use Administrator. Minor modifications include the following: 
(A)  Substitution of plant species based upon the requirements of subsection 15-3.2(C); 
(B)  Substitution of plant sizes; 
(C)  Plant spacing requirements; 
(D)  Relocation of plantings due to specific site conditions; 
(E)  Crediting of tree preservation credits for plants located outside of credited landscape areas subject to 15-4.1(A)(3); 
(F)  Similar minor modifications. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017) 
15-7 - Recreation and Open Space Requirements for Major and Minor Residential Subdivision 
15-7.1  Provisions for land dedication or fees in lieu of dedication. A provision for land dedication or fees in lieu of dedication for recreation and open space areas shall be provided for major and minor residential subdivisions of land. 
(A)  Recreation/Open Space Area Formula: If land is to be dedicated to the Town of Morehead City, Carteret County, or the homeowners association in accordance with this section, the total area shall be based upon one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet per subdivision lot. 
(1)  Formula: 1200 square feet × Number of subdivision lots 
(B)  Recreation/Open Space Fee Formula. Subject to Council approval and in accordance with this section, the amount of fees required in lieu of recreation and open space area dedication shall be based upon the area generated under the Recreation/Open Space Area Formula in subsection 15-7.1(A), multiplied by the value of the land per acre (based upon the purchase price or tax value, whichever is higher), with a minimum land value of $50,000 and a maximum land value of $100,000. 
(1)  Formula: Area generated in the Recreation/Open Space Formula × value of land per acre = the amount of recreation fees due in lieu of dedication. 
(2)  Example: 
10-lot residential subdivision with a value of land per acre of $40,000: 
1,200 square feet × 10 lots = 12,000 square feet or 0.28 acre 
Value of land per acre based upon tax value = $40,000.00 
$50,000.00 × 0.28 = $14,000.00 
(C)  Residential subdivisions shall be required to either: 
(1)  Offer a portion of the subdivision to the Town for purposes of recreation and open space to serve the recreation district; or 
(2)  Provide fees in lieu of dedication based upon the Recreation/Open Space Fee Formula in subsection 15-7.1(B). 
(D)  The following subdivisions shall be subject to a provision for the payment of fees in lieu of land dedication for purposes of recreation and open space: 
(1)  Residential subdivisions with a total gross area of five (5) acres or less. 
(2)  Residential subdivisions which do not generate a minimum of one (1) acre of recreation and open space area based upon the Recreation/Open Space Area Formula. 
(E)  The Town Council shall determine which alternative under subsection 15-7.1(C) above is most appropriate based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The proximity of the subdivision to an existing recreation or open space area; 
(2)  The density and size of the subdivision; and 
(3)  The developer's interest in providing a developed/improved recreation area with active and/or passive uses to serve the residents of the subdivision. 
(a)  In the event that a developer desires to develop or improve a recreation area, plans for the developed/improved recreation areas shall be submitted to the Town Council as part of sketch plan approval. 
(b)  The Town Council may opt to accept a developed/improved recreation area in lieu of a recreation fee. 
(F)  Land dedications required under this section shall be applicable to subdivisions within the Town of Morehead City corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(G)  Land shall be offered to the Town of Morehead City or fees shall be paid in lieu of dedication in accordance with the requirements of this section prior to recordation of the final plat. 
(H)  In the event that the Town of Morehead City Town Council declines the offer, the land dedication shall be offered to Carteret County. If neither the Town Council nor Carteret County accepts the offer of dedication, the land shall be conveyed to a homeowners association. 
(I)  Subject to approval by the Morehead City Town Council, an open space area or improved recreation area may be offered for dedication to the homeowners association. 
15-7.2  Suitability of land for recreation or open space dedication. 
(A)  Location. 
(1)  Land dedicated under this section shall be so located so as to serve the recreation needs of the subdivision or neighborhood. 
(B)  Land unity. 
(1)  The land to be dedicated shall be a single parcel unless it is determined that two (2) or more parcels would be in the public interest. 
(C)  Accessibility. 
(1)  Access to dedicated land shall be provided by an abutting street or easement. 
(2)  If access is provided via an easement, or if it is necessary to provide a connecting path to connect two (2) or more parcels, the access or connecting path shall not be less than thirty (30) feet and not more than sixty (60) feet in width. 
(3)  The area in the connecting path shall be in addition to the minimum land required for dedication. 
(D)  Use of dedicated land. 
(1)  Dedicated land shall be usable for active recreation, such as play areas, ballfields, tennis courts, or similar recreation uses. 
(2)  Ponds, basins, lakes, and other water bodies may not be included within recreation areas required under this section unless approved by the Town Council. 
(E)  Conservation and historic preservation. 
(1)  Conservation and historic preservation easements shall comply with the Conservation and Historic Preservation Agreements Act (G.S. 121-34-121-42). 
(2)  Facilities, improvements, and open space areas offered for dedication to the public shall be maintained by the owner until such offer of dedication is accepted by the appropriate public authority. 
15-7.3  Recreation funds. 
(A)  Expenditures of funds collected under this section shall be determined by the Town Council and shall be used only for acquiring, maintaining, or improving open space and recreation areas or facilities in the recreation district in which the subdivision is located. 
15-7.4  Adjustments. 
(A)  The Town may, in cases of unusual or exceptional nature, allow adjustments in the requirements of this section. 
(B)  Such adjustments shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Council. 
15-7.5  Excess dedication. 
(A)  If the land required for open space and recreation is in a section or phase of a subdivision which exceeds the requirement in the Recreation/Open Space Area Formula, the difference may be applied to future sections or phases of the subdivision. 
(B)  In the event that a Town Council desires recreation and open space land in excess of the amount required in the Recreation/Open Space Area Formula, the subdivider and Town Council shall negotiate a fair price and the Town shall pay the full negotiated price. 
15-7.6  Reversionary clause. 
(A)  In the event that a homeowners association dissolves, liquidates its assets, or otherwise ceases to maintain a park, recreation, or open space area, the title of said park, recreation, or open space area shall revert to the Town of Morehead City or Carteret County. The Town of Morehead City shall have the right of first refusal. 
(B)  Subject to approval by the Morehead City Town Council, a developer, property owner, or homeowners association may sell, develop, or otherwise revert a recorded recreation/open space area to private property provided a fee is paid in accordance with the Recreation/Open Space Fee Formula. 
(C)  All protective covenants, declarations, and homeowners bylaws applicable to the subdivision shall contain provisions legally sufficient to accomplish these directives. 
15-7.7  Recreation areas shown on subdivision plat. 
(A)  If the approved sketch plan showed future recreation areas not included in the section for which final plat approval is sought, the developer shall post a guarantee in the amount determined by the Recreation/Open Space Area Fee Formula prior to final plat approval. 
(B)  If the amount of recreation area required by this Ordinance is not developed within one (1) year of final plat approval, a fee in the amount of the Recreation/Open Space Area Fee Formula shall be due immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017) 
15-8 - Required Public Water Access for Major and Minor Subdivisions 
15-8.1  Public water access area requirement. 
(A)  Every person who subdivides land for residential purposes with direct waterfront access shall be required to provide public access to the water or fees in lieu of dedication. 
(B)  The water access easement shall be offered for dedication to the public. 
15-8.2  Public water access area specifications. 
(A)  Subdivisions that provide water access shall be required to have at least one (1) useable fifteen-foot water access easement. An additional fifteen-foot water access easement shall be provided for each one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of shoreline. 
(B)  Each easement shall be directly accessible to a public street or road. 
(C)  Streets offered for dedication which run to the mean high water mark may count towards the requirements of this section. 
(D)  Plans for the developed/improved water access areas shall be submitted to the Town Council as part of sketch plan approval. 
15-8.3  Maintenance of public water access areas. 
(A)  Maintenance of water access easements required under this section shall be the responsibility of the homeowners association unless the Town has accepted dedication. 
(B)  At such time as dedication of a water access easement is accepted by the Town, the access easement shall be open to the public and maintained by the Town. 
15-8.4  Fees in lieu of dedication. 
(A)  Subject to approval by the Town Council, a subdivider may provide funds in lieu of providing public water access based upon factors listed in subsection 15-8.4(C). 
(B)  If the Council determines that it is acceptable for the developer to pay a fee in lieu of dedication, the amount shall be based upon one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per unit/lot. 
(C)  The Council will use factors such as the proximity of other local public water access points, the likelihood of the public utilizing public water access on the site, whether the site has traditionally been used as a public water access point, the density and size of the subdivision, as well as other factors to determine whether to accept the fee in lieu of dedication. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, 6-13-2017) 
ARTICLE 16. - STREETS, ALLEYS, AND SIDEWALKS 
PART I. - STREETS AND ROADS 

16-1 - Acceptance of Streets 
    No streets shall be maintained by the town nor street dedication accepted for ownership and maintenance in any subdivision for which a plat is required to be approved unless and until such final plat has been approved by the Town of Morehead City, provided, however, that streets or alleys in existing subdivisions may be accepted as a part of the town street system by resolution of the City Council. 
16-2 - Streets and Roads 
16-2.1  In any new subdivision, the street layout shall conform to the arrangement, width, and location indicated on any official plans or maps for the town. In areas for which the town has not completed such plans, the plans of Carteret County shall be utilized. In areas where no plans have been completed, the streets shall be designed and located in proper location to existing and proposed streets, to the topography, to natural features such as streams and tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of land to be served by such streets. The proposed street layout shall be made according to good land planning practice for the type of development proposed, and shall be coordinated with the street system of Morehead City and/or with existing streets in the extra-territorial area. All streets must provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of principal streets in surrounding areas and provide reasonable means of ingress and egress for surrounding tracts. 
16-2.2  All lots shall abut a public street except that lots within a Planned Development (PD) district may abut a private street. All streets other than streets within the Planned Development (PD) district shall be offered for dedication to the public. All streets shall be built to the standards of the Town of Morehead City or the North Carolina Department of Transportation, whichever is more strict. Street maintenance shall be the responsibility of the homeowner's association prior to the acceptance of dedication by the town or the state. 
16-2.3  All streets shown on the final plat shall be designated in accordance with G.S. 136-102.6 and designation of any street as "public" shall be conclusively presumed an offer of dedication to the public. Where streets are dedicated to the public but are not accepted into the municipal or state system, no lot or lots shall be sold until a disclosure of the status of the street is included with the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, § 11, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 5-13-2014) 
16-3 - Special Street Access Requirements 
    The Town of Morehead City may require that special street access be provided as follows: 
16-3.1  Industrial or commercial. An industrial or commercial subdivision may be required to provide a frontage road along U.S. and NC routes, major collectors or state secondary roads, or any road with a constructed or planned capacity of greater than five thousand (5,000) vehicles per day. Where a frontage road is required, intersections with public streets shall be spaced no closer than eight hundred (800) feet. 
16-3.2  Residential. In order to reduce traffic congestion and to buffer residential property from traffic, reverse frontage lots may be required along US and NC numbered highways, major collectors or state secondary roads or any road with a constructed or planned capacity of greater than five thousand (5,000) cars per day unless the developer chooses to build a frontage road. 
    Where reverse frontage lots are required, access shall be permitted only to the subordinate internal subdivision street or road. 
    A buffer composed of at least the minimum requirements defined in section 15-1 of this Ordinance shall be established along the higher capacity right-of-way or any required right-of-way reservations. This buffer shall not be required to extend into the site triangle of an intersection. 
16-3.3  All requirements of this section shall be clearly shown upon the affected areas of the plat. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12, § 10, 5-10-2011) 
16-4 - Frontage Roads 
    Frontage roads shall be public. Public frontage roads may be permitted within a fifty-foot right-of-way subject to the North Carolina Department of Transportation requirements or Morehead City's standards, whichever is the most restrictive. 
16-5 - Access to Adjacent Properties 
    Where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, it is necessary to provide for access to an adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property and a temporary turnaround provided. Streets shall connect with existing streets located on adjacent property whenever possible. 
    Turnarounds built at stubbed out streets are considered temporary and shall be exempt from the cul-de-sac length requirements and shall be required to meet the block length requirements. The temporary turnaround shall be constructed with a fifty-foot radius and shall be paved with curb and gutter. When a temporary turnaround is removed as a result of an extension of the former stubbed out street, the land formerly part of the cul-de-sac and not needed for right-of-way shall revert to adjacent property owners. Dead-end roads shall be prohibited except when designed as cul-de-sac roads or as stubbed out streets to permit future road extension into adjoining tracts. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, § 12, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2011-12, § 11, 5-10-2011) 
16-6 - Design Standards 
    The design of all streets and roads within the area where this ordinance is applicable shall be in accordance with the accepted policies of the North Carolina Department of Transportation. Residential subdivision roads shall be designed in accordance with the most current edition of the North Carolina Department of Transportation Division of Highways' Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards or Morehead City's Standards and Specifications for Streets, Sidewalks, and Drainage booklet, whichever is stricter. Nonresidential subdivision shall provide streets in accordance with the standards contained in the most current edition of the North Carolina Roads, Minimum Construction Standards booklet or the standards of Morehead City. In-town standards are available at the Public Works Department. 
16-7 - Intersections 
16-7.1  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at an angle less than sixty (60) degrees. 
16-7.2  Sight distances shall be required. 
16-7.3  Offset intersections are to be avoided unless exception is granted by the Division of Highways. Intersections which cannot be aligned should be separated by a minimum length of two hundred (200) feet between survey centerlines. 
16-7.4  Intersections between collector and thoroughfares shall have a distance between them of at least one thousand (1,000) feet from centerline to centerline, or more if required by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
16-7.5  On a corner lot, except in the CD and DB district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or continued to exceed the height of three (3) feet, or to protrude lower than ten (10) feet, or to inhibit the visibility of a motor vehicle operator within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the right-of-way lines at two (2) points each twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § 19, 2-13-2007) 
16-8 - Permanent Dead End, Cul-De-Sac Streets 
    Permanent dead end streets should not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length unless necessitated by topography or property accessibility and should not be permitted to be over nine hundred (900) feet long. Cul-de-sac length shall be measured from the middle of an intersection with either a through street or another cul-de-sac to the center of the turnaround of the cul-de-sac. Cul-de-sacs shall not be used to avoid connection with an existing street or to avoid the extension of an important street. Cul-de-sacs over nine hundred (900) feet require a variance in accordance with subsection 4-29.1(E) of this Ordinance. In no case shall the overall length of a cul-de-sac exceed two thousand seven hundred (2,700) feet from a through street. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § 1, 1-14-2003) 
16-9 - Street Names 
    Proposed street names which are obviously in alignment with existing streets shall be given the same name. In assigning new names, duplications of existing names shall be avoided, and in no case shall the proposed name be phonically or confusingly similar to existing names in the county irrespective of the use of a suffix such as street, road, drive, place, court, etc. Street names shall be subject to approval of the Planning Board. 
16-10 - Street and Traffic Control Signs 
    The subdivider shall be required to provide and erect street name signs and traffic control signs to town standards at all appropriate locations within the subdivision prior to any Certificate of Occupancy being issued for any lot in the subdivision. Street and traffic control signs shall be ordered through the Town of Morehead City prior to final approval. 
16-11 - Curb and Gutter 
    Curbs and gutters shall be required in all subdivisions. A variance may be requested from the Planning Board, with final approval by the City Council. Consideration in granting a variance would be based on the inability to receive state approval of a stormwater management plan or a letter of exemption under the Stormwater Regulations if curb and gutter is installed. 
PART II. - ALLEYS 

16-12 - Requirements for Alleys 
16-12.1  Alleys shall be required to serve lots used for commercial and industrial purposes except that this requirement may be waived where other definite and assured provision is made for service access. 
16-12.2  Alleys shall not be provided in residential subdivisions unless necessitated by unusual circumstances. 
16-12.3  The width of an alley shall be at least twenty (20) feet. 
16-12.4  Dead end alleys shall be avoided wherever possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end as may be approved by the Planning Board. 
16-12.5  Sharp changes in alignment and grade shall be avoided. 
16-12.6  All alleys shall be designed in accordance with North Carolina Department of Transportation standards. 
PART III. - SIDEWALKS 

16-13 - Sidewalks, Pedestrian Crosswalks, Wheelchair Ramps 
16-13.1  Sidewalk defined. Sidewalks shall be defined to include bikeways, greenways, ramps, multipurpose trails and related routes. 
16-13.2  Streets in Proposed Subdivisions. Streets in proposed residential subdivisions shall be required to include sidewalks, pedestrian crosswalks and wheelchair ramps on one (1) side of all proposed streets, including the street upon which the subdivision gains access, except as follows: If any street in a proposed residential subdivision is an extension of a major or minor subdivision or the street upon which the subdivision gains access is a minor or major thoroughfare, sidewalks shall be required in accordance with subsection 16-13.3. 
16-13.3  Subdivisions abutting major/minor thoroughfares and other streets as identified by the city. Subdivisions that have frontage on a major thoroughfare, minor thoroughfare as identified in the City's most current Thoroughfare Plan or other street as identified by the City shall be required to submit a sidewalk fee in accordance with subsection 16-13.4 or install the sidewalk in accordance with subsection 16-13.5 prior to recordation, at the discretion of Council. 
16-13.4  Sidewalk fees. 
(A)  Sidewalk fees shall be collected when new construction or improvements exceeding fifty (50) percent of the ad valorem tax value of existing development occurs. 
(B)  Properties adjacent to existing sidewalks are exempt from sidewalk fees if sidewalks meet City standards and specifications (excluding normal wear and tear) and were constructed prior to October 1998. 
(C)  Single-family residential lots with existing sidewalks are exempt from sidewalk fees. 
(D)  The full payment of the sidewalk fees shall be made to the town [City] prior to the issuance of a building permit. Failure of the payment being paid at that time or being paid in less than the full fees will not relieve the necessity of payment in full. Failure of the City to properly assess the correct fee does not relieve the applicant from being assessed the correct fee in the future. 
(E)  Fees shall be based upon a lineal foot rate for sidewalks as determined by the Town's Engineer. Unusual or extreme expenses for sidewalk construction shall not be included in determining the fee. 
(F)  Lots fronting on major thoroughfares will be assessed based upon the total front footage of the lot. Lots fronting on minor thoroughfares or other streets as identified by the City will be assessed based upon one-half (1/2) of the total front footage of the lot. 
(G)  The cost for sidewalk construction shall be determined by the front footage for the lot multiplied by the lineal foot rate. 
(H)  Fees shall be set aside in a sidewalk fund and shall only be used by the City to construct sidewalks along thoroughfares and other streets as identified by the City as it determines to be in the public's best interest. 
(I)  The City Manager may waive the fee and require sidewalks be installed when determined to be in the City's best interest. 
16-13.5  Sidewalk construction. 
(A)  Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street along major thoroughfares unless otherwise prohibited. Sidewalks shall be required along one (1) side of the street along minor thoroughfares and other identified streets. 
(B)  Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with town standards with a minimum width of five (5) feet and in accordance with Appendix III. 
(C)  All sidewalks shall be placed in the street right-of-way unless the development is platted as a planned unit or group development. In the event the sidewalk cannot be located within the right-of-way, the sidewalk shall be located parallel and immediately adjacent to the right-of-way. When necessary, the property owner shall grant the town a sidewalk easement. In locations where sidewalks have been installed on private property, easements must be granted prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(D)  Any sidewalk extended or installed under the provisions of this section shall be required to submit engineered plans and specifications for review. 
(E)  Construction shall be in accordance with approved engineered plans, specifications and other requirements of the City. When required encroachment agreements shall be secured before construction begins. 
16-13.6  [Wheelchair ramps.] In accordance with Chapter 136, Article 2A of the North Carolina General Statutes (NCGS) 136-44-14), all street curbs being constructed or reconstructed for maintenance procedures, traffic operations, repairs, correction of utilities, or altered for any reason, shall be provided with wheelchair ramps for the physically handicapped at all intersections where both curb and gutter and sidewalks are provided and at other major points of pedestrian flow. 
(Ord. No. 2002-21, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-06, 1-10-2006; Ord. No. 2008-26, §§ 1-4, 7-8-2008) 
ARTICLE 17. - UTILITIES 

17-1 - Water and Sanitary Sewer System 
    Each lot in all subdivisions within the corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City shall be provided with an extension of the municipal water and sanitary sewer systems at the subdivider's expense. 
    Subdivisions may connect to the municipal water and sanitary sewer systems if approved by City Council and after annexation. Installation of all lines and laterals shall be in accordance with plans approved by the town and at the developer's sole expense. 
17-2 - Oversized Improvements 
    The Town of Morehead City may require installation of certain oversized utilities or the extension of utilities to adjacent property when it is in the interest of future development. If the town requires the installation of improvements in excess of the standards required in this Ordinance, including all standards adopted by reference, the town shall pay the cost of differential between the improvement required and the standards in this Ordinance. The town may recoup this cost through fees as set forth in the appropriate town ordinance. 
17-3 - Stormwater Drainage System 
    The subdivider shall provide a surface water drainage system plan which shall be designed in accordance with the North Carolina Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, the North Carolina Stormwater Runoff Regulations, the Handbook for the Design of Highway Surface Drainage Structures, as amended, and the town's Standards and Specifications for Streets, Sidewalks, and Drainage. The most stringent standards and regulations shall apply. 
    The developer must submit complete detailed drawings, plan and profile, along with specifications for all construction. The town may have the Town Engineer or some consulting engineer review the plans. 
    Easements necessary to maintain the surface water drainage system shall be offered for dedication to the public. Prior to the time that such dedication is accepted by the town, the maintenance of the surface water drainage system shall be the responsibility of the Homeowner's Association. 
17-4 - Street Lights 
    In subdivisions where the smallest lot is less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, the developer shall make provisions for the installation of street lights to provide adequate lighting through participation in CPandL's or Carteret-Craven EMC's Residential Lighting Program. The Restrictive Covenants shall indicate the subdivisions participation in the program. Commercial and residential subdivisions shall meet the town's spacing requirements for street lighting, which is one (1) light for every four hundred (400) feet. In the event that one (1) or both of these programs are disbanded, street lighting shall continue to be in accordance with the Town of Morehead City's requirements available through the Public Works Department. 
17-5 - Underground Wiring 
    All subdivisions in which the smallest lot is less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet shall have underground wiring. This requirement may be waived by the Planning Board if underlying rock or geologic formations nonconductive to underground wiring is less than four (4) feet from the surface, or if there is extensive pre-existing overhead wiring on the street in the immediate neighborhood of the subdivision. Such underground wiring shall be installed in accordance with the applicable standards of CP and L or Carteret-Craven Electric Membership Corporation. The subdivider shall be required to pay the charges for installation of the underground service. 
ARTICLE 18. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE[3] 
COASTAL REGULAR PHASE 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2003-28, adopted June 18, 2003, repealed and replaced Art. 18 with the updated FEMA Flood Ordinance to read as herein set out. Former Art. 18, §§ 18-1-18-5, derived from Ordinance No. 2001-19, adopted June 12, 2001. 

18-1 - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives 
18-1.1  Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
    Therefore, the City Council of the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina, does ordain as follows: 
18-1.2  Findings of fact. 
(A)  The floodprone areas within the jurisdiction of Morehead City, North Carolina, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(B)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in floodprone areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
18-1.3  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions within floodprone areas by provisions designed to: 
(A)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities; 
(B)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(C)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(1)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(2)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
18-1.4  Objectives. The objectives of this Ordinance are: 
(A)  To protect human life and health; 
(B)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(C)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(D)  To minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions; 
(E)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that are located in floodprone areas; 
(F)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
(G)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2003-28, § 1, 6-18-2003) 
18-2 - Definitions 
18-2.1  See Article 2, Basic Definitions and Interpretations. 
(Ord. No. 2003-28, § 1, 6-18-2003) 
18-3 - General Provisions 
18-3.1  Lands to which this Ordinance applies. This Ordinance shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJ) if applicable, of the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina, and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose governing body agrees, by resolution, to such applicability. 
18-3.2  Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas. The special flood hazard areas are those identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or produced under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in its flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood maps such as the flood insurance rate map(s) (FIRM) and/or the flood boundary floodway map(s) (FBFM), for the Town of Morehead City dated February 16, 1977, and May 15, 1980, which with accompanying supporting data, and any revision thereto, including letters of map amendment or revision, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The special flood hazard areas also include those defined through standard engineering analysis for private developments or by governmental agencies, but which have not yet been incorporated in the FIRM. This includes, but is not limited to, detailed flood data: 
(A)  Generated as a requirement of subsection 18-4.5(K) and (L) of this Ordinance; 
(B)  Preliminary FIRMs where more stringent than the effective FIRM; or 
(C)  Post-disaster flood recovery maps. 
In addition, upon annexation to the Town of Morehead City or inclusion in the extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ), the special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and/or produced under the Cooperating Technical State agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA as stated above for the unincorporated areas of Carteret County, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. 
18-3.3  Establishment of floodplain development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities within special flood hazard areas as determined in subsection 18-3.2. 
18-3.4  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
18-3.5  Abrogation and greater restriction. This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
18-3.6  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
(A)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(B)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(C)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
18-3.7  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Actual flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Morehead City or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
18-3.8  Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Morehead City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-28, § 1, 6-18-2003) 
18-4 - Administration 
18-4.1  Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The holder of the office of chief building inspector, or his/her designee, hereinafter referred to as the "Floodplain Administrator," is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Ordinance. 
18-4.2  Floodplain development permit and certification requirements. 
18-4.2.1  Plans and application requirements. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities proposed to be located within floodprone areas. The following items/information shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit. 
(A)  A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain development: 
(1)  The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance, existing and proposed structures, the location of utility systems, proposed grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other proposed development; 
(2)  The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection 18-3.2 or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area; 
(3)  Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection 18-3.2; 
(4)  The boundary of the floodway(s) or nonencroachment area(s) as determined in section 18-3.2; 
(5)  The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in subsection 18-3.2; subsection 18-4.5(K) and (L); subsection 18-5.3, subsection 18-5.4 or subsection 18-5.2(E); 
(6)  The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(7)  Preparation of the plot plan by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. 
(B)  Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a special flood hazard area, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
(3)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed. 
(C)  If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate and back-up plans from a registered professional engineer or architect certifying that the nonresidential floodproofed development will meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection 18-5.2 and subsection 18-5.3. 
(D)  A foundation plan drawn to scale which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this Ordinance are met. These details include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation on columns/piers); 
(2)  Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used in floodplains other than coastal high hazard areas, details of sufficient openings to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters in accordance with subsection 18-5.2(D); 
(3)  In coastal high hazard areas, the following must also be submitted prior to floodplain development permit issuance. Specific requirements are detailed in subsection 18-5.6 and subsection 18-5.2(D) of this Code. 
(a)  V-zone certification form with accompanying plans and specifications verifying the engineered structure and breakaway wall designs as set forth in subsection 18-5.2(D)(2) of this Code; 
(b)  Plans for lattice work or decorative screening, if applicable. Plans for any structures that will have lattice work or decorative screening must be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator for approval prior to floodplain development permit issuance; 
(c)  Plans for nonstructural fill, if applicable. Plans for placement of any nonstructural fill must be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator for approval prior to floodplain development permit issuance. Requirements are detailed in subsection 18-5.7(H) of this Code. 
(E)  Usage details of any enclosed space below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(F)  Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(G)  Copy of all other local, state and federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance (i.e., wetlands, erosion and sedimentation control, CAMA, riparian buffers, mining, etc.) 
(H)  If floodplain development permit is issued for placement of recreational vehicles and/or temporary structures, documentation to ensure subsection 18-5.2(F) and (G) of this Code are met. 
(I)  If a watercourse is proposed to be altered and/or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. 
18-4.2.2  Floodplain development permit data requirements. The following information shall be provided at a minimum on the floodplain development permit to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(A)  A description of the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit issuance. 
(B)  The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed development per available data specified in subsection 18-3.2. 
(C)  The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities. 
(D)  The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the protection of all public utilities. 
(E)  All certification submittal requirements with timelines. 
(F)  State that no fill material shall encroach into the floodway or nonencroachment area of any watercourse, if applicable. 
18-4.2.3  Certification requirements. 
(A)  An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) or floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) is required after the reference level is completed. Within twenty-one (21) calendar days of establishment of the reference level elevation, or floodproofing, by whatever construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference level, or floodproofed elevation, whichever is applicable in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work done within the twenty-one-day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(B)  A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) or floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation or floodproofed elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy. 
(C)  A V-zone/breakaway wall certification is required prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit within coastal high hazard areas. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator said certification to ensure the design standards of this Ordinance are met. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, plans, and specifications for construction and certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this Ordinance. This certification is not a substitute for an elevation certificate. 
(D)  If a manufactured home is placed within an A, AO, AE, or A1-30 zone and the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height, an engineered foundation certification is required per subsection 18-5.2(C). 
(E)  If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit. 
(F)  Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located within an A, AO, AE or A1-30 zone, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in items (A) and (B) above: 
(1)  Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of subsection 18-5.2(F)(1); 
(2)  Temporary structures meeting requirements of subsection 18-5.2(G); and 
(3)  Accessory structures less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet meeting requirements of subsection 18-5.2(H). 
18-4.3, 18-4.4  Reserved. 
18-4.5  Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(A)  Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development with in floodprone areas to assure that the requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied. 
(B)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits (i.e. wetlands, erosion and sedimentation control, CAMA, riparian buffers, mining, etc.) may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the floodplain development permit. 
(C)  Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(D)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(E)  Prevent encroachments within floodways and nonencroachment areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection 18-5.5. 
(F)  Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level (including basement) of all attendant utilities of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with subsection 18-4.2.3. 
(G)  Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures and all utilities have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 18-4.2.3. 
(H)  Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities, in accordance with subsection 18-4.2.3. 
(I)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 18-4.2.3 and subsection 18-5.2(B). 
(J)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(K)  When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance with subsection 18-3.2, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE) data, along with floodway data and/or nonencroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source including data developed pursuant to subsection 18-5.3(D), in order to administer the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(L)  When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway nor nonencroachment area data has been provided in accordance with subsection 18-3.2, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data, and/or nonencroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(M)  When the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas conflict with the current, natural topography information at the site, the property owner may apply and be approved for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. A copy of the letter of map amendment issued from FEMA will be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator in the floodplain development permit file. 
(N)  Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this Ordinance and make these records available for public inspection. 
(O)  Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(P)  Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this Ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(Q)  Revocation of floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. 
(R)  Make periodic inspections throughout all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(S)  Follow through with corrective procedures of subsection 18-4.6. 
18-4.6  Corrective procedures. 
(A)  Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds violations of applicable State and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law pertaining to their property. 
(B)  Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service, stating: 
(1)  That the building or property is in violation of the flood damage prevention ordinance; 
(2)  That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and 
(3)  That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue such order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as appears appropriate. 
(C)  Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention ordinance, he or she shall make an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than sixty (60) days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible. 
(D)  Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order. 
(E)  Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an appeal, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the discretion of the court. 
18-4.7  Variance procedure. 
(A)  The Board of Adjustment as established by the City Council of the Town of Morehead City, hereinafter referred to as the "Appeal Board", shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(B)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision to the Court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A. 
(C)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(D)  In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this Ordinance, and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(E)  A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be submitted with the application for a variance. 
(F)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this Ordinance, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(G)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or nonencroachment area if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(H)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  Variances may not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(3)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(b)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(c)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(4)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced reference level elevation. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
(5)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State of North Carolina upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2003-28, § 1, 6-18-2003; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 13, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 23, 6-11-2013) 
18-5 - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
18-5.1  General standards. In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required: 
(A)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
(B)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(C)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages. 
(D)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, appliances (i.e., washers, dryers, refrigerator, etc.), hot water heaters, electric outlets/switches. 
(E)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(F)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(G)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(H)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this Ordinance. 
(I)  Nonconforming structures or other development may not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Provided, however, nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this Ordinance and located totally or partially within the floodway, nonencroachment area, or stream setback, provided that the bulk of the building or structure below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, nonencroachment area, or stream setback is not increased and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this Ordinance. 
(J)  New solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted in special flood hazard areas. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified according to subsection 18-4.2.3 of this Code. 
18-5.2  Specific standards. In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in subsection 18-3.2 or subsection 18-4.5(K) and (L), the following provisions are required: 
(A)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(B)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. Structures located in A, AO, AE and A1-30 zones may be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure below the required flood protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection 18-4.2.3. 
(C)  Manufactured homes. 
(1)  New or replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement in accordance with the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured/Mobile Homes, 1995 Edition, and any revision thereto adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. 143-143.15 or a certified engineered foundation. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height, an engineering certification is required. 
(3)  All foundation enclosures or skirting shall be in accordance with section 18-5.2(D). 
(4)  An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within floodprone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the local Emergency Management Coordinator. 
(D)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas that are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall not be designed to be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection level and meet the following design criteria: 
(1)  In A, AO, AE, and A1-30 zones: 
(a)  Measures for complying with this requirement shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the foundation must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria: 
1)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2)  The total net area of all openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
3)  If a building has more than one (1) enclosed area, each area must have openings on exterior walls to allow floodwater to directly enter. 
4)  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade; and 
5)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
6)  Foundation enclosures: 
a)  Vinyl or sheet metal skirting is not considered an enclosure for regulatory and flood insurance rating purposes. Therefore such skirting does not require hydrostatic openings as outlined above. 
b)  Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires hydrostatic openings as outlined above to comply with this Ordinance. 
(b)  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas. 
(2)  In coastal high hazard areas (VE and V1-30 zones): 
(a)  Breakaway walls, lattice work or decorative screening shall be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation provided they are not part of the structural support of the building and are designed so as to breakaway, under abnormally high tides or wave action, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are to be used and provided the following design specifications are met: 
1)  Material shall consist of open wood lattice or mesh insect screening; or 
2)  Breakaway walls meeting the following design specifications: 
a)  Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall be not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot; or 
b)  If more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot, a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design wall collapse would result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). The water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. The wind loading values used shall be those required by the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(E)  Additions/improvements. 
(1)  Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures whereas the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure. 
a)  Are not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more nonconforming than the existing structure. 
b)  Are a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction. 
(2)  Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the existing structure shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction. 
(3)  Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures whereas the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure. 
a)  Are not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction. 
b)  Are a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction. 
(4)  Where a fire wall or independent perimeter load-bearing wall is provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building and only the addition must comply with the standards for new construction. 
(F)  Recreational vehicles. Recreation vehicles placed on sites within a special flood hazard area shall either: 
(1)  Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and has no permanently attached additions); or 
(2)  Meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 18-4.2 and subsections 18-5.1 and 18-5.2(C). 
(G)  Temporary structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the following requirements must be met: 
(1)  Applicants must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a hurricane or flash flood warning notification. The plan must include the following information: 
a)  A specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted; 
b)  The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure; 
1)  The time-frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., minimum of seventy-two (72) hours before landfall of a hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification); 
2)  A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with a trucking company to insure the availability of removal equipment when needed; and 
3)  Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the special flood hazard area to which the temporary structure will be moved. 
(2)  The above information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval. 
(H)  Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met: 
(1)  Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including work, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas); 
(2)  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
(3)  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
(4)  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with subsection 18-5.1(D); 
(5)  All service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be installed in accordance with subsection 18-5.1(D); and 
(6)  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in conformance with subsection 18-5.2(D)(1). 
(7)  An accessory structure with a footprint less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet does not require an elevation or floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance with subsection 18-4.2.3. 
(I)  Fill/grading. 
(1)  Grading and the placement of fill may be permitted provided: 
(a)  The placement of fill in the special flood hazard area is limited to six inches (6") in depth above the street or curb level, whichever is higher, as measured from the edge of the pavement and/or back of curb. For property where no pavement edge or curb is present, the total fill depth shall not exceed two-feet (2') above the lowest prefilled ground elevation on such property as indicated on an applicant-supplied topographical survey map produced and certified by a qualified North Carolina licensed surveyor. In all cases, runoff must be directed towards the street or a designated and approved drainage area, not to adjacent properties. The applicant and/or property owner is responsible for containing and/or properly directing any runoff caused by filling. 
(b)  Exception: Fill not meeting the requirements of subsection 18-5.2(I)(1)(a) above may be permitted provided that an analysis is provided which has been prepared by a North Carolina licensed architect or professional engineer showing and certifying that the proposed fill will result in no harmful diversion of floodwaters to adjacent properties, including buildings and structures. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(i)  Projects for which valid state stormwater permit have been issued are exempt from the requirements contained under subsection 18-5.2(I). 
(ii)  Fill used for structural support in a slab-on-stem wall with fill foundation as depicted in Diagram 1B in Appendix VIII (red area depicts limits of fill) is exempted from the provisions of subsection 18-5.2(I). 

(Ord. No. 2018-O-09, §§ 12-15, 6-18-2018) 
18-5.3  Subdivisions, manufactured home parks and major developments. All subdivision, manufactured home park and major development proposals located within special flood hazard areas shall: 
(A)  Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(B)  Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(C)  Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(D)  Have base flood elevation (BFE) data provided if development is greater than the lesser of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots/manufactured home sites. Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference per subsection 18-3.2 to be utilized in implementing this Code. 
18-5.4  Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations. Within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 18-3.2, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, the following provisions shall apply: 
(A)  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of twenty (20) feet each side from top of bank or five (5) times the width of the stream whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(B)  If subsection 18-5.3(A) is satisfied and base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with elevations established in accordance with subsection 18-4.5(K) and (L). When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal, state, or other source, the reference level, including basement, shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
18-5.5  Standards for floodplains with BFE but without established floodways or nonencroachment areas. Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but neither floodway nor nonencroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
18-5.6  Floodways and nonencroachment areas. Located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 18-3.2 are areas designated as floodways or nonencroachment areas. The floodways and nonencroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions shall apply to all development within such areas: 
(A)  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood. Such certification and technical data shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit. 
(B)  If subsection 18-5.6(A) is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this Ordinance. 
(C)  No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the following provisions are met: 
(1)  The anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection 18-5.2(C); and 
(2)  The no encroachment standards of subsection 18-5.6(A) are met. 
18-5.7  Coastal high hazard areas (VE and V1-30 zones). Coastal high hazard areas are special flood hazard areas established in Article 3, Section B, [sic] and designated as Zones VE or V1-30. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from surges and, therefore, in addition to meeting all provisions in this Ordinance, the following provisions shall apply to all new construction, substantial improvements and all other development: 
(A)  All development shall: 
(1)  Be located landward of the reach of mean high tide; 
(2)  Be located landward of the first line of stable natural vegetation; and 
(3)  Comply with all applicable CAMA setback requirements. 
(B)  All development shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. Floodproofing may not be utilized on any structures in coastal high hazard areas to satisfy the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements. 
(C)  All space below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be open so as not to impede the flow of water. 
(D)  Open wood lattice work or mesh insect screening may be permitted below the regulatory flood protection elevation for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance with subsection 18-5.2(D)(2). Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with subsection 18-4.2(D)(3). 
(E)  All development shall be securely anchored on pilings or columns. 
(F)  All pilings and columns and the attached structures shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. 
(G)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in subsection 18-4.2, subsection 18-5.7(D), (F) and (H) of this Ordinance. 
(H)  There shall be no fill used as structural support. Noncompacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge, thereby rendering the building free of obstruction prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with subsection 18-4.2(D)(3). The Floodplain Administrator may approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect, and/or soil scientist which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered: 
(1)  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; 
(2)  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties; and 
(3)  Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
(I)  There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage. 
(J)  No manufactured homes shall be permitted except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring and elevation standards are in compliance with this section of the Code. 
(K)  Recreational vehicles shall be permitted in coastal high hazard areas provided that they meet the recreational vehicle criteria of subsection 18-5.2(F)(1) and the temporary structure provisions of subsection 18-5.2(G). 
(Ord. No. 2003-28, § 1, 6-18-2003; Ord. No. 2005-22, §§ 14-16, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 8, 3-9-2010) 
18-6 - Legal Status Provisions 
18-6.1  Effect on rights and liabilities under existing flood damage prevention ordinance. This Ordinance in part comes forward by reenactment of some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted November 10, 1977, as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this Ordinance shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina, enacted on November 10, 1977, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed. 
18-6.2  Effect upon outstanding building permits. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator or his authorized agents before the time of passage of this Ordinance; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of six (6) months subsequent to passage of this Ordinance or any revision thereto, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
18-6.3  Effective date. This Ordinance shall become effective 12:01 a.m., July 16, 2003. 
(Ord. No. 2003-28, § 1, 6-18-2003) 
ARTICLE 19. - SIGNS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-22, adopted July 12, 2016, set out provisions for use herein as art. 19. At the discretion of the editor, those provisions were treated as amending art. 19 in its entirety, to read as set out herein. Former art. 19 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2002-30, § 5, adopted October 8, 2002; Ord. No. 2003-12, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 11, 2003; Ord. No. 2003-13, § 1, adopted March 11, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 1, adopted September 14, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-22, §§ 17, 18, adopted June 14, 2005; Ord. No. 2006-32, §§ 2, 3, adopted April 12, 2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 20-22, adopted February 13, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-16, § 1, adopted April 10, 2007; Ord. No. 2008-47, §§ 1, 2, adopted September 9, 2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 14, 2009; Ord. No. 2010-43, §§ 2-7, adopted December 14, 2010; Ord. No. 2011-12, § 12, adopted May 10, 2011; Ord. No. 2012-02, §§ 1-7, adopted January 10, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-24, § 27, adopted July 10, 2012; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 24, adopted June 11, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-22, § 1, adopted June 11, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-30, §§ 1-6, adopted August 13, 2013 and Ord. No. 2013-33, § 1, adopted September 10, 2013. 

19-1 - Purpose 
19-1.1  To protect the safety and welfare of the public by minimizing hazards and distractions to pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
19-1.2  To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication for businesses, organizations, and individuals; 
19-1.3  To further economic development by providing for adequate business identification, advertising, and communication; 
19-1.4  To avoid unnecessary visual clutter and to avoid the unregulated construction, placement, and display of signs which are or may become a public nuisance; 
19-1.5  To minimize adverse effects of signs on nearby property; and 
19-1.6  To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-2 - Applicability 
19-2.1  This article shall apply to the installation and modification of all signs within Morehead City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
19-2.2  No sign shall be installed or modified unless expressly permitted under this Development Ordinance. 
19-2.3  A permit shall be required to install, modify, or relocate any sign unless specifically exempted from permitting requirements. 
19-2.4  Any installation or modification of a sign must comply with applicable provisions of this article as well as with all other applicable standards, requirements, laws, and ordinances. 
19-2.5  Any sign, including an existing sign, which is not in compliance with this article shall be subject to the enforcement and review terms of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-3 - General Sign Requirements 
19-3.1  General sign requirements and maintenance. 
(A)  Signs shall be constructed of durable materials and permanently affixed to the ground or building except for the following sign types: 
(1)  Temporary signs as permitted under section 19-8; 
(2)  Banner signs as permitted under section 19-11; 
(3)  Flag signs as permitted under section 19-12; 
(4)  Window signs as permitted under section 19-15; 
(5)  A-Frame and T-Frame signs as permitted under section 19-19; 
(6)  Pole banner signs as permitted under section 19-22; and 
(7)  Governmental flags as permitted under section 19-23. 
(B)  Signs shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(C)  Signs and sign support structures, together with their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in safe condition. 
(D)  The display surfaces of signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. 
(E)  The following signs are specifically prohibited: 
(1)  Signs which emit any sound, odor, or other visible matter, such as smoke or vapor; 
(2)  Signs which exhibit any statement, word, or picture of an obscene or pornographic nature; 
(3)  Signs which falsely present or imply the need or requirement of stopping or of caution or the existence of danger; 
(4)  Signs which are a copy or an imitation of or that for any reason are likely to be confused with a governmental sign; 
(5)  Hand-carried signs; 
(6)  Signs which are dilapidated; 
(7)  Signs, for which a permit is required, yet which are erected or displayed without issuance of a permit or for which a permit has been denied; 
(8)  Feather flag signs; and 
(9)  Pennant string signs. 
(F)  Replacement of a sign face within an existing panel, repainting of an existing sign, and changeable copy are considered exempt from permitting requirements. 
(G)  Conversion of a non-electronic sign to an electronic sign is not considered replacement of a sign face and is subject to permitting requirements. 
19-3.2  Sign location requirements. 
(A)  No sign shall be placed in such a manner as to endanger pedestrians, bicyclists, or traffic by obscuring the view or interfering with official street signs, signals, or governmental signs. 
(B)  Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain a clearance and noninterference with utility and communication lines and equipment. 
(C)  Signs or sign structures shall not obstruct a sight triangle nor impede visibility at intersections. Signs located within fifty (50) feet of the intersection of two (2) or more streets shall be either less than three (3) feet in height or greater than ten (10) feet in height in addition to any applicable height requirements for the specific sign type. 

Signs within Fifty (50) Feet of Intersections Must Meet the Requirements of Subsection 19-3.2
(D)  Sign setbacks shall be measured from the property line and the minimum setback requirement shall be in accordance with the requirements for the specific sign type. 
(E)  Signs shall not be located in or over any street right-of-way unless the sign is a governmental sign and unless permitted by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
(F)  No sign shall be affixed to any vehicle or trailer on public or private property unless the vehicle or trailer is currently and regularly being used in the daily function of the business to which the sign relates, is currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets, can legally operate on public streets while the sign is affixed, and is not for the sole purpose of attracting business. 
(G)  No sign shall be affixed to a storage container on public or private property except for a two (2) square foot owner identification sign which is painted on or otherwise permanently applied to the storage container. 
(H)  Signs shall not be painted on or otherwise affixed to an object which is not principally intended to support a sign. Examples include trees, other natural features, and utility and light poles. The exceptions to this requirement are interior parking lot signage which is not visible from the right-of-way and which meets the requirements of section 19-9 and pole banner signage which meets the requirements of section 19-22. 
(I)  Signs shall not be located in areas subject to periodic inundation by tidal saltwater, except governmental signs. 
(J)  Signs shall not be located in any waterway within five hundred (500) feet of the mean high water mark except for lettering, logos, and decals adhered to a vessel with a valid registration. 
19-3.3  Sign illumination requirements. 
(A)  Sign illumination shall be in a manner that avoids glare or reflection onto a residentially zoned property and that does not in any way interfere with traffic safety. 
(B)  Illuminated signs in residential and office and institutional zoning districts shall be internally illuminated. 
(C)  No occulting, oscillating, flashing, rotating, flickering, or blinking of signs shall be permitted. 
(D)  Temporary signs shall not be illuminated. 
19-3.4  Changeable copy of signs. 
(A)  General requirements for changeable copy. 
(1)  Changeable copy is allowed on signs in nonresidential districts; for nonresidential uses in planned developments; and for religious, medical, and educational institution uses which are allowed as permissible or special uses in any district subject to the applicable requirements of this Ordinance. 
(2)  No more than one (1) sign per street front of any premises shall contain changeable copy. 
(3)  Signs which incorporate changeable copy shall not cause glare or reflection onto adjacent properties nor interfere with traffic safety. 
(4)  Signs which incorporate changeable copy shall be subject to additional requirements based upon the sign type. 
(5)  The permitted sign type for changeable copy shall be limited to freestanding signs, wall signs, outdoor advertising signs, canopy signs and menu board signs. 
(6)  Freestanding signs which incorporate changeable copy may not be installed parallel to a right-of-way except in the case of a corner lot when the sign may be installed parallel to the secondary street or road. 
(B)  Electronic changeable copy. In addition to the requirements of subsection 19-3.4(A), signs which incorporate electronic changeable copy shall also be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Electronic changeable copy shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total sign area for any individual sign, with the exception of outdoor advertising signs which may use the full permitted sign area if a permit has been issued by the North Carolina Department of Transportation to allow such electronic message board sign. 
(2)  Except as permitted for outdoor advertising signs under subsection 19-3.5(A)(3), conversion from a non-electronic changeable copy sign to an electronic changeable copy sign is prohibited if the original sign is a nonconforming sign, unless the sign will be brought into conformity with this Ordinance as a result of the modification. 
(3)  Electronic changeable copy shall not include animation, streaming video, or text or images which flash, flicker, rotate, blink, twinkle, move, or scroll. 
(4)  Each complete message must fit on one (1) screen. 
(5)  The electronic changeable copy must transition instantly (i.e. "hard cut"), with no special effects or special transition graphics (e.g. no fade-in or fade-out). 
(6)  All displays must remain static with no movement. 
(7)  Displays may not change less than every eight (8) seconds. 
(8)  Signs located within five hundred (500) feet of a residential zoning district may utilize electronic changeable copy from 5:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m., or 1/2 hour past the close of the business or other establishment which is located on-site. 
(9)  Signs which include electronic changeable copy are subject to the following brightness limits: 
(a)  All signs which incorporate electronic changeable copy shall adjust or shall be adjusted in correlation with ambient light conditions. 
(b)  The sign owner shall provide written certification at installation that the sign meets the following light level standards as measured in nits: 
1.  The maximum daytime light level is five thousand (5,000) nits or seven thousand five hundred (7,500) nits if the sign is equipped with an automatic dimmer. 
2.  From dusk until dawn, the maximum light level is two hundred fifty (250) nits. 
(c)  Upon notification that the town has received a complaint, the sign owner shall provide written certification that the light level standards in subsection 19-3.4(B)(9) are being met. 

Freestanding Sign Which Utilizes Electronic Changeable Copy
19-3.5  Nonconforming, illegal, and obsolete signs. 
(A)  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Nonconforming signs that were lawful at the time of their construction but which are not in conformance with current requirements may be maintained as nonconforming signs. 
(2)  Nonconforming signs may not be installed, modified, enlarged, or relocated, except under the following circumstances: 
(a)  If the entire sign and structure are brought into conformity with this Ordinance; 
(b)  If the work proposed involves ordinary maintenance, a copy change, or repair not involving any structural, material, or electrical changes; or 
(c)  If such sign was damaged or partially destroyed by man-caused or natural act such as fire, accident, explosion, flood, lightning, wind or other calamity. In such cases, the sign may stay at its current location provided the structural integrity of the support structure has not been compromised as determined by the building inspector and/or a licensed engineer qualified to make such certification. However, the sign must adhere to the current square footage and height requirements of this article. 
(3)  Exception for nonconforming outdoor advertising signs. In accordance with G.S. 136-131.2, the repair or reconstruction of an outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted provided that there is in effect a valid permit issued by the North Carolina Department of Transportation and that the square footage of the advertising surface area is not increased. For purposes of this subsection, reconstruction includes the changing of an existing multipole structure to a new monopole structure. 
(B)  Illegal signs. 
(1)  Signs that were not lawful at the time of construction shall be removed or shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(C)  Obsolete signs. 
(1)  Any obsolete sign related to or identifying a business or activity which has not been conducted on the premises or which has not been actively marketed for sale, lease, or rent for a period of six (6) months or more must be removed. In the event the business or property is sold, leased, or rented and the new owner or tenant chooses not to use the sign, the obsolete sign or portion thereof must be removed. 
(2)  Both the owner of the property upon which the sign is located and the owner of the sign, if different, are separately responsible for the sign removal. 
(3)  The support structure for an obsolete sign must also be removed if a replacement sign could not meet the requirements of this Ordinance due to the structure's height, physical location, or other standard of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-4 - Exempt Signs 
19-4.1  The following sign types shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to applicable permitting requirements: 
(A)  Federal, state, local, traffic control, and other governmental signs; 
(B)  Public notices and warnings required by valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance; 
(C)  Temporary lighting and displays that are part of customary holiday decorations, provided that they contain no commercial message, are located on private property, and are not located in the public right-of-way; 
(D)  Customary identification signs such as building numbers, addresses, private parking signs, security signs, neighborhood watch signs, no trespassing signs, beware of animal signs, or similar signs which enhance emergency response and public safety; and 
(E)  Signage affixed to a petroleum dispenser which is not visible from the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-5 - Wall Signs 
19-5.1  Wall signs may be located on a parapet provided the sign does not exceed the height of the parapet. 

Example of Allowable Wall Sign Area Calculation
19-5.2  Wall signs shall adhere to the requirements of Table 19-5.1. 
Table 19-5.1 Requirements for Wall Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area 1.5 square foot per lineal frontage of the building wall to which the sign is attached. Maximum Projection No more than 12" from the plane of the wall. Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.4. Where Permitted Non-residential districts; Freestanding walls at subdivision, multifamily, and planned development entrances Permit Required? Yes  
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-6 - Freestanding Signs 
19-6.1  Freestanding signs shall be designed to withstand wind pressures as specified in the North Carolina State Building Code except signs that do not exceed sixteen (16) square feet and which are no more than seven (7) feet in total height. 
19-6.2  The maximum depth of any freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the width. 
19-6.3  The area of a sign support for any freestanding sign is limited to the same number of square feet as the sign face that it supports. 
19-6.4  Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) sign faces per sign. 
19-6.5  Freestanding signs shall contain the street number of the premises. 
19-6.6  Freestanding signs which use changeable copy shall not be installed parallel to a right-of-way except in the case of a corner lot when the sign may be installed parallel to the secondary street or road. 
19-6.7  In order to promote the fair distribution and unified appearance of signage, primary freestanding signs located within multi-tenant developments may be permitted additional sign area subject to the following requirements. 
(A)  A multi-tenant signage plan shall be submitted for review and approval by Morehead City Planning and Inspections Department staff. The plan shall include: 
(1)  Site plan, drawn to scale, showing the lot lines and dimensions of any existing and proposed freestanding signs to be located on the site. 
(2)  Information concerning the maximum dimensions and sign type of all proposed freestanding signage, including any non-primary freestanding signs (e.g. directional signs). 
(3)  North arrow and orientation. 
(4)  Location of existing and proposed rights-of-way. 
(5)  Location of existing and proposed driveways or alleys. 
(B)  Additional sign area per individual sign shall be based upon the number of additional advertised tenants in accordance with Table 19-6.1. 
(C)  Additional primary freestanding signs may be permitted at a rate of one (1) per one hundred (100) feet of linear foot of road frontage (as measured from the center of the sign) with a maximum of three (3) freestanding signs for the multi-tenant development. 
(D)  Outparcels associated with the multi-tenant development shall be consolidated with the remainder of the development and included within the multi-tenant signage plan in order to utilize the additional signage allowances. 
(E)  Both a copy of the signage plan and the deed (or other recordable instrument referencing the approved signage plan) shall be recorded with the Carteret County Register of Deeds prior to final approval of the multi-tenant signage plan. 
19-6.8  Freestanding signs shall adhere to the requirements of Table 19-6.1 and Table 19-6.2 with the exception of secondary freestanding signs in non-residential districts (see Table 19-6.3) and freestanding signs in residential districts (see Table 19-6.4). 
Table 19-6.1 Area and Quantity Requirements for Primary Freestanding Signs 
Size and Type of Development Maximum Number of Signs Max. Area Per Face Residential 500+ units 1 per street entrance 120 Square Feet Residential 300 to 500 units 1 per street entrance 80 Square Feet Residential up to 300 units 1 per street entrance 40 Square Feet Nonresidential 250,000+ SF of building area 1 per street front 154 SF [plus 8 SF per additional advertised tenant up to a maximum of 96 SF*] Nonresidential 100,000 to 250,000 SF of building area 1 per street front 120 SF [plus 8 SF per additional advertised tenant up to a maximum of 64 SF*] Nonresidential 40,000 to 100,000 SF of building area 1 per street front 80 SF [plus 8 SF per additional advertised tenant up to a maximum of 40 SF*] Nonresidential 2,500 to 40,000 SF of building area 1 per street front 80 SF [plus 8 SF per additional advertised tenant up to a maximum of 32 SF*] Nonresidential up to 2,500 SF of building area 1 sign maximum 64 Square Feet  
* Additional allowable square footage of sign area per additional advertised tenant is subject to approval of a multi-tenant signage plan in accordance with subsection 19-6.7. 
Table 19-6.2 Requirements for Primary Freestanding Signs 
Standard Requirement Height Maximum height of 20 feet or the height of the nearest roofline, whichever is less. Signs within 50 feet of an intersection shall also meet the requirements of subsection 19-3.2(C). Setbacks - Noncorner Lots: Minimum 10' setback from any property line unless at an intersection. Setbacks - Corner Lots: Minimum 10' setback from any property line and a minimum distance of 40 feet from the intersection point. 
  
If the owner of a corner lot should choose to use a single freestanding sign on the site in lieu of one sign per street front, one single freestanding sign may be located a minimum 10' setback from both property lines. Should the owner opt to add additional primary freestanding signage, all primary freestanding signs on the site will need to be located to meet the minimum 40' distance requirement. Signs in Districts with No Front Setback Requirement (e.g. CD, DB): No front setback required; however, the requirements of subsection 19-3.2. remain applicable. Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.4 and the following: 
No primary freestanding sign containing electronic changeable copy sign shall exceed 50 percent of the total sign area for any individual freestanding sign. Where Permitted Non-residential districts; Subdivision, multifamily, and planned development entrances Permit Required? Yes  

Primary Freestanding Sign Examples

Primary Freestanding Sign Locational Requirements
19-6.9  Properties in non-residential districts are permitted one (1) additional freestanding sign (e.g. a directional sign) per entrance located within five (5) feet of the entrance and within five (5) feet of the property line subject to the requirements of Table 19-6.3. 
Table 19-6.3 Requirements for Secondary Freestanding Signs 
Standard Non-Residential Districts Maximum Sign Area Per Face 6 Square Feet Maximum Number of Signs 1 per entrance. Height Maximum height of 3 feet. Signs within 50 feet of an intersection shall also meet the requirements of subsection 19-3.2(C). Illumination Permitted? Internal illumination, only, and in accordance with section 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? No Where Permitted Non-residential districts Permit Required? Yes  

Secondary Freestanding Sign Locational Requirements
19-6.10  Non-residential uses in residential districts are permitted freestanding signage in accordance with Table 19-6.4. 
Table 19-6.4 Freestanding Sign Requirements for Non-Residential Uses in Residential Districts 
Standard Non-Residential Districts Maximum Sign Area Per Face 16 Square Feet Maximum Number of Signs 1 per street front Height Maximum height of 7 feet. Signs within 50 feet of an intersection shall also meet the requirements of subsection 19-3.2(C). Setback Requirement Minimum 10-foot setback from any property line. Illumination Permitted? Internal illumination only, and in accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.4 and the following: 
Electronic changeable copy shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign area for any individual freestanding sign. Where Permitted Residential districts Permit Required? Yes  
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-7 - Outdoor Advertising Signs 
19-7.1  A maximum of two (2) faces per sign are permitted with the exception of tri-view signs. 
19-7.2  The bottom edge of an outdoor advertising sign shall not be less than ten (10) feet in height from the average right-of-way grade elevation at the base of the sign. 
19-7.3  Outdoor advertising signs shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-7.1. 
Table 19-7.1 Requirements for Outdoor Advertising Signs 
Standard Requirement Height Maximum height of 20 feet. Signs within 50 feet of an intersection shall also meet the requirements of subsection 19-3.2(C). Setbacks - Noncorner Lots: Minimum 10' setback from any property line unless at an intersection. Setbacks - Corner Lots: Minimum 10' setback from any property line and a minimum distance of 40 feet from the intersection point. Maximum Sign Area Per Face 96 SF Maximum Number of Signs 1 sign permitted per 500 feet radius. Where Permitted CH, I, and PM districts located along Highway 70 and Highway 24. 
Outdoor advertising signs shall not be located closer than 100 feet to a residentially-zoned property. 
The minimum distance between outdoor advertising signs shall be 500 feet radius. Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.4 and the following: 
Changeable copy of outdoor advertising signs is permitted if a permit has been issued by the North Carolina Department of Transportation to allow electronic changeable copy of the signage. Permit Required? Yes  
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-8 - Temporary Signs 
19-8.1  All signs shall be erected in a safe manner. 
19-8.2  Where accessory outdoor displays are permitted, temporary signs may be displayed on accessory outdoor displays. 
19-8.3  No temporary sign shall be permitted to be located within the right-of-way. 
19-8.4  Six (6) weeks prior to an election and one (1) week following an election, there shall be no limit as to the number of temporary signs permitted. 
Table 19-8.1 Requirements for Temporary Signs 
Standard Residential Districts Non-Residential Districts Maximum Sign Area Per Face 6 SF 16 SF Maximum Number of Signs 1 per street front with no more than 2 sign faces per sign 1 per street front with no more than 2 sign faces per sign Height Maximum height of 4 feet. Signs within 50 feet of an intersection shall also meet the requirements of subsection 19-3.2(C). Maximum height of 7 feet. Signs within 50 feet of an intersection shall also meet the requirements of subsection 19-3.2(C). Illumination Permitted? No No Changeable Copy Permitted? No No Where Permitted Residential zoning districts Non-residential zoning districts Permit Required? No No  

Temporary Sign in Residential Zoning District
19-8.5  Temporary signs shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-8.1. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-9 - Interior Parking Area Signs 
19-9.1  Signs which are not visible from the right-of-way may be located within a parking area in a non-residential district, subject to the requirements of Table 19-9.1. 
Table 19-9.1 Requirements for Interior Parking Area Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area 6 Square Feet Maximum Number of Signs No closer than 75 feet to another interior parking lot sign. Height Maximum height of 8 feet. Setback Interior parking area signs may not be visible from the right-of-way. Illumination Permitted? No Changeable Copy Permitted? No Where Permitted Non-residential zoning districts Permit Required? Yes  
19-9.2  In addition to the signs permitted under subsection 19-9.1, additional signs may permitted when located on a drive through menu board, subject to the requirements of Table 19-9.2. 
19-9.3  In the event that a menu board sign is installed as a wall sign, the area of the wall-mounted menu board shall be included in the aggregate wall sign area. 
Table 19-9.2 Requirements for Menu Board Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area per Face Drive-Through Menu Board: 35 SF 
Preview Menu Board: 16 SF 
Parking Stall Menu Board: 8 SF Maximum Number of Signs Drive-Through Menu Board: 1 per drive-through 
Preview Menu Board: 1 per drive-through menu board 
Parking Stall Menu Board: 1 per stall Height Drive-Through Menu Board: 8 feet 
Preview Menu Board: 6 feet 
Parking Stall Menu Board: 6 Setback Text may not be visible from street right-of-way Illumination Permitted? Internal illumination permitted in accordance with 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.4. Where Permitted Non-residential zoning districts. 
Drive-Through Menu Board and Preview Menu Board signs must be located no more than 10 feet from a drive-through lane. Permit Required? Yes  

Drive-Through Menu Board Sign
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-10 - Inflatable Displays 
19-10.1  Inflatable displays shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-10.1. 
Table 19-10.1 Requirements for Inflatable Displays 
Standard Requirement Maximum Number of Signs 1 inflatable display per property Height Tethers of floating inflatables shall be limited to a maximum height of 50 feet. Inflatable displays within 50 feet of an intersection shall also meet the requirements of subsection 19-3.2(C). Where Permitted Non-residential zoning districts Duration Maximum of 5 days in any 30-day period Setback Tethers shall be set back from the property line 1 foot for every 1 foot in height Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Permit Required? Minimum Charge Permit  
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-11 - Banners 
19-11.1  All freestanding banner signs exceeding sixteen (16) square feet shall be erected on a minimum ten (10) foot long salt-treated four (4) by four (4) with a minimum of three (3) feet below ground level. 
19-11.2  Banners must be removed upon installation of a permanent wall sign or freestanding sign if the presence of both the banner and the permanent sign would cause the property to exceed the site's maximum freestanding or wall sign requirements. 
19-11.3  Banners may not be placed on fences or freestanding walls. 
19-11.4  Banners are subject to the requirements for the associated sign type (i.e. either a wall sign or a freestanding sign) and the requirements of Table 19-11.1. 
Table 19-11.1 Requirements for Banners 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area See Associated Wall Sign or Freestanding Sign Requirements Maximum Number of Signs Height Setbacks Where Permitted Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? No Permit Required? Minimum Charge Permit  

Banner Permitted in Accordance with Wall Sign Requirements
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-12 - Flag Signs 
19-12.1  Flag signs that are torn or tattered shall be in violation of this Ordinance and shall be removed. 
19-12.2  In addition to the requirements under Table 19-12.1, the following shall be applicable to flag signs located within the CD and DB zoning districts. 
(A)  Flag signs attached to buildings shall be located no closer than two (2) feet, measured in horizontal distance, to the curb line of any street. 
(B)  Flag signs shall be displayed during business hours, only. 
(C)  Flag signs shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from any intersection and at least five (5) feet from any crosswalk or fire hydrant. 
(D)  Any individual wishing to locate a freestanding feather flag sign in the right-of-way shall sign an indemnification agreement, approved by the Town attorney, prior to issuance of a right-of-way usage permit. The indemnification agreement shall be accompanied by evidence of insurance covering the liability assumed in the indemnity agreement. 
(E)  Additional restrictions may be applicable for flag signs located along NCDOT rights-of-way. 
19-12.3  Flag signs shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-12.1. 
Table 19-12.1 Requirements for Flag Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area 24 square feet per sign Maximum Number of Signs The minimum spacing between flags in non-residential districts, except CD and DB, shall be a minimum of 50 LF. 
In CD and DB, 1 flag is permitted per parcel. Height Maximum height of 20 feet or the height of the nearest roof line, whichever is less. Minimum Vertical Clearance: CD and DB districts: 7 feet or the height of the nearest entrance door, whichever is greater. Feather flags are excluded from this requirement. Setback Requirements Non-residential districts except CD and DB: Minimum 10-foot setback from any property line. 
CD and DB Districts: No setback shall be required, except that a right-of-way usage permit is required in order to locate a flag sign within the right-of-way. Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Where Permitted Non-residential zoning districts. Permit Required? No permit required unless located on a public sidewalk or right-of-way in the CD or DB zoning district. If located on a public sidewalk or right-of-way, a right-of-way usage permit is required.  
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-13 - Canopy Signs 
19-13.1  A canopy located in the CD or DB district shall meet the requirements of subsection 12-2.9. 
19-13.2  A canopy sign shall not extend beyond the edge of the canopy to which it is attached. 
19-13.3  Canopy signs shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-13.1. 
Table 19-13.1 Requirements for Canopy Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area Maximum area of 25 percent of the vertical canopy face. Setback Requirements Non-residential districts [except CD and DB]: May not extend more than 24 inches into a required front setback yard. 
CD and DB: May be located no closer than 2 feet to the curb line of any street. Minimum Vertical Clearance 9 feet Illumination Permitted? Internal illumination, only. Changeable Copy Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.4. Where Permitted Non-residential districts Permit Required? Yes  

Signs on Gas Station Canopies Are a Type of Canopy Sign
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-14 - Awning Signs 
19-14.1  In addition to the requirements of this section, an awning located in the CD or DB district shall meet the requirements of subsection 12-2.9. 
19-14.2  Awning signs shall meet the requirements of Table 19-14.1. 
Table 19-14.1 Requirements for Awning 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area 12 square feet per sign face Setback Requirements Non-residential districts [except CD and DB]: May not extend more than 24 inches into a required front yard. 
CD and DB: May be located no closer than 2 feet to the curb line of any street. Minimum Vertical Clearance 9 feet Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? No Where Permitted Non-residential districts Permit Required? Yes  

Awning Signs
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-15 - Window Signs 
19-15.1  Window signs shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-15.1. 
Table 19-15.1 Requirements for Window Signs 
Standard Requirement Where Permitted Non-residential districts Permit Required? No permit shall be required and the window sign shall not count towards the wall sign calculation, provided that the window sign does not extend beyond the outside perimeter of any window.  

Window Signs
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-16 - Suspended Signs 
19-16.1  Suspended signs shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-16.1. 
Table 19-16.1 Requirements for Suspended Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area 12 SF per sign face Maximum Number of Signs 1 per establishment Setback Requirements May be located no closer than 2 feet to the curb line of any street. Minimum Vertical Clearance 9 feet Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? No Where Permitted Non-residential districts Permit Required? Yes  
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-17 - Projecting Signs 
19-17.1  Projecting signs shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-17.1. 
Table 19-17.1 Requirements for Projecting Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area 12 SF per sign face Maximum Number of Signs 1 per establishment Setback Requirements May be located no closer than 2 feet to the curb line of any street. Minimum Vertical Clearance 9 feet Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? No Where Permitted Non-residential districts Permit Required? Yes  

Projecting Sign
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-18 - Roof Signs 
19-18.1  Roof signs shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-18.1. 
Table 19-18.1 Requirements for Roof Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area 32 SF Maximum Number of Signs 1 per establishment Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Changeable Copy Permitted? No Where Permitted DB district lots located on the south side of Evans Street and Shepard Street between S 4th Street and S 8th Street, excluding the "jib" area. Permit Required? Yes  

Roof Sign
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-19 - A-Frame and T-Frame Signs 
19-19.1  Within the specified maximum dimensions, varying shapes of A-Frame and T-Frame signs are permitted. 
19-19.2  A-Frame and T-Frame signs may be displayed during business hours, only. 
19-19.3  A-Frame and T-Frame signs must be at least twenty (20) feet from any intersection and at least five (5) feet from any crosswalk or fire hydrant. 
19-19.4  A minimum of four (4) feet of unobstructed space must be maintained for the passageway of pedestrians. 
19-19.5  The sign must be constructed of materials that present a finished appearance. Rough-cut plywood is not acceptable. 
19-19.6  The sign lettering should be professionally painted or applied; a "yard sale" or "graffiti" look with hand painted or paint stenciled letters is not acceptable; however, chalkboard signs are permitted. 
19-19.7  Any individual wishing to locate an A-Frame or T-Frame sign in the CD or DB district shall sign an indemnification agreement, approved by the Town attorney, prior to the issuance of a right-of-way usage permit. The indemnification agreement shall be accompanied by evidence of insurance covering the liability assumed in the indemnity agreement. 
19-19.8  A-Frame and T-Frame signs shall be subject to Table 19-19.1. 
Table 19-19.1 Requirements for A-Frame and T-Frame Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area 8 SF per side Maximum Number of Signs 1 per establishment in non-residential districts except CD and DB. In CD and DB, one per establishment per street front. Locational Requirements Must be located within 10 feet of the wall of the primary structure. Height Maximum height of 4 feet. Maximum Width 2 LF Illumination Permitted? No Changeable Copy Permitted? No, except chalk board signs Where Permitted Non-residential districts Permit Required? No permit required unless located on a public sidewalk or right-of-way. If located on a public sidewalk or right-of-way, a right-of-way usage permit is required.  

T-Frame Sign
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-20 - Pedestrian Wayfinding Signs 
19-20.1  Pedestrian wayfinding signs may be permitted in accordance with an approved Town wayfinding program. 
19-20.2  Pedestrian wayfinding signs may be permitted in accordance with an approved Town wayfinding program. 
Table 19-20.1 Requirements for Pedestrian Wayfinding Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area 2 SF Where Permitted Within or adjacent to CD and DB districts on private property or within Town rights-of-way subject to Town approval. Permit Required? Yes  
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-21 - Fence Screening Signs 
19-21.1  The fence or gate to which a fence screening sign is attached shall meet the requirements of section 14-1. 
19-21.2  Fence screening signs shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-21.1. 
Table 19-21.1 Requirement for Fence Screening Signs 
Standard Requirement Height The maximum height shall be limited by the height of the fence and be subject to the maximum height requirements of section 14-1. Illumination Permitted? No Where Permitted All zoning districts provided there is an active building permit on file for the site at which the fence screening is located. Permit Required? No  
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-22 - Pole Banner Signs 
19-22.1  Pole banner signs must be located on lighted utility poles on private property and may not overhang onto adjacent public or private property. 
19-22.2  Permission must be obtained from both the property owner upon which the light pole is located and the light pole owner, if different. 
19-22.3  Pole banner signs shall be limited to cloth, flexible plastic, vinyl, or similar material, and shall not be made of paper, poster board, foam, card board, wood, aluminum, or rigid plastics. 
19-22.4  Pole banners must be installed in a secure manner using pole banner brackets. 
19-22.5  The requirements of this section do not apply to Town-owned or sponsored pole banner signs located within the right-of-way or upon Town-owned property. 
19-22.6  Pole banner signs shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-22.1. 
Table 19-22.1 Requirement for Pole Banner Signs 
Standard Requirement Maximum Sign Area 15 SF with a maximum horizontal sign width of 2.5 feet and a maximum vertical sign length of 6 feet. Maximum Number of Signs 2 per light pole. If 2 signs are used instead of 1, the signs must be situated directly side-by-side. Minimum Vertical Clearance 8 feet above a walking surface. 
14 feet above a parking area. 
Shall not hang over a travel lane. 
Minimum of 3 feet below any luminaries from where a ballast connects to a pole. Height The maximum height of the top of the flag and its supporting bracket is 20 feet or the height of the nearest roof line, whichever is less. Where Permitted Non-residential districts. Permit Required? Yes  

Pole Banner Sign
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-23 - Governmental Signs and Flags 
19-23.1  Any governmental flag that is torn or tattered shall be in violation of this Ordinance and shall be removed. 
19-23.2  Governmental signs and flags shall be subject to the requirements of Table 19-23.1. 
Table 19-23.1 Requirements for Governmental Signs and Flags 
Standard Requirement Setback Requirements May not be located within the right-of-way unless authorized by the Town or State. Illumination Permitted? In accordance with subsection 19-3.3. Where Permitted All zoning districts Permit Required? No  
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
19-24 - Substitution Clause 
19-24.1  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, noncommercial copy may be substituted for commercial copy or other noncommercial copy on any sign that is permissible under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
ARTICLE 20. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 

20-1 - General Provisions 
20-1.1  Scope of provisions. Except as provided in this section, no application for a building/zoning permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvement, or use a plot plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
20-1.2  Off-street parking required. Off-street automobile parking or storage shall be provided for every establishment and every dwelling on every lot as required herein. 
    All zoning districts shall conform to the requirements of this section with the exception that no off-street parking will be required for developments located as follows excluding developments listed in subsection 12-2.4(F): 
(A)  Lots on the south side of Shepard Street from its beginning in the 700 block to South 9th Street. 
(B)  Lots on the south side of Evans Street from South 4th Street to South 7th Street. 
(C)  Lots on the north side of Shepard Street and the south side of Evans Street from South 7th Street to South 8th Street. 
(D)  Lots on the north side of Evans Street and the south side of Arendell Street from South 4th Street to South 10th Street, to exclude the North Carolina Railroad property identified as Tax #638620718127. 
(E)  Lots on the north side of Arendell Street from North 4th Street east to the NC State Port. 
(F)  Lots on the north side of Bridges Street from North 4th Street east to the water. 
(G)  Lots fronting on Arendell Street, including the wedge lots, from North 4th Street to North 9th Street. 
(H)  Lots on the north side of Arendell Street and the south side of Bridges Street from North 9th Street to North 12th Street. 
20-1.3  Combined lots permissible. The required parking space for any number of separate establishments may be combined in one (1) lot, but the required spaces assigned to one (1) establishment may not be assigned to another establishment at the same time or any other time, except that one-half (1/2) of the parking spaces required for establishments such as churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to an establishment which will be closed at nights or on Sundays. 
(A)  If the required automobile parking spaces cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the Administrator may permit such spaces to be provided on other off-street property, provided such space lies within four hundred (400) feet of the main entrance of such principal use and is in the same or a less restrictive zone, and provided that if the property on which the principal use is conducted is located within the corporate limits, the property on which the off-site parking is located must be within the city. 
(B)  When off-street parking is provided on a lot other than the lot on which the principal use is situated, the building/zoning permit application for the principal use shall include a signed instrument duly executed and acknowledge lot, parcel, or tract of land that will be used in connection with the principal use. The applicant shall deposit the necessary fee and, upon the issuance of a building permit, the Land Use Administrator shall cause said instrument to be registered in the office of the register of deeds. 
(C)  Extension of parking spaces into a residential district. Required customer and employee parking spaces may extend up to one hundred twenty (120) feet in a residential zoning district, provided that: 
(1)  The parking space adjoins a commercial, office/professional, or industrial district; 
(2)  Has its only access to the property from upon the same street or alley as the property in the commercial, office/professional, or industrial district for which it provides the required parking space and has no access from any point within the residential zone; and 
(3)  Is separated from abutting properties or streets in the residential district by a planted buffer strip as described in section 15-1. 
(4)  No structure shall be constructed. 
20-1.4  Exceptions and modifications. Whenever a building not having off-street parking facilities in an amount herein specified is increased in floor area by fifty (50) percent or less, parking spaces shall be provided to meet the new requirements hereof as though the addition were a new building. If the floor area is increased more than fifty (50) percent, parking spaces shall be provided and maintained for the building and any addition thereto. If a building is modified and its parking lot contains ten (10) foot by twenty (20) foot parking spaces, the parking spaces may be reconfigured in accordance with section 20-2. In the event of building destruction and rebuilding, parking spaces must be provided in accordance with section 20-3 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 6, 10-8-2002; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 19, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-72, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 25, 6-11-2013) 
20-2 - Plan and Design Standards 
20-2.1  Required area for each parking space. Each automobile parking space shall contain not less than one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet plus adequate maneuvering space and shall be not less than nine (9) feet in width and not less than eighteen (18) feet in length. 
20-2.2  Drainage, construction, and maintenance. All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets. All such areas shall be at times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof in a clean and serviceable condition. 
20-2.3  Separation from walkways, sidewalks, and streets. All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device to prevent vehicles from hanging over these use areas. 
20-2.4  Design standards for parking areas. All parking facilities shall conform to the design standards listed in Appendix IV. 
20-2.5  [Provision of joined parking lots.] Whenever possible, joined parking lots shall be provided, at the discretion of the Administrator. 
20-3 - Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required 
    For any use or class of uses not specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities for a similar use or class of uses specifically mentioned shall apply. For the purposes of this section, the number of employees shall be computed based on the basis of the largest number of persons to be employed on the largest shift. 
20-3.1  Residential and related uses. 
(A)  Apartment/multifamily dwelling. Two (2) spaces per unit; plus one space for every six (6) units for overflow. 
(B)  Single-family residence. Two (2) spaces. 
(C)  Boarding house. One (1) space for each two (2) rooms rented. 
(D)  Home occupation. Two (2) spaces in addition to residence requirement. 
(E)  Family care home. One (1) space for each two (2) beds plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees plus one (1) space per staff doctor. 
(F)  Dormitories. One (1) space for each three (3) residents. 
(G)  Manufactured home park. Two (2) spaces for each manufactured home stall plus one (1) space for every six (6) units for overflow. 
(H)  Two-family dwelling. Two (2) spaces per unit. 
(I)  Business residence. Two (2) spaces for the residential use plus parking to meet the minimum requirements of the particular business. 
20-3.2  Public and semi-public uses. 
(A)  Hospital. One (1) space for each two (2) beds intended for patient use, plus one (1) space for each staff or visiting doctor, two (2) spaces for each three (3) employees. 
(B)  Clinic. Four (4) spaces for each doctor plus one (1) space for each employee. 
(C)  Nursing home. One (1) space for each five (5) beds intended for patient use; plus one (1) space for each three (3) employees. 
(D)  Assisted living facilities. One (1) space per three (3) beds plus one (1) space per two (2) employees. 
(E)  Churches. One (1) space for each six (6) seats in the sanctuary. 
(F)  Elementary and junior high school. One (1) space for each classroom and administrative employee plus five (5) visitor spaces. 
(G)  Senior high school. One (1) space for each ten (10) students, plus one (1) space for each classroom and administrative office employee. 
(H)  Institution of higher learning. One (1) space for every six hundred (600) square feet of academic space plus one (1) space for every four (4) seats in the principal assembly room, plus one (1) space for each employee. 
(I)  Stadium. One (1) space for each four (4) seats. 
(J)  Auditorium/theater. One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the largest assembly room. 
(K)  Public/private clubs. One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area or one (1) space for every six (6) members, whichever is greater. 
(L)  Public utility building/use and governmental building. One (1) space for each employee. 
(M)  Day care center, child or adult. One (1) space for each employee plus four (4) spaces for drive-in, off-street drop-off, and pickup. 
(N)  Library, museum, and art gallery. One (1) space for each three (3) seats for patron use or one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is more. 
(O)  Emergency shelter mission. One (1) space for each employee/volunteer on the largest shift plus ten (10) percent of the seating capacity. 
(P)  Bus station, terminal. One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of nonstorage floor area. Space will also be provided for off-street loading and unloading of all commercial buses. This loading and unloading space shall have minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet by sixty (60) feet and an overhead clearance of fifteen (15) feet in height above the alley or street grade. 
20-3.3  Business uses. 
(A)  Tourist home, hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, motor inn. One (1) space for each room to be rented plus one (1) additional space for every two (2) employees. 
(B)  Office other than medical. One (1) space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area. 
(C)  Medical office/clinic. One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. 
(D)  Financial institution. One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees. 
(E)  Automobile service station or repair garage. Three (3) spaces for each grease or wash rack and one (1) space for each two (2) employees, but no fewer than five (5) spaces (these spaces are required exclusive of vehicle service areas). 
(F)  Funeral home. One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the assembly room or chapel plus five (5) spaces for funeral vehicles plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees. 
(G)  Retail uses. One (1) space for each two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet of gross floor area. 
(H)  Shopping centers. One (1) space for each two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet of gross leasable retail floor area. 
(I)  Recreation use. One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area, plus three (3) spaces per tennis/racquetball court, plus four (4) spaces per basketball court, plus one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet pool and deck area. 
(J)  Restaurants. One (1) space for each four (4) seats or one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is less. 
(K)  Restaurants, drive-in. One (1) space for each four (4) seats or one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is less, plus a minimum of fifteen (15) spaces for drive-in service. 
(L)  Marina and/or boat storage. Parking spaces equal to sixty (60) percent of the number of boats for which facilities for dry storage are available plus one (1) space for each two (2) wet slips plus one (1) space for each employee. 
(M)  Personal services. One (1) space per usable station, plus one (1) space per two (2) stations for waiting, plus one (1) space per employee or one (1) space per two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet of gross floor area, which[ever] is more. 
(N)  Adult establishment. One-half (.5) space times (X) the maximum occupancy load allowed by the building code plus one (1) space per two (2) employees. 
(O)  Bar/Cocktail lounge. One-half (.5) space times (X) the maximum occupancy load allowed by the building code plus one (1) space per two (2) employees. 
(P)  Campground. One (1) space per site plus parking for other uses associated with the establishment plus one (1) space per six (6) sites for overflow. 
(Q)  Crisis response ministry center. One (1) space per four hundred and fifty (450) square feet of gross floor area. 
(R)  Dry cleaning/laundry establishment. One (1) space per two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet. 
(S)  Flea/farmer's market (open air). One (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square foot lot area used for storage, display or sales. 
(T)  Kennel. One (1) space per employee plus five (5) spaces for visitors. 
(U)  Massage parlor. One-half (.5) times (X) the maximum occupancy load allowed by the building code plus one (1) space per two (2) employees. 
(V)  Retail, low volume sales (i.e. furniture stores, carpet stores, manufactured home sales, boat sales, car sales, garden center). One (1) space per four hundred fifty (450) square feet of gross floor area. 
(W)  Studio (art, photograph). One (1) space per four hundred fifty (450) square feet floor area. 
(X)  Taxi stand. One (1) space per two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Y)  Outdoor vending self-service kiosk. One (1) space per fifty (50) square feet of kiosk area. 
(Z)  Freestanding manufactured ice vending machine. Two (2) spaces plus one (1) handicapped space marked with either stripes or parking stops. 
20-3.4  Recreational uses. 
(A)  Bowling alley. Three (3) spaces per lane plus requirements for any other use associated with the establishment such as a restaurant, etc. 
(B)  Golf course. Three (3) spaces per hole plus requirements for any other use associated with the establishment such as a restaurant, etc. 
(C)  Outdoor recreation area, commercial (driving range, miniature golf, tennis, public pool, etc.). One (1) space for each three (3) persons able to use such facility at its maximum capacity plus ten (10) spaces for waiting plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees. 
20-3.5  Industrial, warehouse, and wholesale uses. 
(A)  Manufacturing, processing, fabrication assembly, distributions, bottling works, machine shop, metal shop, woodworking shop, plumbing shop, contractors yard, building material storage, junk yard, medical/research laboratories, warehouse, electrical shop, printing shop, roofing shop. One (1) space per six hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area other than office or retail plus one space per two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet of office area and one (1) space per two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet of retail area. 
(B)  Wholesale establishments. One (1) space per nine hundred (900) square feet of gross floor area other than office or retail plus one (1) space per two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet of office area and one (1) space per two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet of retail area. 
20-3.6  Special situations. Special situations or situations to which none of the above can be applied to shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment based on the occupancy restrictions of the use. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 9-14-2004; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 20, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2007-40, § 9, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 2007-50, § 7, 12-11-2007 ; Ord. No. 2008-27, §§ 26, 27, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 2010-07, §§ 33, 34, 3-9-2010; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 26, 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 3, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 2018-O-22, § 3, 12-11-2018) 
20-4 - Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space 
    Every building or structure used for business, trade, or industry hereafter erected except in the CD district shall provide space as indicated herein for loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or off the public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or if there is no alley, to the street. For the purposes of this Ordinance, an off-street loading and unloading space shall have minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet by sixty (60) feet and an overhead clearance of fifteen (15) feet in height above the alley or street grade. 
20-4.1  Retail business. One (1) space for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor space or major fraction thereof but not to exceed two (2) spaces. 
20-4.2  Wholesale and industrial. One (1) space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor space or major fraction thereof but not to exceed three (3) spaces. 
ARTICLE 21. - COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Coastal Area Management, G.S. 113A-100 et seq.; implementation and enforcement programs, G.S. 113A-117. 

21-1 - Purposes 
    The purposes of this Article are to establish: 
21-1.1  Procedures to be followed in issuing minor development permits in AECs within the town's jurisdiction including methods of coordinating with other local permits; 
21-1.2  Scope and coverage of the program, including the geographic extent of jurisdiction of the town management program; 
21-1.3  Requirements of permit-letting agencies, including a description of the criteria to be used in choosing the permit officer; 
21-1.4  Methods of identifying and taking into account projects and impacts of regional, state, and national concern, where applicable; 
21-1.5  Procedures to ensure that the program is consistent with the approved land use plan for the town. 
21-2 - Designated Local Official 
21-2.1  Creation of position. The designated local official of the town Coastal Area Management Act permit management plan shall be the Land Use Administrator of the town. The position of minor development permit officer is hereby created. 
21-2.2  Qualifications. The minor development permit officer shall have at least a high school diploma or equivalent and some experience with construction in a coastal area. Within one (1) year after appointment to the position, the minor development permit officer shall successfully complete the training course offered by the Coastal Resources Commission (commission), the NC Department of Environment and Natural Resources and the Division of Community Assistance. 
21-2.3  Appointment. The Land Use Administrator of the town is hereby appointed as the minor development permit officer. 
21-2.4  Duties generally. 
(A)  The permit officer shall administer and enforce in duly designated areas of environmental concern the Coastal Area Management Act of 1974, the minor development permit process as established in this Article, all applicable local ordinances, and all other guidelines and standards established by the commission and the City Council pursuant to the Coastal Area Management Act. The permit officer shall be available both in an advisory capacity and as a liaison between major permit applicants and the commission for the purpose of facilitating efficient disposition of major permit applications. The permit officer shall assist in identifying and assessing projects of greater than local concern (e.g., projects of regional, state, and national concern). The permit officer shall also be responsible for implementing any procedures recommended by the City Council for the purpose of coordinating the Coastal Area Management Act minor development permit with other locally required permits. Such locally required permits and approvals include, but are not limited to, plumbing permits, electric permits, building permits, septic tank permits, zoning permits, and sand dune permits. 
(B)  The permit officer shall immediately notify the City Council of any suit filed against the town because of minor development permit disposition or other functions of the Coastal Area Management Act management program. 
(C)  The permit officer shall inform the City Council of his intent to initiate any suit arising out of the Coastal Area Management Act management program. The initiation of any suit requires City Council approval. 
(D)  The permit officer shall use his knowledge of the Coastal Area Management Act program and consultation with other permitting agencies to assess the regional or national impact of certain projects and to so inform the City Council and the Coastal Resources Commission. 
21-2.5  Records, reports. 
(A)  The minor development permit officer shall prepare and forward to the commission and the secretary a quarterly summary of all permit applications and dispositions. 
(B)  The officer shall submit written reports summarizing permit applications, dispositions, and recommendations or comments to the City Council monthly. He shall appear before the City Council in September of each year to present a full report on the operation of the Coastal Area Management Act permit system as it affects the town. 
(C)  He shall keep correct and comprehensive records of all transactions related to minor development permit disposition and shall maintain such records so long as any part of the structure or entity to which it relates remains in existence; or, in the case of denials, for a period of ten (10) years. 
(D)  The applications shall be numbered consecutively according to a two-part number: a two-digit part noting the year separated from the four-digit counting part by a hyphen (e.g., the first application in 1978 would be 78-0001). A permit shall bear the number of the application. 
21-2.6  Availability. The permit officer shall have an office at the Morehead City Municipal Building. He shall hold regular office hours. These hours shall be posted in the City Clerk's office. The permit officer shall be accessible to the extent practical to Morehead City citizens seeking minor development permits. (Morehead City Municipal Building, 706 Arendell Street, P.O. Drawer M, Morehead City, NC 28557, phone 252-726-6848). 
21-2.7  Support personnel. The permit officer shall share a full-time secretary who will maintain the office during regular business hours. 
21-3 - Minor Development Permits 
21-3.1  Application. An application for a permit for minor development shall consist of filing the following with the secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Division of Community Assistance, and the permit office: 
(A)  A completed application using the applicable form adopted and approved by the commission; 
(B)  A single check or money order payable to the permit-letting agency in the amount specified by the commission. Monies so collected shall be used only in the administration of the permit program, specifically including the cost of required public notices and hearings. 
21-3.2  Return of application. The permit officer shall return incomplete, insufficient, or unauthorized applications within seven (7) working days. The thirty-day period for consideration of the application shall begin to run upon receipt. The time period will continue to run in the case of an incomplete or insufficient application until the permit officer returns it with reasons for the rejection in writing to the applicant for correction of the deficiencies. The time period will begin to run when a corrected application is returned to the permit officer. An application received requesting a permit for an activity which constitutes major development shall be returned by the permit officer with appropriate instructions for submitting the application to the commission. 
21-3.3  Procedural considerations. 
(A)  The permit officer shall refer the file of all denials to the town Board of Adjustment. If the Board agrees with the permit officer, the permit stands denied. Appeals from the town Board of Adjustment shall be to the Coastal Resources Commission. 
(B)  The permit officer shall also submit proposals he deems appropriate for conditioned grant to the Board of Adjustment. He shall make available to the Board of Adjustment the file, his recommendations, and any other relevant information. The conditions approved or suggested by the Board of Adjustment shall be attached to the grant. 
(C)  Whenever it is appropriate, the permit officer shall confer with the county sanitarian, the erosion-control officer, the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, the Division of Community Assistance, the Corps of Engineers, and other appropriate permitting agencies before making a decision. 
(D)  The procedures and requirements of this section shall be conducted in a manner consistent with the expeditious disposition of minor development permits required by the Coastal Area Management Act. The procedures shall take place within the time limitations and extensions stated in the act. 
21-3.4  Disposition. Disposition of the application must take place within twenty-five (25) days unless the permit officer gives written notice by registered mail of one (10 additional twenty-five-day extension in exceptional cases for proper evaluation of the application. Statutory grounds upon which the permit officer bases the denial, conditioned grant, or return of application must be set out in writing. One (1) copy must be maintained by the permit officer as required by subsection 21-2.5 and one (1) copy must be given to the applicant, either in person or by registered mail. 
21-3.5  Grant. The grant of a minor development permit shall be made only if consideration of the application results in none of the appropriate findings listed in G.S. 113A-120(a)(1)-(8) and shall be displayed on the premises while the permitted activities are being accomplished. 
21-3.6  Conditioned grant. The grant of a minor development permit may be conditioned upon the acceptance by the applicant of certain reasonable conditions as set out by the permit officer to protect the public interest with respect to the appropriate factors enumerated in G.S. 113A-120(a)(1)-(8). The applicant must sign the conditioned grant as an acceptance of the amendments of the proposed project plans in a manner consistent with the conditions set out by the permit officer before the permit shall become effective. 
21-3.7  Passive grant. Failure of the permit officer to approve or deny a properly completed filed application, or to give notice of an extension beyond the initial twenty-five-day disposition period shall result in a passive grant. A passive grant shall have the full force and effect of a grant. 
State Law reference- Permits for minor developments under expedited procedures, G.S. 113A-121; grant or denial of permits, G.S. 113A-120. 
21-4 - Implementation of Coastal Area Management Act Minor Development Permit 
    Local permits and inspections required prior to the institution of Coastal Area Management Act minor development permits shall continue to be required and shall be issued and considered in coordination with Coastal Area Management Act permits. Such existing permits include, but are not limited to, plumbing permits, electrical permits, building permits, septic tank permits, zoning permits, and sand dune permits. Whenever other local permits are required, the permit officer shall consult with the agencies responsible for such permits, and comments of this consultation shall be noted in the record. The permit officer is not bound by the decisions or comments of other agencies. 
21-5 - Appeal of Minor Development Permit Disposition 
21-5.1  Parties. Any person directly affected by the decision of the permit officer, including the secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources and the Division of Community Assistance may, within twenty (20) days after the permit officer's final disposition, request in writing a hearing before the Coastal Resources Commission. The hearing before the commission shall be a quasi-judicial hearing conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Coastal Area Management Act, any applicable rules and regulations adopted by the commission, and any other state laws applicable to such procedures. 
21-5.2  Record forwarded to commission. Upon receiving notice from the commission of such an appeal, the permit officer shall promptly forward to the commission the entire record compiled in relation to the minor permit disposition that is the subject of the appeal. 
21-5.3  Record forwarded to City Council. Upon receipt of notice of appeal from the commission, the permit officer shall give notice to the City Council and forward to it a copy of the record as submitted to the commission and any other relevant information. 
21-5.4  Appeal pending. No action for which a minor development permit is required shall be taken while appeal of the permit officer's final disposition of that permit request is pending. 
State Law reference- Procedure applicable to appeals of permit applications, G.S. 113A-122. 
21-6 - Injunctive Relief and Penalties 
21-6.1  Injunctive relief. Upon violation of the provisions adopted by the City Council pursuant to the Coastal Area Management Act relating to the issuance of minor development permits, the permit officer may, either before or after the institution of proceedings for the collection of any penalty imposed by the Coastal Area Management Act for such violation, institute a civil action in the general court of justice in the name of the City Council upon the relation of the permit officer for injunctive relief to restrain the violation and for such other or further relief as the court shall deem proper. Neither the institution of the action nor any of the proceedings thereon shall relieve any party to such proceedings from any penalty prescribed by the Coastal Area Management Act for any violation of same. 
21-6.2  Penalties. Any person adjudged guilty of knowingly and willfully undertaking any development requiring a minor development permit without acquiring such a permit, or of conduct exceeding the authority of a permit granted, or of failure to observe the agreed modifications of a conditioned grant, or of violation of any other applicable regulations adopted by the City Council or the commission pursuant to the Coastal Area Management Act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and for each violation shall be liable for a penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or shall be imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. In addition, if any person continues or further commits any of the above violations after written notice from the permit officer, the court may determine that each day during which the violation continues or is repeated constitutes a separate violation subject to the foregoing penalties. 
21-6.3  Notice. The permit officer shall notify the secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources and the Division of Community Assistance of any civil action undertaken by or against such officer under the Coastal Area Management Act. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 113A-126. 
21-7 - Amendment of Article 
21-7.1  Notice and public hearing. Amendment of this Article shall be in accordance with the notice and public hearing requirement set forth in the Coastal Area Management Act and the commission's "Criteria for Local Implementation and Enforcement Plans" pertaining to the adoption of the original program. 
21-7.2  Request to waive formal amendment requirements. Whenever a proposed amendment is deemed sufficiently insignificant by the City Council, that body may petition the commission for a waiver of formal hearing and notice requirements. 
21-7.3  Commission approval. Upon local acceptance of any amendment, the amendment shall be submitted to the commission for approval. Upon commission approval, such amendment shall be adopted as a part of this Article. 
21-7.4  Recommendations by permit officer. The permit officer shall bring to the City Council's attention annually or more frequently recommendations for modifications or amendments to this Article. 
State Law reference- Implementation and enforcement programs, G.S. 113A-117. 
21-8 - Failure to Properly Enforce and Administer Article 
21-8.1  Procedure. Upon receipt of notification from the commission of deficiencies in administration and enforcement of this Article, the permit officer and a committee appointed by the City Council shall conduct an investigation and prepare an appropriate response to the alleged deficiencies set forth in the commission's notice. 
21-8.2  Notification to the commission. If the commission's charges are found to be valid, within thirty (30) days of notification by the commission, the City Council and the permit officer shall inform the commission of the findings of the investigation, shall assess the willingness and ability to modify the situation resulting in the violation, and shall state the means by which the permit officer and City Council intend to avoid similar violations in the future. 
21-8.3  Disagreement between City Council and commission. If the City Council and permit officer find the commission's charges to be without grounds, they shall so inform the commission. If the Coastal Resources Commission disagrees with that finding, the City Council may at that time request a hearing before the commission or take other appropriate action within ninety (90) days after receipt of the commission's notification of the violation to come to some mutually acceptable solution with the commission. If no such mutually acceptable solution has been achieved within the ninety-day period, the City Council and permit officer shall automatically relinquish authority to issue permits for minor development. 
ARTICLE 22. - NUISANCES AND ABANDONED OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES 

22-1 - Violations; Remedies 
22-1.1  [Violations, abatement.] The procedures set forth in sections 22-7 through 22-9 ..... shall be in addition to any other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of public nuisances and shall not prevent the town from proceeding in a criminal action against any person violating such provisions of this article. The town may choose to abate any public nuisance or violation of the Town Code of Ordinances through any of the abatement methods set forth in the Town Code or in other local, state or federal law, and nothing contained in this article shall be construed as limiting, prejudicing or adversely affecting the town's ability to concurrently or consecutively use any of those proceedings as the town may deem are applicable. Proceeding under this section will not preclude the town from proceeding under other sections of this article. Whenever the enforcement officer determines that any condition exists in violation of the provisions of this article, he/she may take enforcement action pursuant to this section. 
22-1.2  [Enforcement.] Each day that a violation continues or that an order is not obeyed shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The provisions of this Article and all orders issued pursuant thereto may be enforced also by mandatory or prohibitory injunction or order of abatement from a court of competent jurisdiction or by any other equitable remedy as provided by G.S. 160A-175. 
22-1.3  Investigation. The enforcement officer may enter any property or premises at all times to perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this article whenever the enforcement officer has cause to believe a violation of provisions of this article is occurring, provided that: 
(1)  The enforcement officer shall present proper credentials, state the reason for entry and request entry from the owner or occupant. 
(2)  The enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner of unoccupied property or premises, inform the owner of the reasons for entry and request entry. 
(3)  The enforcement officer shall not enter any property or premises in the absence of permission to enter, unless an inspection warrant has been issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
22-1.4  No duty to enforce. Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the town to enforce prohibitions in this article against all or any properties which may violate the article. In the town's prosecutorial discretion, and as the town's resources permit, this article may be enforced only as to a limited number of problem properties per year. Nothing in this section or the absence of any similar provisions from any other town law shall be construed to impose a duty upon the town to enforce such other provision of law. 
22-1.5  Costs of enforcement. In any civil, criminal or administrative appeal, hearing or action commenced by the town under this article, the town shall be entitled to recover from the defendant in such action reasonable attorney's fees, costs of suit, any other costs of enforcement, including, but not limited to, inspection costs and cleanup or abatement costs. 
22-1.6  Emergency cleanup or abatement. When the town enforcement officer or his/her duly authorized agents or representatives find and determine that the severity of the violation warrants immediate action, he/she may clean up or abate violation thereof. If the enforcement officer or his/her duly authorized agents or representatives present themselves for such purposes and are denied access to, the cost of such cleanup or abatement may be recovered by the town in a civil action. Such emergency cleanup or abatement will not relieve the person from further action which may be taken by the town council or its duly authorized agents and representatives, including, but not limited to, liability for any violations of this article or any other applicable provisions of this article of state law and local ordinances. 
22-1.7  Nonemergency abatement by the town. Following determination by the town that a nuisance should be abated by the town, the notices required by law shall be given and a hearing shall be conducted as provided herein (see sections 22-8 through 22-9). Following abatement, the costs of abatement including those authorized by this article shall be confirmed by the town council as provided in the General Statutes of North Carolina and thereafter placed as a lien on the subject property. The proceedings provided by the General Statutes of North Carolina are not exclusive, and the town may abate by all other legal means available to it. 
22-1.8  Conclusive notice. Mailing of notice of any hearing or order under this Article 22 to the owners of real property concerned at the owners' names and addresses as shown on the last equalized roll upon which town taxes are collected shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper persons and addresses for mailing of such notices, and the failure of any or all of the addresses to receive the notice shall not invalidate any of the proceedings. Further, the posting of the notice of hearing or order pursuant to this article shall be conclusively deemed to be adequate notice to any and all occupants, users or possessors of the property or its contents, and the failure of any such occupant, user or possessor to see, read, understand or otherwise receive the notice shall not invalidate any of the proceedings. 
22-1.9  Liability. Neither the town, nor any person acting on behalf of the town in the enforcement of this article, may be held to answer in a civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, junked, lost or stolen vehicle, or other property or materials, or personal property of any kind for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 28-38, 1-8-2008) 
22-2 - Maintenance of Buildings, Land; Proper Disposal of Refuse; Cleanup of Refuse Dropped from Vehicles 
22-2.1  Every owner and every occupant or other person in control of any building or land in the town limits, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, including vacant property, shall keep the same in a clean and orderly condition and shall deposit refuse for collection in accordance with the provisions of this article and the regulations of the town manager adopted in conformity herewith. 
22-2.2  No persons shall throw, drop, or deposit or cause to be thrown, dropped, or deposited on any land in the town's municipal limit, vacant or occupied, including specifically streets, alleys, public areas, including waters adjacent to seawalls and all waters under the jurisdiction of the town, including the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the same, any waste, including, but not limited to, refuse, garbage, ashes, rubbish, dead animals or fish, paper, drinking cups, broken glass, tacks, brush, grass, weeds, and anything injurious or potentially injurious to health. If any person, while transporting or hauling or causing to be transported or hauled such rubbish or material or earth excavation, coal or other material shall throw, drop, or deposit or cause to be thrown, dropped, or deposited such rubbish or material from the body of any vehicle in violation of the provisions of this subsection, such person must daily clean up and remove such rubbish or material in a manner satisfactory to the Enforcement Officer. Upon such owner failing to do so, the town may clean up and remove such rubbish and material and collect the cost of such cleaning up and removal from such persons. 
(Ord. No. 2003-10, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 21, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 39, 40, 1-8-2008) 
22-3 - Conditions Constituting Nuisance Generally 
    The existence of any of the following conditions: (1) on any lot of one (1) acre or less that is located within an approved subdivision that has not been left in its natural state; and (2) all other lots and tracts would fall under this regulation only if a defined nuisance occurs within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter property line, unless the nuisance is deemed to be a public health hazard, or is declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or safety and to constitute a public nuisance within the corporate limits: 
22-3.1  Property maintenance; public nuisances. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any owner or other person in control of any property or premises to keep or maintain property, premises, or rights-of-way in such manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist: 
(A)  Accumulation of junk that is determined by the Enforcement Officer to constitute a fire hazard or to be detrimental to human life, health or safety; 
(B)  Any accumulation of garbage, rubbish, refuse or recyclable items that is offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitation of therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health; or determined by the Enforcement Officer to constitute a fire hazard or to be detrimental to human life, health or safety; 
(C)  Oil, grease, paint, other petroleum products, hazardous materials, volatile chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fungicides or waste (solid, liquid or gaseous) which is determined by an Enforcement Officer to constitute a fire or environmental hazard, or to be detrimental to human life, health or safety; 
(D)  Swimming pool, pond, spa, other body of water, or excavation which is abandoned, unattended, unsanitary, empty, not securely fenced, or which is determined by the Enforcement Officer to be detrimental to life, health or safety; and 
(E)  Any premises which detrimentally impacts the surrounding neighborhood because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, or unreasonably overgrown vegetation, or is unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used or is not secured or is improperly secured and which is determined by the Enforcement Officer to be detrimental to life, health or safety. 
(F)  Any graffiti or marks made by drawing, painting, writing, inscribing, or otherwise defacing any real or personal property without the prior consent of the owner or person in control of the premises. 
22-3.2  Responsibility for property maintenance. The owner, occupant, lessee and tenant of any property within the city limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be responsible for the maintenance of property and premises in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Section and other provisions of the Code of the Town of Morehead City. 
(Ord. No. 2003-10, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 21, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 41-48, 1-8-2008; Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 4-8-2014) 
22-4 - Weeds, Noxious Growth-General Restrictions 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any lot or land or any part thereof in the town's municipal limit, or within the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction, to permit or maintain on any such lot or land any growth of weeds, grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than eight (8) inches on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, trees, grass or brush. It shall also be unlawful for any such person to cause, suffer or allow poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants detrimental to health to grow on any such lot or land in such manner that any part of such ivy, ragweed or other poisonous or harmful weed shall extend upon, cover, overhang or border any public place, or allow the seed, pollen or other poisonous particles or emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into any public place. 
(Ord. No. 2003-10, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 2008-02, § 49, 1-8-2008) 
22-5 - Same-Duty of Owner, Occupant to Cut and Remove 
    It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or land to cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed all weeds, grass or other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of sections 22-2 and 22-4. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 50, 1-8-2008) 
22-6 - Investigations 
    The Enforcement Officer, upon notice from any person of the existence of any of the conditions described in section 22-2, or upon his own volition if he sees such conditions, shall cause to be made by the appropriate county health department official or town official such investigation as may be necessary to determine whether, in fact, such conditions exist as to constitute a public nuisance as declared in section 22-1. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 51, 1-8-2008) 
22-7 - Notice and Order to Abate; Appeal 
22-7.1  Upon a determination that conditions constituting a public nuisance exist, the Enforcement Officer shall give written notice to the owner, occupant or person in possession of the premises in question of the conditions constituting such public nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement thereof within fifteen (15) days from the receipt of such written notice. Notice shall be delivered personally or may be mailed, certified mail, return receipt requested, and the date of mailing shall be the date of giving of the notice. If the notice cannot be served in either fashion, service of the notice shall be made by publication once in a newspaper published in the county, and the date of publication shall be the date of notice. 
22-7.2  Any person receiving a notice under the provisions of subsection 22-7.1 above may appeal from the order contained therein by giving written notice of such appeal to the City Manager within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice from the Enforcement Officer or from the posting thereof, whichever is earlier, or, if the notice is served by publication, within ten (10) days of the publication thereof. All appeals will be heard by the City Manager. The appellant may be represented at such hearing by counsel and may present evidence. Hearings shall be had within thirty (30) days of the date notice of appeal is given and a decision shall be made within ten (10) days following the hearing. The City Manager may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Enforcement Officer. During the appeal process, the order of the Enforcement Officer shall be suspended. The order may be served in any manner provided for service of notice in subsection 22-7.1. 
22-7.3  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 22-7.1, 22-7.2 and 22-8.1, the Town may notify a chronic violator of the Town's nuisance ordinance that, if the violator's property is found to be in violation of the ordinance, the Town shall, without further notice in the calendar year in which notice has been given, take action to remedy the violation, and the expense of the action shall become a lien upon the property and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. The notice shall be sent by certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 52, 53, 1-8-2008; Ord. No. 2009-45, § 1, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 9, 3-9-2010) 
22-8 - Abatement by Town-Performance 
22-8.1  If any person, having been ordered by the Enforcement Officer or by the City Manager to abate such a public nuisance, fails, neglects or refuses to abate or remove the condition constituting the nuisance within fifteen (15) days from the service of the order, the Enforcement Officer or City Manager shall cause the condition to be removed or otherwise remedied by having employees of the town go upon the premises and remove or otherwise abate such nuisance under the supervision of an officer or employee designated by the City Manager. 
22-8.2  Any person who has been ordered to abate a public nuisance may, within the time allowed herein, request the town in writing to remove such condition, the cost of which shall be paid by the person making such request. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 54, 1-8-2008) 
22-9 - Same-Recovery of Cost 
22-9.1  The actual cost incurred by the town in removing or otherwise remedying a public nuisance shall be charged to the owner of the lot or parcel of land, and it shall be the duty of the tax collector to mail a statement of such charges to the owner or other person in possession of such premises with instructions that such charges are due and payable within thirty (30) days from the receipt thereof. 
22-9.2  If charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance are not paid within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a statement of charges, such charges shall become a lien upon the land or premises where the public nuisance existed and shall be collected as unpaid taxes, as provided in G.S. 160A-193. 
22-10 - Abandoned, Nuisance, and Junked Motor Vehicles 
22-10.1  Administration. The Police Department and the Planning and Inspections Department of the Town of Morehead City shall be responsible for administrating the removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the public streets and highways within the town and on property owned by the town. The Planning and Inspections Department shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of "abandoned," "nuisance," or "junked" motor vehicles located on private property. The town may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles, and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this Article and applicable state laws. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the town police department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties. 
22-10.2  Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the term is defined in 2-2.1 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(B)  Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed. 
22-10.3  Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been determined to be declared a nuisance vehicle as defined in subsection 2-2.182 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(B)  Upon investigation, the town building inspector may determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed. 
22-10.4  Junked motor vehicle regulated; remove authorized. 
(A)  Except as authorized in this section, it shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered removed. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful to have more than one (1) junked motor vehicle, as defined in subsection 2-2.138 of the Unified Development Ordinance, on the premises of public or private property. Single, permitted junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location and concealment requirements of this section. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitle to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to comply with the locational requirements or the concealment requirements of this section. 
(D)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (E), upon investigation, the town building inspector may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle as defined in this Article after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood, or area appearance. The following among other relevant factors may be considered: 
(1)  Protection of property values; 
(2)  Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities; 
(3)  Indirect protection of public health and safety; 
(4)  Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and 
(5)  Promotion of the comfort, happiness, and emotional stability of area residents. 
(E)  Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicle: 
(1)  One (1) junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, can be located in the rear yard as defined by subsection 2-2.327 of the Unified Development Ordinance if the junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public street and from abutting premises by an acceptable covering. The Enforcement Officer has the authority to determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to deteriorate. The covering or enclosure must be compatible with the objectives stated in the preamble of Ordinance No. 1991-14 and must comply with all provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  More than one (1) junked motor vehicle. Any other junked motor vehicle(s) must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle(s) cannot be seen from a public street, alley, public property, or abutting property. A garage or building structure means either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been constructed in accordance with all zoning and building code regulations. 
22-10.5  Removal of abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice requirements. Except as set forth in subsection 22-10.6 below, an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail. The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to show the name(s) and address(es) to which mailed, and the date mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date (no sooner than seven (7) days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date, no sooner than seven (7) days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time. 
    With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of the junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be made to the City Council in writing, heard at a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council, and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided. 
22-10.6  Exceptions to prior notice requirement. The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice includes: 
(A)  Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, the City Council hereby determines that immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are: 
(1)  Obstructing traffic; 
(2)  Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking; 
(3)  Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone; 
(4)  Parked in loading zones; 
(5)  Parked in bus zones; or 
(6)  Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions. 
(B)  Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on town-owned property other than streets, alleys, and highways, and on private property such vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety, and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard and vehicles causing damage to public or private property. 
22-10.7  Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements. 
(A)  Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform such services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing town official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, such notice to include the following: 
(1)  The description of the removed vehicle; 
(2)  The location where the vehicle is stored; 
(3)  The violation with which the owner is charged, if any; 
(4)  The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and 
(5)  The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the removal. 
(B)  The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in subsections (1) through (5) above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his agent. 
(C)  If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given within twenty-four (24) hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be given to the registered owner within seventy-two (72) hours from the removal of the vehicle. 
(D)  Whenever an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle is removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the authorizing town official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information set forth in subsections 22-2.7(A)(1) through (5) above. 
22-10.8  Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicle. After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle, or junked motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court judge to receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 20-219.11, as amended. 
22-10.9  Redemption of vehicle during proceedings. At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violations of this Article. 
22-10.10  Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle. Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town and in accordance with Article 1 of Chapter 44A of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
22-10.11  Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property. As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner, occupant, or lessee of such property could have the vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the town from private property without a written request of the owner, occupant, or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by the town building inspector. The town may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense, or liability incurred because of the removal, storage, or sale thereof. 
22-10.12  Protection against criminal or civil liability. No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this Article. 
22-10.13  Exceptions. Nothing in this Article shall apply to any vehicle: 
(A)  Which is located in a bona fide "automobile graveyard" or "junkyard" as defined in G.S. 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act, G.S. 136-141 et seq.; 
(B)  Which is in an enclosed building; 
(C)  Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the enterprise; 
(D)  Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town; or 
(E)  Which is a junked motor vehicle, used on a regular basis for business or personal use as a motor vehicle. 
22-10.14  Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Code unless and until all towing and impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, § 22, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 55-63, 1-8-2008) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to regulate abandoned, nuisance, and junked motor vehicles, G.S. 160A-193, 160A-303, 160A-303.2. 
ARTICLE 23. - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS 

23-1 - Violations; Penalty 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the same, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the inspector duly made and served as provided in this Article, within the time specified in such order. Each day that any such failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with such order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to section 23-19, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration, or improvement or its vacation and closing, and each day that such occupancy continues after such prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute a misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. 14-4, and shall be punishable by a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) or thirty (30) days in jail or both for each offense. 
23-2 - Finding; Purpose 
23-2.1  Pursuant to G.S. 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared that there exist in the town, dwellings that are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, and other calamities; lack of ventilation, light, and sanitary facilities; and due to other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, and dangerous and detrimental to the health, safety, and morals and otherwise unfavorable to the welfare of the residents of the town. 
23-2.2  In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the town as authorized by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 6, it is the purpose of this Article to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, as expressly authorized by G.S. 160A-444. 
23-3 - Minimum Standards of Fitness for Dwellings, Dwelling Units 
    Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation or held out for use as a human habitation shall comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of sections 23-4 through 23-15. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy or use as human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit that does not comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of sections 23-4 through 23-15. The inspector may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that conditions exist at the dwelling that render it dangerous or injurious to the health of the occupants of the dwelling, the occupants of neighborhood dwellings or other residents of the town. 
23-4 - Sanitary Facilities 
23-4.1  A dwelling unit shall include its own sanitary facilities, which are in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy, and are adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste. These facilities shall utilize an approved public disposal system. 
23-4.2  All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and shall be accessible to the occupants of same. A flush toilet, a fixed basin, and tub or shower shall be located in a separate room in the dwelling unit affording privacy to the user, and such room shall have a minimum floor space of thirty (30) square feet. The lavatory and tub or shower shall have hot and cold running water. 
23-4.3  Every dwelling unit shall have an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water connected to the kitchen sink, washing machine connections, lavatory, and tub or shower. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply. 
23-4.4  Every dwelling shall have water-heating facilities that are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, or shower at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit. Such water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities required under the provisions of this Article are not in operation. 
23-5 - Food Preparation; Refuse Disposal 
23-5.1  A dwelling unit shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare, and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage where necessary. 
23-5.2  The unit shall contain the following equipment in proper operating condition: cooking stove or range and a refrigerator of appropriate size for the unit supplied by either the owner or the family, and a kitchen sink with hot and cold running water. The sink shall drain into an approved public system. Adequate space for the storage, preparation, and serving of food shall be provided. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage where necessary (e.g., garbage cans). 
23-5.3  All plumbing fixtures and appliances shall meet the standards of the state plumbing code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working order. 
23-5.4  All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed in accordance with the state electrical code. 
23-5.5  All cooking and heating equipment and facilities shall be installed in accordance with the building, gas, or electrical code and shall be maintained in a safe and good working condition. 
23-5.6  Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers, the type and location of which facilities or containers are approved by the City Council. 
23-6 - Space and Security 
23-6.1  A dwelling unit shall afford the family adequate space and security. 
23-6.2  A living room, kitchen area, and bathroom shall be present, and the dwelling unit shall contain at least one (1) sleeping or living/sleeping room of appropriate size for each two (2) persons. 
23-6.3  Exterior doors and windows accessible from outside the unit shall be lockable. 
23-6.4  Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight that can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required, or shall have other approved equivalent ventilation. 
23-6.5  Every bathroom shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an approved ventilation system. 
23-7 - Structure and Materials 
23-7.1  A dwelling unit shall be structurally sound so as not to pose any threat to the health and safety of the occupants and so as to protect the occupants from the environment. 
23-7.2  Ceilings with minimum height of seven (7) feet, six (6) inches, and walls and floors shall not have any serious defects such as severe bulging or leaning, large holes, loose surface materials, severe buckling, or noticeable movement under walking stress, missing parts, or other serious damage. The roof structure shall be firm and the roof shall be weathertight. The exterior wall structure and exterior wall surface shall not have any serious defects such as serious leaning, buckling, sagging, cracks or holes, loose siding, or other serious damage. The condition and equipment of interior stairways, halls, porches, walkways, etc., shall be such as not to present a danger of tripping or falling. Elevators shall be maintained in safe operating condition. In the case of a manufactured home, the home shall be securely anchored by a tie-down device that distributes and transfers the loads imposed by the unit to appropriate ground anchors so as to resist wind overturning and sliding. 
23-7.3  The building foundation walls, piers, or other structural elements shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
23-7.4  The exterior walls shall be substantially weathertight, watertight, and shall be made impervious to the adverse effects of weather and be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
23-7.5  Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no defects that might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portions of the building. 
23-7.6  Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open space at ground level. 
23-7.7  Every inside and outside stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
23-7.8  Every window, exterior door, and basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight, and rodent-proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
23-7.9  Windowpanes or an approved substitute shall be maintained without cracks or holes. 
23-7.10  Window sash shall be properly fitted and weathertight within the window frame. 
23-7.11  Every window required for light and ventilation for habitable rooms shall be capable of being easily opened and secured in position by window hardware. 
23-7.12  Every exterior door shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in good condition. 
23-7.13  Every exterior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from entering the dwelling building. 
23-7.14  Every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have screens, and every window or other device with opening to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise have screens. 
23-7.15  Dwelling buildings containing central heating furnaces and air conditioning equipment for mechanically ventilating the building year-round are not required to have screens on door or window openings. Window-type air conditioning units are not included in this exception. 
23-7.16  All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. 
23-7.17  Garages, storage buildings, and other accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound structural condition. 
23-7.18  Every structural element of the dwelling shall be maintained structurally rodent-proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
23-7.19  Every structural element of the dwelling shall be maintained structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration that would render them incapable of carrying loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
23-7.20  No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(A)  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and insulated against dampness; 
(B)  There is at least one (1) window above grade. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 35, 3-9-2010) 
23-8 - Thermal Environment 
23-8.1  A dwelling unit shall have and be capable of maintaining a thermal environment healthy for the human body. 
23-8.2  A dwelling unit shall contain a safe heating facility in proper operating condition which can provide adequate heat to each room in the dwelling unit appropriate for the climate to ensure a healthy living environment. Unvented room heaters that burn gas, oil, or kerosene are unacceptable except as allowed by law. If a cooling system exists or is installed, it too must be in a safe operating condition. 
23-8.3  A dwelling unit shall be free of pollutants in the air at levels which threaten the health of the occupants. 
23-8.4  A dwelling unit shall be free of dangerous levels of air pollution from carbon monoxide, sewer gas, fuel gas, dust, and other harmful air pollutants. Air circulation shall be adequate throughout the unit. Bathroom areas shall have at least one (1) openable window or other adequate exhaust ventilation. 
23-9 - Electrical Systems 
    No person shall occupy, as owner-occupant, any dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, that does not comply with the following requirements: 
23.9-1  All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed and connected to the source of electric power. 
23-9.2  The minimum capacity of the service supply and the main disconnect switch shall be sufficient to adequately carry the total load. 
23-9.3  All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed in accordance with the state electrical code. 
23-9.4  Every public hall and stairway in every multifamily dwelling containing five (5) or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall or stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four (4) dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting. 
23-10 - Care of Premises 
23-10.1  The owner or occupants of a residential building, structure, or property shall not utilize the premises of such residential property for the open storage of any junked motor vehicle, ice box, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish, or similar items or otherwise harbor, allow or cause a nuisance upon such property as identified in Article 22 of this Unified Development Ordinance. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or occupant to keep the premises of such residential property clean and to remove from the premises all such abandoned items as listed above, including, but not limited to, weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc., upon notice of the inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, §§ 64, 65, 1-8-2008) 
23-11 - Water Supply 
23-11.1  The water supply of a dwelling unit shall be free from contamination. 
23-11.2  The unit shall be served by an approved public or private sanitary water supply. 
23-12 - Lead-Based Paint 
    No lead-based paint shall be used on a dwelling unit. This provision shall be in compliance with the United States Lead Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act, 42 USC 4801. 
23-13 - Access 
23-13.1  A dwelling unit shall be usable and capable of being maintained without unauthorized use of other private properties. 
23-13.2  The building shall provide an alternate means of egress in case of fire (i.e., fire stairs or egress through windows). 
23-14 - Extermination 
23-14.1  A dwelling unit and its equipment shall be in a sanitary condition. 
23-14.2  The unit and its equipment shall be free of vermin and rodent infestation. 
23-15 - Congregate Housing 
    The foregoing standards shall apply to congregate housing except for section 23-5. In addition, the following standards shall apply: 
23-15.1  The unit shall contain a refrigerator or appropriate size. 
23-15.2  The central dining facility (and kitchen facility, if any) shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare, and serve food in a sanitary manner, and there shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage where necessary (e.g., garbage cans). 
23-16 - Duties of Inspector 
    The inspector is hereby designated as the officer to enforce the provisions of this Article and to exercise the duties and powers prescribed in this Article. It shall be the duty of the inspector to: 
23-16.1  Investigate the dwelling conditions and to inspect dwellings and dwelling units located in the town in order to determine which dwellings and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this Article with respect to such dwellings and dwelling units. 
23-16.2  Take such action, together with other appropriate departments and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated. 
23-16.3  Keep a record of the results of inspections made under this Article and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum standards of fitness prescribed in this Article. 
23-16.4  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed in this Article. 
23-17 - Powers of Inspector 
    The inspector is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this Article, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 
23-17.1  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the town in order to determine which dwellings are unfit for human habitation; 
23-17.2  To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence; 
23-17.3  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and inspections, provided such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
23-17.4  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article; and 
23-17.5  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this Article to qualified assistants. 
23-18 - Inspections; Duty of Owners and Occupants 
    For the purpose of making inspections, the inspector is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, congregate housing, and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, or congregate housing, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the inspector free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection, examination, and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this Article or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this Article. 
23-19 - Procedure for Enforcement 
23-19.1  Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a petition is filed with the inspector by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the town charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the inspector upon inspection that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the inspector or his designated agent at a place within the town therein fixed, not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least one (1) of the persons signing a petition relating to such dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend such hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the inspector and the complaint shall so state. 
23-19.2  Determination, action after hearing. 
(A)  After such notice and hearing, the inspector shall state in writing his determination whether such dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation and, if so, whether it is deteriorated or dilapidated. 
(B)  If the inspector determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination. If he shall determine that the repair, alteration, or improvement of the property can be made for not more than fifty (50) percent of the value that the dwelling or dwelling unit shall have after such repair, alteration, or improvement, he shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to repair, alter, and improve such dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by this Article within a specified period of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days. Such order may also direct and require the owner to vacate and close such dwelling or dwelling unit until such repairs, alterations, or improvements have been made. If progress in making such repairs, alterations, or improvements have been made satisfactory to the inspector, he may extend the time to finish. 
(C)  If the inspector determines that the dwelling cannot be repaired, altered, or improved within the cost limits specified in subsection (B) above, he shall state in writing his findings of fact to support such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to vacate and remove or demolish the same within a specified period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
23-19.3  Appeals. 
(A)  Any person aggrieved by an order of the inspector may appeal therefrom to the Board of Adjustment. A notice of appeal must be filed within ten (10) days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order. Such notice must be filed with the inspector and with the secretary or chairperson of the Board of Adjustment and shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. 
(B)  Upon the timely filing of the notice of appeal, the inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the decision or order appealed from was made. 
(C)  When an appeal is from a decision or order of the inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board unless the inspector certified to the Board, after notice of appeal is served upon him that because of facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished to the appellant), a suspension of his order would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one (1) day's written notice to the inspector by the board or by a court of competent jurisdiction upon petition made pursuant to G.S. 160A-446(f). 
(D)  The chairperson or assistant chairperson of the Board shall fix a time for hearing the appeal within thirty (30) days of receiving the notice of appeal, shall give all parties due notice of the time, date, and place, and shall announce the Board's decision within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing. Any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make any decision or order that in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers of the inspector, but the concurring vote of four-fifths (?) of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the inspector. The Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of the minimum housing ordinance, to adapt the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety, and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(E)  Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the Board, but not otherwise. 
23-19.4  Failure to comply with order. After failure of an owner to comply with a final order of the inspector within the time specified therein or as extended as provided in subsection 23-19.2 above, the inspector shall submit to the City Council an ordinance ordering the inspector to cause such dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered, improved, or vacated and removed or demolished, as provided in the original order of the inspector, and pending such removal or demolition, to placard such dwelling as provided by G.S. 160A-443 and section 23-21 of this Ordinance. 
23-19.5  Petition to superior court by owner. Any person aggrieved by an order by the inspector or a decision rendered by the board under subsection 23-19.3 above not to suspend the order of the inspector shall have the right, within thirty (30) days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision, to petition the superior court for a temporary injunction restraining the inspector pending a final disposition of the cause, as provided in G.S. 160A-446(f). 
(Ord. No. 2014-11, § 7, 4-8-2014) 
23-20 - Complaints; Orders 
23-20.1  Methods of service. Complaints or orders issued by the inspector pursuant to this Article shall be served upon the owner(s) or the parties in interest in such dwelling either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of such complaint or order upon the unknown owners or other persons may be made by publishing the same in a newspaper of general circulation in Carteret County at least once not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing to be had in accordance with subsection 23-19.1. When service is made by publication, a notice of pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. 
23-20.2  Removal of complaint, notice, or order. No persons without written consent of the inspector shall remove or permit the removal of any complaint, notice, or order posted in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
23-21 - In Rem Action by Inspector 
23-21.1  If the owner fails to comply with an order issued pursuant to this Article to repair, alter, or improve or to vacate and close a dwelling, the inspector may cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed. The inspector may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed a placard with the following words: This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful. Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
23-21.2  If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling, the inspector may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished. The duties of the inspector set forth in subsections 23-21.1 and 23-21.2 shall not be exercised until the City Council shall have by ordinance ordered the inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this Article with respect to the particular property or properties which the inspector has found to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with the housing code. This ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the county register of deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. 
23-21.3  Dwellings ordered vacated by the inspector shall have all outer doors firmly locked, and the basement, cellar, and first-story windows barred or boarded to prevent entry, and shall not again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from the inspector. 
23-22 - Costs; Liens on Premises 
    The amount of the cost of proceedings under this Article, including attorneys' fees and the cost of any repairs, alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing or removal or demolition, caused to be made or done by the inspector pursuant to section 23-19 and section 23-21 shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred. Such lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be enforced and the costs collected as provided by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10. 
State Law reference- Special assessments, G.S. 160A-216 et seq. 
23-23 - Sales of Items in, Attached to, Removed or Demolished Dwelling; Disbursal of Funds 
    If a dwelling is removed or demolished by the inspector, he shall sell the materials of the dwelling and any personal property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the costs of the proceedings, attorney fees, and of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the inspector, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. 
23-24 - Alternative Remedies 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this Article as authorized by G.S. 14-4, and the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinance provisions or laws. 
23-25 - Enforcement by Action in the Nature of Summary Ejectment 
    If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling, the inspector may file a civil action in the name of the town to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying such dwelling. The clerk of superior court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date, and place not to exceed ten (10) days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the hearing the inspector produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the City Council pursuant to subsection 23-19.4 authorizing the inspector to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgement ordering that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgement ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgement for summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from any judgement entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. 7A-228 and the execution of such judgement may be stayed as provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this paragraph unless such occupant was served with notice at least thirty (30) days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that the City Council has ordered the inspector to proceed to exercise his duties under section 23-19 to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling. 
23-26 - Conflict with Other Provisions 
    If any provision, standard, or requirement of this Article is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance, provision, or code of the town, the provision that establishes the higher standards or more stringent requirements for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the residents of the town shall prevail. 
ARTICLE 23A. - MINIMUM NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE STANDARDS 

23A-1 - Violations; Penalty 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential structure to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the same, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the inspector duly made and served as provided in this article, within the time specified in such order. Each day that any such failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with such order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential structure, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to section 23-10, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration, or improvement or its vacation and closing. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 2, 2-12-2008) 
23A-2 - Finding; Purpose 
23A-2.1  Pursuant to G.S. 160A-439, it is hereby found and declared that there exist in the town, nonresidential structures that are dangerous and injurious to public health, safety, and welfare. 
23A-2.2  In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the town as authorized by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 5, it is the purpose of this article to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all nonresidential structures used by its occupants or members of the general public, as expressly authorized by G.S. 160A-439. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 3-5, 2-12-2008) 
23A-3 - Minimum Standards of Fitness for Nonresidential Structures 
    Every nonresidential structure occupied or held out for occupancy shall comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for occupancy and all of the requirements of sections 23A-4 through 23A-8. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy or use any nonresidential structure that does not comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for occupancy and all of the requirements of sections 23A-4 through 23A-8. The inspector may determine that a nonresidential structure is unfit for occupancy if he finds that conditions exist at the structure that render it dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of its occupants or the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 6, 2-12-2008) 
23A-4 - Plumbing 
23A-4.1  A nonresidential structure shall include its own sanitary facilities, which are in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy, and are adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste. These facilities shall utilize an approved public disposal system. 
23A-4.2  All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the structure and shall be accessible to the occupants of the same. A flush toilet and a fixed basin shall be located in a separate room in the structure affording privacy to the user. 
23A-4.3  Every restroom shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements of the state mechanical code except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an approved ventilation system. 
23A-4.4  All plumbing fixtures and appliances shall meet the standards of the state plumbing code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working order. 
23A-4.5  The water supply of a nonresidential structure shall be free from contamination. 
23A-4.6  The structure shall be served by an approved public or private sanitary water supply. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 7-13, 2-12-2008) 
23A-5 - Electrical Systems 
    No person shall occupy any nonresidential structure that does not comply with the following requirements: 
23A-5.1  All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed and connected to the source of electric power. 
23A-5.2  The minimum capacity of the service supply and the main disconnect switch shall be sufficient to adequately carry the total load. 
23A-5.3  All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed in accordance with the state electrical code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 14-17, 2-12-2008) 
23A-6 - Heating and Cooling Systems 
23A-6.1  All heating and cooling equipment and facilities shall be installed in accordance with the relevant building, gas, or electrical codes and shall be maintained in a safe and good working condition. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 18, 19, 2-12-2008) 
23A-7 - Refuse Disposal 
23A-7.1  Every nonresidential structure shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers, the type and location of which facilities or containers are approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 20, 21, 2-12-2008) 
23A-8 - Structure and Materials 
23A-8.1  A nonresidential structure shall be structurally sound so as not to pose any threat to the health and safety of the occupants or the general public and so as to protect the occupants from the environment. 
23A-8.2  Walls and floors shall not have any serious defects such as severe bulging or leaning, large holes, loose surface materials, severe buckling, or noticeable movement under walking stress, missing parts, or other serious damage. The roof structure shall be firm and the roof shall be weathertight. The exterior wall structure and exterior wall surface shall not have any serious defects such as serious leaning, buckling, sagging, cracks or holes, loose siding, or other serious damage. The condition and equipment of interior stairways, halls, porches, walkways, etc. shall be such as not to present a danger of tripping or falling. Elevators shall be maintained in safe operating condition. 
23A-8.3  The structure's foundation walls, piers, or other structural elements shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
23A-8.4  The exterior walls shall be substantially weathertight, watertight, and shall be made impervious to the adverse effects of weather and be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
23A-8.5  Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no defects that might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portions of the building. 
23A-8.6  Every nonresidential structure shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open space at ground level. 
23A-8.7  Every inside and outside stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
23A-8.8  Every exterior door shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in good condition. 
23A-8.9  Every exterior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from entering the structure. 
23A-8.10  All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. 
23A-8.11  Garages, storage buildings, and other accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound structural condition. 
23A-8.12  Every structural element of the structure shall be maintained structurally rodent-proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
23A-8.13  Every structural element of the structure shall be maintained structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration that would render them incapable of carrying loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 22-35, 2-12-2008) 
23A-9 - Procedure for Enforcement 
23A-9.1  Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever it appears to the public officer that any nonresidential building or structure has not been properly maintained so that the safety or health of its occupants or members of the general public are jeopardized for failure of the property to meet the minimum standards established by the town and as they are amended from time to time, the public officer shall undertake a preliminary investigation. If entry upon the premises for purposes of investigation is necessary, such entry shall be made pursuant to a duly issued administrative search warrant in accordance with G.S. 15-27.2 or with permission of the owner, the owner's agent, a tenant, or other person legally in possession of the premises. If the preliminary investigation discloses evidence of a violation of the minimum standards, the public officer shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in the nonresidential building or structure, a complaint. The complaint shall state the charges and contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer (or his or her designated agent) at a place within the Town scheduled not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to answer the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer. 
23A-9.2  Determination, action after hearing. If, after notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the nonresidential building or structure has not been properly maintained so that the safety or health of its occupants or members of the general public is jeopardized for failure of the property to meet the minimum standards established by the town, the public officer shall state in writing findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order. The order may require the owner to take remedial action, within a reasonable time specified, subject to the procedures and limitations herein. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 36-38, 2-12-2008) 
23A-10 - Limitation on Orders 
23A-10.1  An order may require the owner to repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential building or structure in order to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards established by the town or to vacate and close the nonresidential building or structure for any use. 
23A-10.2  An order may require the owner to remove or demolish the nonresidential building if the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement of the building or structure would exceed fifty (50) percent of its then current value. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the nonresidential building or structure is designated as a local historic landmark, listed in the National Register of Historic Places and the Town Council determines, after a public hearing, that the nonresidential building or structure is of individual significance or contributes to maintaining the character of the district within which it is located, and the nonresidential building or structure has not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the nonresidential building or structure be vacated and closed until it is brought into compliance with the minimum standards established by the town. 
23A-10.3  An order may not require repairs, alterations, or improvements to be made to vacant manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial warehouse facilities to preserve the original use. The order may require such building or structure to be vacated and closed, but repairs may be required only when necessary to maintain structural integrity or to abate a health or safety hazard that cannot be remedied by ordering the building or structure closed for any use. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 39-42, 2-12-2008) 
23A-11 - Action by Town Council Upon Failure to Comply with Order 
23A-11.1  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, or improve or to vacate and close the nonresidential building or structure, the Town Council may adopt an ordinance ordering the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this section with respect to the particular property or properties that the public officer found to be jeopardizing the health or safety of its occupants or members of the general public. The property or properties shall be described in this ordinance. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner or owners in the grantor index. Following adoption of an ordinance, the public officer may cause the building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any nonresidential building or structure so closed a placard with the following words: "The building is unfit for any use; the use or occupation of this building for any purpose is prohibited and unlawful." Any person who occupies or knowingly allows the occupancy of a building or structure so posted shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
23A-11.2  If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the nonresidential building or structure, the Town Council may adopt an ordinance ordering the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this section with respect to the particular property or properties that the public officer found to be jeopardizing the health or safety of its occupants or members of the general public. No ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a nonresidential building or structure until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with the minimum standards established by the town. The property or properties shall be described in this ordinance. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner or owners in the grantor index. Following adoption of an ordinance, the public officer may cause the building or structure to be removed or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 43-45, 2-12-2008) 
23A-12 - Action by Town Council Upon Abandonment of Intent to Repair 
    If the Town Council has adopted any ordinance or the public officer has issued an order requiring the building or structure to be repaired or vacated and closed and the building or structure has been vacated and closed for a period of two (2) years pursuant to the ordinance or order, the Town Council may make findings that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the building or structure and that the continuation of the building or structure in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, and welfare of the municipality in that it would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire or safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, or would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area. Upon such findings, the Town Council may, after the expiration of the two-year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following: 
23A-12.1  If the cost to repair the nonresidential building or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards is less than or equal to fifty (50) percent of its then current value, the ordinance shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the building or structure within ninety (90) days; or 
23A-12.2  If the cost to repair the nonresidential building or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards exceeds fifty (50) percent of its then current value, the ordinance shall require the owner to demolish and remove the building or structure within ninety (90) days. 
In the case of vacant manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial warehouse facilities, the building or structure must have been vacated and closed pursuant to an order or ordinance for a period of five (5) years before the Town Council may take action under this subsection. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with the ordinance, the public officer shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 46-49, 2-12-2008) 
23A-13 - Service of Complaints and Orders 
    Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to an ordinance adopted under this section shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail so long as the means used are reasonably designed to achieve actual notice. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected. If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer makes an affidavit to that effect, the serving of the complaint or order upon the owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least once no later than the time that personal service would be required under this section. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 50, 2-12-2008) 
23A-14 - Liens 
23A-14.1  The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for a special assessment provided in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes. 
23A-14.2  If the real property upon which the cost was incurred is located in an incorporated city, the amount of the costs is also a lien on any other real property of the owner located within the city limits except for the owner's primary residence. The additional lien provided in this subdivision is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as money judgment. 
23A-14.3  If the nonresidential building or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he or she shall offer for sale the recoverable materials of the building or structure and any personal property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the building or structure and shall credit the proceeds of the sale, if any, against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the public officer, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 51-54, 2-12-2008) 
23A-15 - Ejectment 
    If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a nonresidential building or structure, the public officer may file a civil action in the name of the city to remove the occupant. The action to vacate shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying the nonresidential building or structure. The clerk of superior court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date, and place not to exceed 10 days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served and if at the hearing the public officer produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the Town Council pursuant to section 23A-12 to vacate the occupied nonresidential building or structure, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the nonresidential building or structure be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered under this subsection by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. 7A-228, and the execution of the judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a nonresidential building or structure who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this subsection unless the occupant was served with notice, at least thirty (30) days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding, that the Town Council has ordered the public officer to proceed to exercise his duties under subsection (f) of this section [sic] to vacate and close or remove and demolish the nonresidential building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 55, 2-12-2008) 
23A-16 - Civil Penalty 
    The town may impose civil penalties against any person or entity that fails to comply with an order entered pursuant to this section. Such fines shall be assessed in accordance with section 7-4 of the town's UDO. However, the imposition of civil penalties shall not limit the use of any other lawful remedies available to the town for the enforcement of any ordinances adopted pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 56, 2-12-2008) 
23A-17 - Powers Supplemental 
    The powers conferred by this section are supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. The public officer may exercise any powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this section, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 
23A-17.1  To investigate nonresidential buildings and structures in the city to determine whether they have been properly maintained in compliance with the minimum standards so that the safety or health of the occupants or members of the general public are not jeopardized. 
23A-17.2  To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence. 
23A-17.3  To enter upon premises pursuant to subsection 23A-10.1 for the purpose of making examinations in a manner that will do the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
23A-17.4  To appoint and fix the duties of officers, agents, and employees necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. 
23A-17.5  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this section to other officers and agents. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 57-62, 2-12-2008) 
23A-18 - Appeals 
23A-18.1  Any person aggrieved by an order of the public officer may appeal therefrom to the Board of Adjustment. A notice of appeal must be filed within ten (10) days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order. Such notice must be filed with the public officer and with the secretary or chairperson of the Board of Adjustment and shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. 
23A-18.2  Upon the timely filing of the notice of appeal, the public officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the decision or order appealed from was made. 
23A-18.3  When an appeal is from a decision or order of the public officer requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board unless the public officer certified to the Board, after notice of appeal is served upon him or her, that because of facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished to the appellant), a suspension of his or her order would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one (1) day's written notice to the public officer by a court of competent jurisdiction upon petition made pursuant to G.S. 160A-446(f). 
23A-18.4  The chairperson or assistant chairperson of the Board of Adjustment shall fix a time for hearing the appeal within thirty (30) days of receiving the notice of appeal, shall give all parties due notice of the time, date, and place, and shall announce the Board's decision within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing. Any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make any decision or order that in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers of the public officer, but the concurring vote of four-fifths (?) of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the public officer. The Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of the minimum standards, to adapt the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 63-67, 2-12-2008) 
23A-19 - Definitions 
23A-19.1  Parties in interest means all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interests of record in a nonresidential building or structure and any who are in possession thereof. 
23A-19.2  Vacant manufacturing facility means any building or structure previously used for the lawful production or manufacturing of goods, which has not been used for that purpose for at least one (1) year and has not been converted to another use. 
23A-19.3  Vacant industrial warehouse means any building or structure designed for the storage of goods or equipment in connection with manufacturing processes, which has not been used for that purpose for at least one (1) year and has not been converted to another use. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, §§ 68-71, 2-12-2008) 
ARTICLE 24. - AMENDMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Changes in zoning regulations, G.S. 160A-364, 160A-385. 

24-1 - Who May Petition 
    A petition for a zoning amendment may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Board, any department or agency of the town, or the owner of any property within the zoning jurisdiction of the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina. 
24-2 - Fee 
    A fee to be set by the City Council shall be paid to the Town of Morehead City for each application for an amendment to this Ordinance to cover the costs of advertising and other administrative expenses involved. 
24-3 - Application Procedure 
    Any application for an amendment to this Ordinance shall be filed with the administrator of this Ordinance at least twenty-eight (28) calendar days prior to the date on which it is to be introduced to the Planning Board. Subject to the length of the agenda and complexity of the application, late submittals may be placed on the meeting agenda with the approval of the Land Use Administrator. The administrator of this Ordinance shall be responsible for presenting the application to the Planning Board. Each application shall be signed and shall contain at least the following information: 
24-3.1  The applicant's name in full, applicant's address, and description of the property to be rezoned; 
24-3.2  Applicant's interest in the property and type of rezoning or amendment requested; 
24-3.3  If the proposed change would require a change in the zoning map, an accurate diagram of the property proposed for rezoning showing: 
(A)  All adjoining property lines with dimensions and north arrow; 
(B)  Adjoining streets with rights-of-way and paving widths; 
(C)  The location of all structures; 
(D)  The use of all land; 
(E)  Zoning classification of all abutting zoning districts. 
24-3.4  A statement regarding the change in conditions as opposed to those proposed and set forth in the Morehead City Land Use Plan, in the planning area or in the town, generally, that make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
24-3.5  A statement analyzing the reasonableness of the proposed rezoning shall be prepared for each petition for a rezoning to a special or conditional use district, or a conditional district, or other small-scale rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 9, 1-10-2006; Ord. No. 2006-64, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 2011-21, § 6, 7-12-2011) 
24-4 - Proposed Amendments to be Submitted to Planning Board for Recommendation 
    Unless initiated by the Planning Board, the City Council shall submit all proposed amendments to the Unified Development Ordinance to the Planning Board for review and recommendation. The Planning Board shall have forty-five (45) days from the time it received the proposed change to submit its report. If the Planning Board fails to submit a report within the above period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. In accordance with G.S. 160A-283, the Planning Board review of zoning amendments shall include written comments on the consistency of the proposed amendment with any and all officially adopted plans (i.e. comprehensive plans, land use plans, thoroughfare plans, small area plans, etc.). The statement from the Planning Board that the proposed amendment is inconsistent with a plan does not preclude the governing board from adoption of the amendment. Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, the governing board shall adopt a statement describing whether its action is consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan and explaining why the board considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest. That statement is not subject to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 10, 1-10-2006) 
24-5 - Required Public Hearing 
    A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before the adoption of any proposed amendment to the Unified Development Ordinance. A notice of the public hearing shall be given once a week for two (2) successive calendar weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the area. The notice shall be published the first time not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty-five (25) days before the date fixed for the hearing. In computing such period, the day of publication is not to be included but the day of the hearing shall be included. Large scale rezonings (those affecting more than fifty (50) properties) shall have an alternate notice provision requiring the half-page newspaper advertisement to be published twice. In accordance with G.S. 160A-384(c) a rezoning site shall be posted to notify persons of hearings on rezonings. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, § 23, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 11, 1-10-2006) 
24-6 - Petition Withdrawal 
    Any petition for an amendment to this Ordinance may be withdrawn up to two (2) weeks prior to the public hearing by the person initiating such a request, upon written notice to the City Manager. 
24-7 - Reconsideration 
    If the applicant withdraws his application following the recommendation of the Planning Board, the town shall not thereafter accept any other application for the same change of zoning affecting the same property, or any portion thereof, until the expiration of six (6) months from the date of such previous withdrawal; or when the City Council shall have denied any application for the change of any zoning district, the town shall not thereafter accept any other application for the same change of zoning affecting the same property, or any portion thereof, until the expiration of six (6) months from the date of such previous denial. 
24-8 - Protest Against an Amendment 
    In the case of a protest against a zoning map amendment, such amendment shall not become effective except by a three-fourths (3/4) majority if there is a qualified protest submitted in accordance with G.S. 160A-385. The three-fourths (3/4) majority is calculated on the basis of the number of council members eligible to vote on the matter (excluding vacancies and those who have a financial conflict of interest and are prohibited by law from voting on the matter). For the purposes of a protest petition, a qualifying area is defined to include five (5) percent of the land included within a 100-foot wide buffer around each separate area proposed to be rezoned. Street rights-of-way are not considered for the 100-foot buffer unless the right-of-way has a width greater than one hundred (100) feet. When less than an entire parcel is proposed to be rezoned, the qualifying buffer is measured from the property line rather than the zoning district boundary. A person filing a protest against a proposed zoning amendment may withdraw the protest any time prior to a vote on the rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 12, 1-10-2006) 
Appendix I - STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) SYSTEM 
20 FOOD AND KINDRED PRODUCTS 201 Meat Products 2011 Meat Packing Plants 2013 Sausages and Other Prepared Meat Products 2015 Poultry Slaughtering and Processing 202 Dairy Products 2021 Creamery Butter 2022 Natural, Processed, and Imitation Cheese 2023 Condensed and Evaporated Dairy Products 2024 Ice Cream and Frozen Desserts 2026 Fluid Milk 203 Canned, Frozen, and Preserved Fruits and Vegetables 2032 Canned Specialties 2033 Canned Fruits, Vegetables, Jams, Preserves and Jellies 2034 Dried and Dehydrated Fruits, Vegetables and Soup Mixes 2035 Pickled Fruits and Vegetables, Vegetable Sauces and Seasonings and Salad Dressings 2037 Frozen Fruits, Fruit Juices and Vegetables 2038 Frozen Specialties, NEC 204 Grain Mill Products 2041 Flour and Other Grain Mill Products 2043 Cereal Breakfast Foods 2044 Rice Milling 2045 Prepared Flour Mixes and Doughs 2046 Wet Corn Milling 2047 Dog and Cat Food 2048 Prepared Feeds and Ingredients For Animals and Fowls, Except Dog and Cat Food 205 Bakery Products 2051 Bread and Other Bakery Products, Except Cookies and Crackers 2052 Cookies and Crackers 2053 Frozen Bakery Products, Except Bread 206 Sugar and Confectionery Products 2061 Cane Sugar, Except Refining 2062 Cane Sugar Refining 2063 Beet Sugar 2064 Candy and Other Confectionery Products 2066 Chocolate and Cocoa Products 2067 Chewing Gum 2068 Salted and Roasted Nuts and Seeds 207 Fats and Oils 2074 Cottonseed Oil Mills 2075 Soybean Oil Mills 2076 Vegetable Oil Mills, Except Corn, Cottonseed and Soybean 2077 Animal and Marine Fats and Oils 2079 Edible Table Fats and Oils, NEC 208 Beverages 2082 Malt Beverages 2083 Malt 2084 Wines, Brandy and Brandy Spirits 2085 Distilled and Blended Liquors 2086 Bottled and Canned Soft Drinks and Carbonated Waters 2087 Flavoring Extracts and Syrups, NEC 209 Miscellaneous Food Preparations and Kindred Products 2091 Canned and Cured Fish and Seafoods 2092 Prepared Fresh or Frozen Fish and Seafoods 2095 Roasted Coffee 2096 Potato Chips, Corn Chips and Similar Snacks 2097 Manufactured Ice 2098 Macaroni, Spaghetti, Vermicelli and Noodles 2099 Food Preparations, NEC 21 TOBACCO PRODUCTS 211 Cigarettes 2111 Cigarettes 212 Cigars 2121 Cigars 213 Chewing and Smoking Tobacco and Snuff 2131 Chewing and Smoking Tobacco and Snuff 214 Tobacco Stemming and Redrying 2141 Tobacco Stemming and Redrying 22 TEXTILE MILL PRODUCTS 211 Broad Woven Fabric Mills, Cotton 2211 Broad Woven Fabric Mills, Cotton 222 Broad Woven Fabric Mills, Manmade Fiber and Silk 2221 Broad Woven Fabric Mills, Manmade Fiber and Silk 223 Broad Woven Fabric Mills, Wool (Including Dyeing and Finishing) 2231 Broad Woven Fabric Mills, Wood (Including Dyeing and Finishing) 224 Narrow Fabric and Other Smallwares Mills; Cotton, Wool, Silk and Manmade Fiber 2241 Narrow Fabric Mills 225 Knitting Mills 2251 Women's Full-Length and Knee-Length Hosiery, Except Socks 2252 Hosiery, NEC 2253 Knit Outerwear Mills 2254 Knit Underwear and Nightwear Mills 2257 Weft Knit Fabric Mills 2258 Lace and Warp Knit Fabric Mills 2259 Knitting Mills, NEC 226 Dyeing and Finishing Textiles, Except Wool Fabrics and Knit Goods 2261 Finishers of Broadwoven Fabrics of Cotton 2262 Finishers of Broadwoven Fabrics of Manmade Fiber and Silk 2269 Finishers of Textiles, NEC 227 Carpets and Rugs 2273 Carpets and Rugs 228 Yarn and Thread Mills 2281 Yarn Spinning Mills 2282 Yarn Texturizing, Throwing, Twisting and Winding Mills 2284 Thread Mills 229 Miscellaneous Textile Goods 2295 Coated Fabrics, Not Rubberized 2296 Tire Cord and Fabrics 2297 Nonwoven Fabrics 2298 Cordage and Twine 2299 Textile Goods, NEC 23 APPAREL AND OTHER FINISHED TEXTILE PRODUCTS 231 Mens and Boys Suits, Coats and Overcoats 2311 Mens and Boys Suits, Coats and Overcoats 232 Mens and Boys Furnishings, Work Clothing - Allied Garments 2321 Mens and Boys Shirts, Except Work Shirts 2322 Mens and Boys Underwear and Nightwear 2323 Mens and Boys Neckwear 2325 Mens and Boys Separate Trousers and Slacks 2326 Mens and Boys Work Clothing 2329 Mens and Boys Clothing, NEC 233 Womens, Misses and Juniors Outerwear 2331 Womens, Misses and Juniors Blouses and Shirts 2335 Womens, Misses and Juniors Dresses 2337 Womens, Misses and Juniors Suits, Skirts and Coats 2339 Womens, Misses and Juniors Outerwear, NEC 234 Womens, Misses, Childrens and Infants Undergarments 2341 Womens, Misses, Childrens and Infants Underwear and Nightwear 2342 Brassieres, Girdles and Allied Garments 235 Hats, Caps and Millinery 2353 Hats, Caps and Millinery 236 Girls, Childrens and Infants Outerwear 2361 Girls, Childrens and Infants Dresses, Blouses and Shirts 2369 Girls, Childrens and Infants Outerwear, NEC 237 Fur Goods 2371 Fur Goods 238 Miscellaneous Apparel and Accessories 2381 Dress and Work Gloves, Except Knit and All-Leather 2384 Robes and Dressing Gowns 2385 Waterproof Outerwear 2386 Leather and Sheep-Lined Clothing 2387 Apparel Belts 2389 Apparel and Accessories, NEC 239 Miscellaneous Fabricated Textile Products 2391 Curtains and Draperies 2392 Housefurnishings, Except Curtains and Draperies 2393 Textile Bags 2394 Canvas and Related Products 2395 Decorative, Pleating and Novelty Stitching 2396 Automotive Trimmings, Apparel Findings and Related Products 2397 Schiffli Machine Embroideries 2399 Fabricated Textile Products, NEC 24 LUMBER AND WOOD PRODUCTS, EXCEPT FURNITURE 241 Logging 2411 Logging 242 Sawmills and Planing Mills 2421 Sawmills and Planing Mills, General 2426 Hardwood Dimension and Flooring Mills 2429 Special Product Sawmills, NEC 243 Millwork, Veneer, Plywood and Structural Wood Members 2431 Millwork 2434 Wood Kitchen Cabinets 2435 Hardwood Veneer and Plywood 2436 Softwood Veneer and Plywood 2439 Structural Wood Members, NEC 244 Wood Containers 2441 Nailed and Lock Corner Wood Boxes and Shook 2448 Wood Pallets and Skids 2449 Wood Containers, NEC 245 Wood Buildings and Mobile Homes 2451 Mobile Homes 2452 Prefabricated Wood Buildings and Components 249 Miscellaneous Wood Products 2491 Wood Preserving 2493 Reconstituted Wood Products 2499 Wood Products, NEC 25 FURNITURE AND FIXTURES 251 Household Furniture 2511 Wood Household Furniture, Except Upholstered 2512 Wood Household Furniture, Upholstered 2514 Metal Household Furniture 2515 Mattresses, Foundations and Convertible Beds 2517 Wood Cabinets For TV, Radio, Phonograph and Sewing Machines 2519 Household Furniture, NEC 252 Office Furniture 2521 Wood Office Furniture 2522 Office Furniture, Excepted Wood 253 Public Building and Related Furniture 2531 Public Building and Related Furniture 254 Partitions, Shelving, Lockers and Office and Store Fixtures 2541 Wood Office and Store Fixtures, Partitions, Shelving and Lockers 2542 Office and Store Fixtures, Except Wood 259 Miscellaneous Furniture and Fixtures 2591 Drapery Hardware and Window Blinds and Shades 2599 Furniture and Fixtures, NEC 26 PAPER AND ALLIED PRODUCTS 261 Pulp Mills 2611 Pulp Mills 262 Paper Mills 2621 Paper Mills 263 Paperboard Mills 2631 Paperboard Mills 265 Paperboard Containers and Boxes 2652 Setup Paperboard Boxes 2653 Corrugated and Solid Fiber Boxes 2655 Fiber Cans, Tubes, Drums and Similar Products 2656 Sanitary Food Containers, Except Folding 2657 Folding Paperboard Boxes, Including Sanitary 267 Converted Paper and Paperboard Products, Except Containers and Boxes 2671 Packaging Paper and Plastics Film, Coated and Laminated 2672 Coated and Laminated Paper, NEC 2673 Plastics, Foil and Coated Paper Bags 2674 Uncoated Paper and Multiwall Bags 2675 Die-cut Paper and Paperboard and Cardboard 2676 Sanitary Paper Products 2677 Envelopes 2678 Stationery, Tablets and Related Products 2679 Converted Paper and Paperboard Products, NEC 27 PRINTING, PUBLISHING AND ALLIED INDUSTRIES 271 Newspapers: Publishing and Printing 2711 Newspapers: Publishing and Printing 272 Periodicals: Publishing and Printing 2721 Periodicals: Publishing and Printing 273 Books 2731 Books: Publishing and Printing 2732 Book Printing 274 Miscellaneous Publishing 2741 Miscellaneous Publishing 275 Commercial Printing 2752 Commercial Printing, Lithographic 2754 Commercial Printing, Gravure 2759 Commercial Printing, NEC 276 Manifold Business Forms 2761 Manifold Business Forms 277 Greeting Cards 2771 Greeting Cards 278 Blankbooks, Looseleaf Binders, Bookbinding, Etc. 2782 Blankbooks, Looseleaf Binders and Devices 2789 Bookbinding and Related Work 279 Service Industries For the Printing Trade 2791 Typesetting 2796 Platemaking and Related Services 28 CHEMICALS AND ALLIED PRODUCTS 281 Industrial Inorganic Chemicals 2812 Alkalies and Chlorine 2813 Industrial Gases 2816 Inorganic Pigments 2819 Industrial Inorganic Chemicals, NEC 282 Plastics Materials, Synthetic Resins, Synthetic Rubber 2821 Plastics Materials, Synthetic Resins and Nonvulcanizable Elastomers 2822 Synthetic Rubber (Vulcanizable Elastomers) 2823 Cellulosic Manmade Fibers 2824 Manmade Organic Fibers, Except Cellulosic 283 Drugs 2833 Medicinal Chemicals and Botanical Products 2834 Pharmaceutical Preparations 2835 In Vitro and In Vivo Diagnostic Substances 2836 Biological Products, Except Diagnostic Substances 284 Soap, Detergents and Cleaning Preparations; Perfumes, Cosmetics and Other Toilet Preparations 2841 Soap and Other Detergents, Except Specialty Cleaners 2842 Specialty Cleaning, Polishing and Sanitation Preparations 2843 Surface Active Agents, Sulfonated Oils and Assistants 2844 Perfumes, Cosmetics and Other Toilet Preparations 285 Paints, Varnishes, Lacquers, Enamels and Allied Products 2851 Paints, Varnishes, Lacquers, Enamels and Allied Products 286 Industrial Organic Chemicals 2861 Gum and Wood Chemicals 2865 Cyclic Organic Crudes and Intermediates, Dyes and Pigments 2869 Industrial Organic Chemicals, NEC 287 Agricultural Chemicals 2873 Nitrogenous Fertilizers 2874 Phosphatic Fertilizers 2875 Fertilizers, Mixing Only 2879 Pesticides and Agricultural Chemicals, NEC 289 Miscellaneous Chemical Products 2891 Adhesives and Sealants 2892 Explosives 2893 Printing Ink 2895 Carbon Black 2899 Chemicals and Chemical Preparations, NEC 29 PETROLEUM REFINING AND RELATED INDUSTRIES 291 Petroleum Refining 2911 Petroleum Refining 295 Asphalt Paving and Roofing Materials 2951 Asphalt Paving Mixtures and Blocks 2952 Asphalt Felts and Coatings 299 Miscellaneous Products of Petroleum and Coal 2992 Lubricating Oils and Greases 2999 Products of Petroleum and Coal, NEC 30 RUBBER AND MISCELLANEOUS PLASTIC PRODUCTS 301 Tires and Inner Tubes 3011 Tires and Inner Tubes 302 Rubber and Plastics Footwear 3021 Rubber and Plastics Footwear 305 Gaskets, Packing and Sealing Devices 3052 Rubber and Plastics Hose and Belting 3053 Gaskets, Packing, and Sealing Devices 306 Fabricated Rubber Products, NEC 3061 Molded, Extruded and Lathe-cut Mechanical Rubber Goods 3069 Fabricated Rubber Products, NEC 308 Miscellaneous Plastics Products 3081 Unsupported Plastics Film and Sheet 3082 Unsupported Plastics Profile Shapes 3083 Laminated Plastics Plate, Sheet and Profile Shapes 3084 Plastics Pipe 3085 Plastics Bottles 3086 Plastics Foam Products 3087 Custom Compounding of Purchased Plastics Resins 3088 Plastics Plumbing Fixtures 3089 Plastics Products, NEC 31 LEATHER AND LEATHER PRODUCTS 311 Leather Tanning and Finishing 3111 Leather Tanning and Finishing 313 Boot and Shoe Cut Stock and Findings 3131 Boot and Shoe Cut Stock and Findings 314 Footwear, Except Rubber 3142 House Slippers 3143 Mens Footwear, Except Athletic 3144 Womens Footwear, Except Athletic 3149 Footwear, Except Rubber, NEC 315 Leather Gloves and Mittens 3151 Leather Gloves and Mittens 316 Luggage 3161 Luggage 317 Handbags and Other Personal Leather Goods 3171 Womens Handbags and Purses 3172 Personal Leather Goods, Except Womens Handbags and Purses 319 Leather Goods, NEC 3199 Leather Goods, NEC 32 STONE, CLAY, GLASS AND CONCRETE PRODUCTS 321 Flat Glass 3211 Flat Glass 322 Glass and Glassware, Pressed Or Blown 3221 Glass Containers 3229 Pressed and Blown Glass and Glassware, NEC 323 Glass Products, Made of Purchased Glass 3231 Glass Products, Made of Purchased Glass 324 Cement, Hydraulic 3241 Cement, Hydraulic 325 Structural Clay Products 3251 Brick and Structural Clay Tile 3253 Ceramic Wall and Floor Tile 3255 Clay Refractories 3259 Structural Clay Products, NEC 326 Pottery and Related Products 3261 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures and Accessories 3262 Vitreous China Table and Kitchen Articles 3263 Fine Earthenware, Whiteware, Table and Kitchen Articles 3264 Porcelain Electrical Supplies 3269 Pottery Products, NEC 327 Concrete, Gypsum and Plaster Products 3271 Concrete Block and Brick 3272 Concrete Products, Except Block and Brick 3273 Ready-Mixed Concrete 3274 Lime 3275 Gypsum Products 328 Cut Stone and Stone Products 3281 Cut Stone and Stone Products 329 Abrasive, Asbestos and Nonmetallic Mineral Products 3291 Abrasive Products 3292 Asbestos Products 3295 Minerals and Earths, Ground or Otherwise Treated 3296 Mineral Wool 3297 Nonclay Refractories 3299 Nonmetallic Mineral Products, NEC 33 PRIMARY METAL INDUSTRIES 331 Blast Furnaces, Steel Works and Rolling and Finishing Mills 3312 Blast Furnaces, Steel Works and Rolling Mills 3313 Electrometallurgical Products, Except Steel 3315 Steel Wiredrawing and Steel Nails and Spikes 3316 Cold-Rolled Steel Sheet, Strip and Bars 3317 Steel Pipe and Tubes 332 Iron and Steel Foundries 3321 Gray and Ductile Iron Foundries 3322 Malleable Iron Foundries 3324 Steel Investment Foundries 3325 Steel Foundries, NEC 333 Primary Smelting and Refining of Nonferrous Metals 3331 Primary Smelting and Refining of Copper 3334 Primary Production of Aluminum 3339 Primary Smelting and Refining of Nonferrous Metals, NEC 334 Secondary Smelting and Refining of Nonferrous Metals 3341 Secondary Smelting and Refining of Nonferrous Metals 335 Rolling, Drawing and Extruding of Nonferrous Metals 3351 Rolling, Drawing and Extruding of Copper 3353 Aluminum Sheet, Plate and Foil 3354 Aluminum Extruded Products 3355 Aluminum Rolling and Drawing, NEC 3356 Rolling, Drawing and Extruding of Nonferrous Metals, NEC 3357 Drawing and Insulating of Nonferrous Wire 336 Nonferrous Foundries (Castings) 3363 Aluminum Die-Castings 3364 Nonferrous Die-Casting, Except Aluminum 3365 Aluminum Foundries 3366 Copper Foundries 3369 Nonferrous Foundries, Except Aluminum and Copper 339 Miscellaneous Primary Metal Products 3398 Metal Heat Treating 3399 Primary Metal Products, NEC 34 FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS EXCEPT HEAVY EQUIPMENT 341 Metal Cans and Shipping Containers 3411 Metal Cans 3412 Metal Shipping Barrels, Drums, Kegs and Pails 342 Cutlery, Handtools and General Hardware 3421 Cutlery 3423 Hand and Edge Tools, Except Machine Tools and Handsaws 3425 Saw Blades and Handsaws 3429 Hardware, NEC 343 Plumbing and Heating Equipment Except Electric and Warm Air 3431 Enameled Iron and Metal Sanitary Ware 3432 Plumbing Fixture Fittings and Trim 3433 Heating Equipment, Except Warm Air and Electric Furnaces 344 Fabricated Structural Metal Products 3441 Fabricated Structural Metal 3442 Metal Doors, Sash, Frames, Trim and Molding 3443 Fabricated Plate Work (Boiler Shops) 3444 Sheet Metal Work 3446 Architectural and Ornamental Metal Work 3448 Prefabricated Metal Buildings and Components 3449 Miscellaneous Structural Metal Work 345 Screw Machine Products and Nuts, Screws, Rivets and Washers 3451 Screw Machine Products 3452 Bolts, Nuts, Screws, Rivets and Washers 346 Metal Forgings and Stampings 3462 Iron and Steel Forgings 3463 Nonferrous Forgings 3465 Automotive Stampings 3466 Crowns and Closures 3469 Metal Stampings, NEC 347 Coating, Engraving and Allied Services 3471 Electroplating, Plating, Coloring, Polishing and Anodizing 3479 Coating, Engraving and Allied Services, NEC 348 Ordnance and Accessories, Except Vehicles and Guided Missiles 3482 Small Arms Ammunition 3483 Ammunition, Except For Small Arms 3484 Small Arms 3489 Ordnance and Accessories, NEC 349 Miscellaneous Fabricated Metal Products 3491 Industrial Valves 3492 Fluid Power Valves and Hose Fittings 3493 Steel Springs, Except Wire 3494 Valves and Pipe Fittings, NEC 3495 Wire Springs 3496 Miscellaneous Fabricated Wire Products 3497 Metal Foil and Leaf 3498 Fabricated Pipe and Pipe Fittings 3499 Fabricated Metal Products, NEC 35 INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL MACHINERY AND COMPUTER EQUIPMENT 351 Engines and Turbines 3511 Steam, Gas and Hydraulic Turbines and Generator Units 3519 Internal Combustion Engines, NEC 352 Farm and Garden Machinery and Equipment 3523 Farm Machinery and Equipment 3524 Garden Tractors and Lawn and Garden Equipment 353 Construction, Mining and Materials Handling Machinery 3531 Construction Machinery and Equipment 3532 Mining Machinery, Except Oil Field Machinery and Equipment 3533 Oil and Gas Field Machinery and Equipment 3534 Elevators and Moving Stairways 3535 Conveyors and Conveying Equipment 3536 Overhead Traveling Cranes, Hoists and Monorail Systems 3537 Industrial Trucks, Tractors, Trailers and Stackers 354 Metalworking Machinery and Equipment 3541 Machine Tools, Metal Cutting Types 3542 Machine Tools, Metal Forming Types 3543 Industrial Patterns 3544 Special Dies and Tools, Jigs and Fixtures and Industrial Molds 3545 Machine Tool Accessories and Measuring Devices 3546 Power-Driven Handtools 3547 Rolling Mill Machinery and Equipment 3548 Electric and Gas Welding and Soldering Equipment 3549 Metalworking Machinery, NEC 355 Special Industry Machinery, Except Metalworking Machinery 3552 Textile Machinery 3553 Woodworking Machinery 3554 Paper Industries Machinery 3555 Printing Trades Machinery and Equipment 3556 Food Products Machinery 3559 Special Industry Machinery, NEC 356 General Industrial Machinery and Equipment 3561 Pumps and Pumping Equipment 3562 Ball and Roller Bearings 3563 Air and Gas Compressors 3564 Fans and Blowers and Air Purification Equipment 3565 Packaging Machinery 3566 Speed Changers, Industrial-High Speed Drives and Gears 3567 Industrial Process Furnaces and Ovens 3568 Mechanical Power Transmission Equipment, NEC 3569 General Industrial Machinery and Equipment, NEC 357 Computer and Office Equipment 3571 Electronic Computers 3572 Computer Storage Devices 3575 Computer Terminals 3577 Computer Peripheral Equipment, NEC 3578 Calculating and Accounting Machines, Except Computers 3579 Office Machines, NEC 358 Refrigeration and Service Industry Machinery 3581 Automatic Vending Machines 3582 Commercial Laundry, Dry Cleaning and Pressing Machines 3585 Air-Conditioning, Warm Air Heating and Refrigeration Equipment 3586 Measuring and Dispensing Pumps 3589 Service Industry Machines, NEC 359 Miscellaneous Industrial and Commercial Machinery and Equipment 3592 Carburetors, Pistons, Piston Rings and Valves 3593 Fluid Power Cylinders and Actuators 3594 Fluid Power Pumps and Motors 3596 Scales and Balances Except Laboratory 3599 Industrial and Commercial Machinery and Equipment, NEC 36 ELECTRONIC AND OTHER ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 361 Electric Transmission and Distribution Equipment 3612 Power, Distribution and Specialty Transformers 3613 Switchgear and Switchboard Apparatus 362 Electrical Industrial Apparatus 3621 Motors and Generators 3624 Carbon and Graphite Products 3625 Relays and Industrial Controls 3629 Electrical Industrial Apparatus, NEC 363 Household Appliances 3631 Household Cooking Equipment 3632 Household Refrigerators and Home and Farm Freezers 3633 Household Laundry Equipment 3634 Electric Housewares and Fans 3635 Household Vacuum Cleaners 3639 Household Appliances, NEC 364 Electric Lighting and Wiring Equipment 3641 Electric Lamp Bulbs and Tubes 3643 Current-Carrying Wiring Devices 3644 Noncurrent-Carrying Wiring Devices 3645 Residential Electric Lighting Fixtures 3646 Industrial and Institutional Electric Lighting Fixtures 3647 Vehicular Lighting Equipment 3648 Lighting Equipment, NEC 365 Household Audio and Video Equipment and Audio Recordings 3651 Household Audio and Video Equipment 3652 Prerecorded Audio Tapes and Disks and Phonograph Records 366 Communications Equipment 3661 Telephone and Telegraph Apparatus 3663 Radio and TV Broadcasting and Communications Equipment 3669 Communications Equipment, NEC 367 Electronic Components and Accessories 3671 Electron Tubes 3672 Printed Circuit Boards 3674 Semiconductors and Related Devices 3675 Electronic Capacitors 3676 Electronic Resistors 3677 Electronic Coils, Transformers and Other Inductors 3678 Electronic Connectors 3679 Electronic Components, NEC 369 Miscellaneous Electrical Machinery and Supplies 3691 Storage Batteries 3692 Primary Batteries Dry and Wet 3694 Electrical Equipment For Internal Combustion Engines 3695 Magnetic and Optical Recording Media 3699 Electrical Machinery, Equipment and Supplies, NEC 37 TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT 371 Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Equipment 3711 Motor Vehicles and Passenger Car Bodies 3713 Truck and Bus Bodies 3714 Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories 3715 Truck Trailers 3716 Motor Homes 372 Aircraft and Parts 3721 Aircraft 3724 Aircraft Engines and Engine Parts 3728 Aircraft Parts and Auxiliary Equipment, NEC 373 Ship and Boat Building and Repairing 3731 Ship Building and Repairing 3732 Boat Building and Repairing 374 Railroad Equipment 3743 Railroad Equipment 375 Motorcycles, Bicycles and Parts 3751 Motorcycles, Bicycles and Parts 376 Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles and Parts 3761 Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles 3764 Guided Missile and Space Vehicle Propulsion Unit Parts 3769 Guided Missile and Space Parts and Auxiliary Equipment, NEC 379 Miscellaneous Transportation Equipment 3792 Travel Trailers and Campers 3795 Tanks and Tank Components 3799 Transportation Equipment, NEC 38 MEASURING, ANALYZING AND CONTROLLING INSTRUMENTS 381 Search, Detection, Nautical and Aeronautical Systems 3812 Search, Detection, Nautical and Aeronautical Systems 382 Laboratory Apparatus and Controlling Instruments 3821 Laboratory Apparatus and Furniture 3822 Automatic Controls For Environments and Appliances 3823 Industrial Instruments For Measurement, Display and Control of Process Variables 3824 Totalizing Fluid Meters and Counting Devices 3825 Instruments For Measuring and Testing Electricity and Signals 3826 Laboratory Analytical Instruments 3827 Optical Instruments and Lenses 3829 Measuring and Controlling Devices, NEC 384 Surgical, Medical and Dental Instruments and Supplies 3841 Surgical and Medical Instruments and Apparatus 3842 Orthopedic, Prosthetic and Surgical Appliances 3843 Dental Equipment and Supplies 3844 X-ray Apparatus and Tubes and Related Irradiation Apparatus 3845 Electromedical and Electrotherapeutic Apparatus 385 Ophthalmic Goods 3851 Ophthalmic Goods 386 Photographic Equipment and Supplies 3861 Photographic Equipment and Supplies 387 Watches, Clocks, Clockwork Operated Devices and Parts 3873 Watches, Clocks, Clockwork Operated Devices and Parts 39 MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 391 Jewelry, Silverware and Plated Ware 3911 Jewelry, Precious Metal 3914 Silverware, Plated Ware and Stainless Steel Ware 3915 Jewelers' Findings and Materials and Lapidary Work 393 Musical Instruments 3931 Musical Instruments 394 Dolls, Toys, Games and Sporting and Athletic Goods 3942 Dolls and Stuffed Toys 3944 Children's Vehicles, Games and Toys, Except Dolls and Bicycles 3949 Sporting and Athletic Goods, NEC 395 Pens, Pencils and Other Artists Materials 3951 Pens, Mechanical Pencils and Parts 3952 Lead Pencils, Crayons and Artists Materials 3953 Marking Devices 3955 Carbon Paper and Inked Ribbons 396 Costume Jewelry, Novelties, Buttons and Notions 3961 Costume Jewelry and Costume Novelties, Except Precious Metal 3965 Fasteners, Buttons, Needles and Pins 399 Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries 3991 Brooms and Brushes 3993 Signs and Advertising Specialties 3995 Burial Caskets 3996 Hard Surface Floor Coverings, NEC 3999 Manufacturing Industries, NEC  
Appendix II - INFORMATION REQUIRED WITH APPLICATIONS 

A-1 - In General 
A-1.1  As provided in section 4-4, it is presumed that all of the information listed in this appendix must be submitted with an application for a zoning, building or special-use permit to enable the permit-issuing authority to determine whether the development, if completed as proposed, will comply with all the requirements of this Ordinance. As set forth in section 5-2, applications for variances are subject to the same provisions. However, the permit-issuing authority may require more information or accept as sufficient less information according to the circumstances of the particular case. A developer who believes information presumptively required by this appendix is unnecessary shall contact the planning staff for an interpretation. 
A-1.2  As also provided in section 4-4, the administrator shall develop application processes, including standard forms, to simplify and expedite applications for simple developments that do not require the full range of information called for in this appendix. In particular, developers seeking only permission to construct single-family or two-family residences or to construct new or modify existing signs should contact the administrator for standard forms. 
A-2 - Written Application 
    Every applicant for a variance or a zoning, building or special-use permit shall complete a written application containing at least the following information: 
A-2.1  The name, address, and phone number of the applicant. 
A-2.2  If the applicant is not the owner of the property in question, (i) the name, address, and phone number of the owner, and (ii) the legal relationship of the applicant to the owner that entitles the applicant to make application. 
A-2.3  The date of the application. 
A-2.4  Identification of the particular permit sought. 
A-2.5  A succinct statement of the nature of the development proposed under the permit or the nature of the variance. 
A-2.6  Identification of the property in question by street address and tax map reference. 
A-2.7  The zoning district within which the property lies. 
A-2.8  The number of square feet in the lot where the development is to take place. 
A-2.9  The gross floor area of all existing or proposed buildings located on the lot where the development is to take place. 
A-2.10  If the proposed development is a two-family or multifamily residential development or an architecturally integrated subdivision, the number of one-, two-, three-, or four-bedroom dwelling units proposed for construction. 
A-3 - Development Site Plans 
    Subject to section A-1 of this appendix, every application for a variance, zoning, building, or special-use permit shall contain plans that locate the development site and graphically demonstrate existing and proposed natural, manmade, and legal features on and near the site in question, all in conformity with Sections A-4 through A-6 of this appendix. 
A-4 - Graphic Materials Required for Plans 
A-4.1  The plans shall include a location map that shows the location of the project in the broad context of the town or planning jurisdiction. This location map may be drawn on the development site plans or it may be furnished separately using reduced copies of maps of the town's planning jurisdiction available at the planning and inspections department. 
A-4.2  Development site plans shall be drawn to scale, using such a scale that all features required to be shown on the plans are readily discernible. Very large developments may require that plans show the development in sections to accomplish this objective without resort to plans that are so large as to be cumbersome, or the objective may be accomplished by using different plans or plans drawn to different scales to illustrate different features. In all cases, the permit-issuing authority shall make the final determination whether the plans submitted are drawn to the appropriate scale, but the applicant for a conditional- or special-use permit may rely in the first instance on the recommendations of the administration. 
A-4.3  Development site plans should show on the first page the following information: 
(A)  Name of applicant. 
(B)  Name of development (if any). 
(C)  North arrow. 
(D)  Legend. 
(E)  Scale. 
A-4.4  All of the features required to be shown on plans by Sections A-5 and A-6 may be included on one (1) set of plans, so long as the features are distinctly discernible. 
A-5 - Existing Natural, Manmade, and Legal Features 
A-5.1  Development sites plans shall show all existing natural, manmade, and legal features on the lot where the development is to take place, including, but not limited to, those listed below. In addition, the plans shall also show those features, indicated in the following by an asterisk, that are located within fifty (50) feet in any direction of the lot where the development is to take place, and shall specify (by reference to the Table of Permissible Uses or otherwise) the use made of adjoining properties. 
A-5.2  Existing natural features. 
(A)  Tree line of wooded areas. 
(B)  Individual trees eighteen (18) inches in diameter or more, identified by common or scientific name. 
(C)  Location of CAMA AEC's and 404 wetlands, flood hazard zones, and natural features affecting the site. 
(D)  If the proposed development is located within any Zone A on the flood insurance rate map, base flood elevation data (see Article 18). 
(E)  Contour lines (shown as dotted lines) with no larger than two-foot contour intervals. (As indicated in subsection A-6.2(Q), proposed contour lines shall be shown as solid lines). 
A-5.3  Existing manmade features. 
(A)  Vehicle accommodation areas (including parking areas, loading areas, and circulation areas, see Article 20), all designated by surface material and showing the layout of existing parking spaces and direction of travel lanes, aisles, or driveways. 
(B)  Streets, private roads, sidewalks, and other walkways, all designated by surface material. 
(C)  Curbs and gutters, curb inlets and curb cuts, and drainage grates. 
(D)  Other stormwater or drainage facilities, including manholes, pipes, and drainage ditches. 
(E)  Underground utility lines, including water, sewer, electric power, telephone, gas, cable television. 
(F)  Aboveground utility lines and other utility facilities. 
(G)  Fire hydrants. 
(H)  Buildings, structures, and signs (including dimensions of each). 
(I)  Location of exterior light fixtures. 
(J)  Location of dumpsters. 
A-5.4  Existing legal features. 
(A)  The zoning of the property, including zoning district lines where applicable. 
(B)  Property lines (with dimensions identified). 
(C)  Street right-of-way lines. 
(D)  Utility or other easement lines. 
A-6 - Proposed Changes in Existing Features or New Features 
A-6.1  Development site plans shall show proposed changes in existing natural features (see A-5.2), existing manmade features (see A-5.3), and existing legal features (see A-5.4). 
A-6.2  Development site plans shall also show proposed new legal features (especially new property lines, street right-of-way lines, and utility and other easements), as well as proposed man-made features, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(A)  The number of square feet in every lot created by a new subdivision. 
(B)  Lot dimensions, including lot widths measured in accordance with section 13-1. 
(C)  The location and dimensions of all buildings and freestanding signs on the lot, as well as the distances all buildings and freestanding signs are set back from property lines, streets, or street right-of-way lines (see section 13-1). 
(D)  Principal side(s) building elevations for typical units of new buildings or exterior remodelings of existing buildings, showing building heights (see section 13-1) and proposed wall sign or window sign area. 
(E)  The location and dimensions of all recreational areas provided in accordance with Article 15, with each area designated as to type of use. 
(F)  Areas intended to remain as usable open space. The plans shall clearly indicate whether such open space areas are intended to be offered for dedication to public use or to remain privately owned. 
(G)  Streets and street name showing whether curb and gutter or shoulders and swales are to be provided and indicating street paving widths. Private roads in subdivisions shall also be shown and clearly labeled as such. 
(H)  Curbs and gutters, curb inlets and curb cuts, drainage grates. 
(I)  Other stormwater or drainage facilities, including manholes, pipes, drainage ditches, retention ponds, etc. 
(J)  Sidewalks and walkways, showing widths and surface material. 
(K)  Bridges. 
(L)  Outdoor illumination with lighting fixtures sufficiently identified to demonstrate compliance with section 17-4. 
(M)  Underground utility lines, including water, sewer, electric power, telephone, gas, cable television. Water and sewer pipe line signs shall be labeled. 
(N)  Aboveground utility lines and other facilities. 
(O)  Fire hydrants. 
(P)  Dumpsters. 
(Q)  New contour lines resulting from earth movement (shown as solid lines) with no larger than two-foot contour intervals (existing lines should be shown as dotted lines). 
(R)  Scale drawings of all signs requiring permits pursuant to Article 19, together with an indication of the location and dimensions of all such signs. 
(S)  Vehicle accommodation areas (including parking areas, loading areas, and circulation areas, see Article 20), all designated by surface material and showing the dimensions and direction of travel of lanes, aisles, and driveways. 
A-7 - Documents and Written Information in Addition to Plans 
    In addition to the written application and the plans, whenever the nature of the proposed development makes information or documents such as the following relevant, such documents or information shall be provided. The following is a representative list of the types of information or documents that may be requested: 
A-7.1  Documentation confirming that the applicant has a legally sufficient interest in the property proposed for development to use it in the manner requested, or is the duly appointed agent of such a person. 
A-7.2  Certifications from the appropriate agencies that proposed utility systems are or will be adequate to handle the proposed development, as set forth in Article 17, and that all necessary easements have been provided. 
A-7.3  Detailed description of play apparatus or other recreational facilities to be provided in miniparks. 
A-7.4  Legal documentation establishing homeowners associations or other legal entities responsible for control over required common areas and facilities. 
A-7.5  Bonds, letters of credit, or other surety devices. 
A-7.6  Stamped envelopes containing the names and addresses of all those to whom notice of a public hearing must be sent to comply with sections 4-7 and 6-2. 
A-7.7  Complete documentation justifying any requested deviation from specific requirements established by this Ordinance as presumptively satisfying design standards. 
A-7.8  Time schedules for the completion of phases in staged development, as required by section 4-13. 
A-7.9  The environmental impact of a development, including its effect on historically significant or ecologically fragile or important areas and its impacts on pedestrian or traffic safety or congestion. 
A-7.10  For a zoning or building permit, an impact study regarding drainage of the area to be developed and all adjoining property and all downstream properties as regards surface runoff water shall be performed by a registered land surveyor or registered engineer. If there is no impact, then a statement to that effect shall be made by a registered land surveyor or registered engineer. All proposed drainage on the property to be developed shall be set forth in the impact study and shall be in compliance with section 13-3 of this Ordinance. This section applies to major and/or multiunit developments only. 
A-8 - Number of Copies of Plans and Documents 
    With respect to all plans and other documents required by this appendix, the developer shall submit the number of copies (not to exceed eighteen (18)) that the administrator deems necessary to expedite the review process and to provide necessary permanent records. 
Appendix III - STANDARD CONCRETE SIDEWALK 

General notes: 
A grooved joint 1" deep with ?" radii shall be required in the concrete sidewalk at 5' intervals. On [one] 1/2" expansion joint will be required at 45' intervals. A 1/2" expansion joint will be required where the sidewalk joins any rigid structure. 
Joint sealer shall be hot-poured rubber asphalt. 
Width of sidewalks on thoroughfares shall be a minimum of 5'. Width of sidewalks in the Downtown Business and Downtown Commercial districts will be determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11, § 8, 4-8-2014) 
Appendix IV - PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS 
STREET SPACE USED FOR VARIOUS PARKING POSITIONS 
Based on stall width as shown, including lines. No overhang of curb. 
Car length: 18 feet. 
Car width: 6 feet, 6 inches. 
Wheel base: 10 feet, 6 inches. 
Overall turning diameter: 23 feet, 3 inches. 
Stall 
Width Positions 
at Curb Width of 
Street Used 
When Parked Street Width 
Needed for 
Parking Plus 
Maneuvering Length 
of Curb 
Per Car 9 feet 30° 18.8' 29.5' 18.8' 45° 19.1' 30.1' 12.7' 60° 20.0' 37.0' 10.4' 90° 18.0' 41.0'  9.0'  

Appendix V - SIGNS 
Signs shall be subject to the requirements of Article 19, Signs. 
Sign Type Permitted Areas Requirements Found 
Under: Exempt Signs All Zoning Districts Section 19-4 Fence Screening Signs Section 19-21 Governmental Signs and Flags Section 19-23 Temporary Signs Section 19-8 Pedestrian Wayfinding Signs CD and DB Districts Section 19-20 Projecting Signs Section 19-17 Suspended Signs Section 19-16 A-Frame and T-Frame Signs Non-Residential Districts [CD, CM, DB, CN, CH, I, PM, commercial PDs, OP, MA, IC] Section 19-19 Awning Signs Section 19-14 Banner Signs Section 19-11 Canopy Signs Section 19-13 Flag Signs Section 19-12 Freestanding Signs - Secondary Section 19-6 Inflatable Displays Section 19-10 Interior Parking Area Signs Section 19-9 Interior Parking Area Signs - Menu Boards Section 19-9 Pole Banner Signs Section 19-22 Window Signs Section 19-15 Freestanding Signs - Primary Non-Residential Districts [CD, CM, DB, CN, CH, I, PM, commercial PDs, OP, MA, IC]; subdivision, multifamily, and planned development entrances Section 19-6 Wall Signs Section 19-5 Roof Signs Portion of DB District Section 19-18 Freestanding Signs - Nonresidential Uses in Residential Districts Residential Districts [R5, R5S, R7, R10, R15, R15M, R15SM, R20, RMF, and residential PDs] Section 19-6  
(Ord. No. 2016-22, 7-12-2016) 
Appendix VI - TREE PLANTING RECOMMENDATIONS 
Recommended Canopy Tree List 
Common Name Scientific Name Mature Height 
(in feet) Mature Width 
(in feet) Site Form Special 
Considerations Images American beech Fagus grandifolia 50-80 40-60 Sun to partial shade; moist, well-drained soil Dense; broad with wide spreading crown Deciduous; native; casts very dense shade; shallow roots; difficult to grow plants underneath; seeds poisonous if ingested (low-toxicity); no serious pests; younger trees hold leaves in winter Atlantic white cedar Chamae- 
cyparis thyoides 40-85 10-20 Sun; range of soil types, including damp soil Tall, slender columnar tree; loses lower branches with age Evergreen; native; not shade tolerant; salt tolerant Bald cypress Taxodium distichum 50-100 20-30 Sun; grows in variety of soils (wet, dry, and compacted) Pyramidal in youth; broad open crown at maturity Deciduous; native; casts light shade; cypress knees produced when grown in or near water; large taproot; heat and drought tolerant; no serious pests Black gum, Black tupelo, Sour gum Nyssa sylvatica 40-60 20-30 Sun to partial shade; prefers moist, well-drained soil; provide shelter from wind Pyramidal when young; opens with age; some branches are pendulous Deciduous; native; long taproot; spectacular fall color, no serious pests Crepe (Crape) myrtle [Basham Pink, Fantasy, Kiowa, and other large varieties] Lagerstroemia (Large Varieties) 35-50 25-35 Six hours or more of direct sun to maximize blooming; sand, loam, or clay Multi-stemmed; rounded crown; dense branching Deciduous Dawn redwood Metasequoia glypto- 
stroboides 50-90 15-25 Sun; moist, well-drained soil Pyramidal, conical with single straight trunk Deciduous; casts medium shade Deodar cedar Cedrus deodara 30-50 30-40 Sun to partial shade; well-drained, somewhat dry site; needs protection from wind Pyramidal with pendulous branches Evergreen; cones on female tree Eastern redcedar Juniperus virginiana 30-40 42663 Sun; prefers well-drained soil but tolerates wide range of soil types Densley pyramidal; becomes irregular and slightly pendulous with age Evergreen; native; cones (resemble berries) and leaves are poisonous if ingested (low-toxicity); drought and heat tolerant; may be susceptible to bagworm Giant arborvitae, Western red cedar Thuja plicata 50-80 15-25 Sun to partial shade; moist, well-drained soil but does well in clay; needs protection from wind Conical; narrow to broad pyramidal Evergreen; cone production begins at age 10-20 years; bagworms can be a problem Ginkgo, Maidenhair tree Ginkgo biloba 40-70 20-40 Sun; range of soil types except wet soil Irregular horizontal branches; pyramidal Deciduous, plant only male trees; messy fruit; drought, heat, air pollution, and salt tolerant; outer pulp of seeds and raw seed kernel are poisonous if ingested in large quantities Green ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica 50-60 25-30 Sun; tolerates wet to dry soil Pyramidal in youth; upright; spreading; irregular crown Deciduous; drought, wind, and salt tolerant Pignut hickory Carya glabra 50-60 25-35 Sun to partial shade; range of soil types, however, prefers well-drained acidic soils Regular, open, oval head; slender, contorted branches Deciduous; drought tolerant; deep taproot Thornless common honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos vari. Inermis 30-70 20-40 Sun; range of soil types Short trunk; open spreading crown Deciduous; drought tolerant; casts light shade; some varieties' root systems will lift sidewalks Japanese black pine Pinus thunbergiana 40-70 15-25 Sun; range of soil types but prefers well-drained soil Pyramidal when young; irregular, asymmetrical, spreading crown with pendulous branches with age; dense Evergreen; heat and drought tolerant; very tolerant to salt spray Lacebark elm, Chinese elm, Drake elm Ulmus parvifolia 40-50 30-40 Sun; prefers moist, well-drained soil; tolerates poor soil Round-headed tree, pendulous branches Deciduous; durable tree; resistant to Dutch Elm disease and air pollution; bark sheds Loblolly pine (non-dwarf variety) Pinus taeda 50-90 30-40 Sun to partial shade; tolerant of poor soils Horizontal, ascending branches; oval-rounded crown; loosely pyramidal in youth Evergreen; native; most rapid growth of all pine trees; good wind break Oak: White oak Quercus alba 60-100 50-90 Sun; prefers moist, well-drained soil but tolerates a range of soil types, including clay Pyramidal in youth; broad crown with age; massive, spreading tree with thick trunk Deciduous; native; avoid planting near paved areas; does not withstand construction damage well; drought tolerant; acorns and young leaves are poisonous if ingested (low-toxicity) Oak: Willow oak Quercus phellos 60-80 30-40 Sun; prefers moist, well-drained soil, but will grow in a wide range of soil conditions, including compacted soil Conical in youth; rounded crown; dense Deciduous; native; tolerant of heat, drought, air pollution, and standing water; acorns and young leaves are poisonous if ingested (low-toxicity) Red maple Acer rubrum 40-60 25-45 Sun to shade; range of soil types Pyramidal when young; ascending branches with an irregular, rounded crown Deciduous; native; some air pollution tolerance River birch Betula nigra 40-70 20-60 Sun to partial shade; moist, well-drained soil Multi-stemmed, pyramidal in youth, rounded at maturity Deciduous; native; best not to prune in spring - sap "bleeds"; heat tolerant Sassafras Sassafras albidum 30-60 25-40 Sun to partial shade; moist, well-drained soil but is adaptable Pyramidal in youth; irregular rounded crown with age Deciduous; native; bark poisonous if ingested (low toxicity) Southern magnolia Magnolia grandiflora 40-80 25-40 Sun to partial shade; well-drained soil; tolerates high moisture Symmetrical, sweeps to ground Evergreen; native; dense and shallow roots make it difficult to grow plants; should be planted where lowest branches can grow to ground; difficult to grow anything underneath Sweetgum Liquidambar styraciflua 60-100 50-75 Sun to partial shade; dry to moist soil Pyramidal in youth; upright; semi-conical to spreading with age Deciduous; non-fruiting variety, such as Rotundiloba, preferred; resistant to insect attack; provide large areas of shade; capable of fixing nitrogen in soil Sycamore Platanus occidentalis 70-100 60-80 Sun to partial shade; prefers moist, well-drained soil Large massive trunk; wide-spreading open crown; crooked branches Deciduous; subject to anthracnose and lace bugs Tulip poplar, tuliptree, yellow poplar Liriodendron tulipifera 40-100 20-40 Sun; moist, well-drained soil Tall, straight trunk; upper branches create a rounded crown; in an open landscape has upright, oval shape Deciduous; native; branches are brittle; not a true poplar  
Images from the North Carolina State University Cooperative Extension Plant List Database, the University of Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences Extension Southern Tree Fact Sheets, and the US Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service Plant Database 
Recommended Understory Tree List 
Common Name Scientific Name Mature Height 
(in feet) Mature Width 
(in feet) Site Form Special 
Considerations Images American holly Ilex opaca 25-50 15-35 Sun to partial shade; moist to dry soil Upright; conical; pyramidal in youth; with age open, irregular with high branches at wide angles Evergreen; native; both male and female plants needed for berry production; berries toxic in large quantities (low-toxicity) Carolina cherry laurel Prunus caroliniana 20-40 15-20 Sun to partial shade; moist, well-drained soil Pyramidal in youth; dense; rounded crown with age Evergreen; native; foliage is poisonous to livestock; withstands heavy pruning; wilted leaves, twigs (stems), and seeds poisonous if ingested (highly toxic; may be fatal) Chastetree Vitex agnus-castus 15-20 42658 Sun; range of soil types Rounded; oval; open; shrubby Deciduous; prefers hot weather; withstands heavy pruning in spring Chinese pistachio Pistacia chinensis 25-40 25-35 Sun; prefers moist, well-drained soil but tolerates a wide range of soils Oval; rounded; spreading; vase shape Deciduous; drought tolerant Crepe (Crape) myrtle Lagerstroemia Aug-35 6-15 Sun; moist, well-drained soil Multi-stemmed; rounded crown; dense branching Deciduous; select powdery mildew resistant cultivars; depending on the location, small or medium (non-dwarf) varieties may be desirable Dwarf palmetto; swamp palmetto (or any other palm suitable to site conditions) Sabal minor 8-10 Sun to light shade; moist, well-drained soil Alternate, palmately compound, fan-shaped blue-green leaves Evergreen; salt and drought tolerant Eastern redbud; Redbud Cercis canadensis 15-30 15-25 Sun to partial shade; prefers moist, well-drained soil but tolerates a range of soil types Dense; flat-topped to rounded crown; often multi-stemmed; zig-zag horizontal branches Deciduous; native; prone to root rot in wet soils; Trees look better when they receive some irrigation in summer dry spells Florida anise tree Illicium flordanum 10 8 Partial shade; average to moist soil Broad-leafed; compact stature Evergreen; foliage and fruit are poisonous to livestock; should be mulched and watered during prolonged dry spells as it has a tendency to wilt Crabapples Malus 15-25 10-20 Sun; tolerates a range of soil types but prefers moist, well-drained soil Most have a round to spreading crown; vase shaped; varies with species and cultivar Deciduous; plant only disease-resistant cultivars; best located away from patios or other hard surfaces, as fruits can drop and cause a mess Flowering dogwood Cornus florida 15-30 15-20 Partial shade; moist, well-drained soil Semi-rounded top; horizontal low branches creating a layered look Deciduous; native; shallow root system; mulch to maintain moist soil; may be subject to leaf and flower diseases, cankers, and root rot; may be trained to grow with a single trunk Fringe tree Chionanthus 20-Dec 12-20 Sun to partial shade; average moisture; tolerates dry soil Spreading, open crown; often multi-stemmed Deciduous; native Hedge Maple Acer campestre 25-35 25-35 Sun to light shade; moist, well-drained soil but tolerates slightly wet and compacted soil Low-branched with a rounded form Deciduous; tolerates drought, air pollution, and wind; casts dense shade; shallow root system American hornbeam, Ironwood, Muscel 
wood, Blue beech* Carpinus caroliniana 20-30 20-30 Sun to partial shade; does well in moist to wet soil Wide-spreading flat or round top; single or multi-stemmed Deciduous; native; Slow grower, very interesting, muscular tree Japanese Maple Acer palmatum 20-25 15-20 Sun to modest shade; prefers moist, well-drained soil but tolerates a range of soil types including sand and heavy clay Dense, rounded top; spreading branches Deciduous; drought tolerant Little Gem magnolia Magnolia grandiflora 'Little Gem' 15-20 8-10 Sun to part shade Compact, upright growth habit more typical of a multi-stemmed shrub than a single-trunked tree Evergreen; dwarf cultivar of Southern magnolia; ideal for low-maintenance landscape Loquat Eriobotrya japonica 25-Oct 8-10 Sun to partial shade; moist, well-drained soil Short, slender trunk; dense rounded form Evergreen; cold sensitive; modest drought tolerance; usually does not fruit in NC; can be used in areas where overhead space is limited; pit kernel from cracked seeds toxic in large quantities Nellie R. Stevens Holly Ilex x 'Nellie R. Stevens' 30-40 10-15 Sun to partial shade; prefers well-drained soil but tolerates a range of soil types (heavy clay; damp); best to avoid wet sites Oval; pyramidal; upright; dense Evergreen; allow room for spreading; drought and heat tolerant Common persimmon Diospyros virginiana 30-60 20-35 Sun to light shade; prefers moist, well-drained soil but tolerates dry soil Pyramidal in youth; slender, oval rounded crown Deciduous; native; deep tap root; drought tolerant Possumhaw holly Ilex decidua 20-30 7-15 Sun to partial shade; moist to dry soil Loose; rounded; many horizontal and ascending branches Deciduous; native berries persist through winter Red buckeye; scarlet buckeye; firecracker plant Aesculus pavia 10-30 10-20 Sun to partial shade; moist, well-drained soil; dislikes dry soil Clump forming; round top Deciduous; native; leaf scorch possible in hot sunny, dry summers River birch Betula nigra 40-70 20-60 Sun to partial shade; moist, well-drained soil Multi-stemmed, pyramidal in youth, rounded at maturity Deciduous; native; best not to prune in spring - sap "bleeds"; heat tolerant Savannah holly Ilex x attenuata 'Savannah' 25-30 10 Sun; well-drained soil Loosely pyramidal; upright Evergreen Serviceberry Amelanchier arborea 25-Oct 10-15 Sun to partial shade; prefers moist soil but will tolerate a range of soil types (dry, clay, sand, wet) Irregular branching; narrow, rounded crown Deciduous; native; fire blight can be problem Sourwood, Lily of the valley tree, Sorrel tree Oxydendrum arboreum 20-30 10-15 Sun to partial shade; well-drained soil but does well in dry soil Pyramidal; slender trunk; drooping branches; narrow crown Deciduous; native Star Magnolia Magnolia stellata 20-Oct 10-15 Sun; range of soil types (clay, sand) Typically branching close to the ground, the multi-stemmed form develops with a dense head of foliage Deciduous; frost-sensitive; plant in protected site; tolerates heat; Intolerant of root competition or dryness Swamp magnolia, Sweet bay, Sweetbay magnolia Magnolia virginiana Oct-60 10-20 Sun to partial shade; moist to wet soil Conical narrow, rounded crown; multi-trunked; upright spreading habit Evergreen; native; shallow roots; Trident maple Acer buergerianum 25-35 20-30 Sun; well-drained soil; tolerates dry, infertile sites Upright; rounded crown Deciduous; tolerant of wind, salt, drought, air pollution, and soil compaction; may suffer breakage with ice storms Waxmyrtle, Southern waxmyrtle Myrica cerifera 15-Oct 8-10 Sun to partial shade; range of soil types (sand, clay, poor fertility) Irregular; rounded; dense Evergreen; native; drought and salt spray tolerant; fixes atmospheric nitrogen; spreads by suckers; can be severely pruned Wild olive; Devilwood Osmanthus americanus 15-25 10-20 Sun to partial shade; range of soil conditions Symmetrical, round, and dense crown Evergreen; native; drought resistant once established; salt tolerant Witchhazel* Hamamelis virginiana 15-30 15-25 Sun to shade; moist, well-drained soil; avoid extremely dry sites Open spreading; irregular branching; multi-stemmed Deciduous; native; roots are sensitive to disturbance Yaupon Holly Ilex vomitoria 15-25 15-20 Sun to part shade Round; vase shape Evergreen; sprouting plants underneath can be difficult if soil beneath canopy is disturbed; needs to be pruned to ground two or three times a year to maintain neat appearance  
Images from the North Carolina State University Cooperative Extension Plant List Database, the University of Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences Extension Southern Tree Fact Sheets, and the US Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service Plant Database 
Evergreen Planting Recommendation 
    For the health of the tree stand and protection of landscaping investment, it is recommended that evergreens consist of no less than three (3) different, unrelated species, planted alternately, so that no two (2) plants of the same species or related species is next to one another. 
Tree Types to be Planted with Caution 
Black alder ( Ilex verticillata ). Not heat tolerant. 
Black cherry ( Prunus serotina ). Weedy and aggressive. 
Bradford pear ( Pyrus calleryana ). One of the South's most overplanted trees; relatively short-lived; brittle and easily-damaged in storms. 
Chinese privet, variegatum ( Ligustrum ). Invasive. 
Locust ( Robinia ). Can become very weedy; root suckers prolifically. 
Long leaf pine ( Pinus palustris ). Uproots and breaks in half in high winds. Avoid planting near homes and other structures. 
Pecan ( Carya illinoinensis ). Tends to be brittle and lose large limbs in high winds. Avoid planting near homes and other structures. 
Silver maple ( Populus alba ).Weak wood. 
Water oak ( Quercus nigra ). Weak wood; limbs break in wind; weedy. 
Yucca ( Yucca aloifolia ). Not for use where children play; useful where human access is to be discouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, §§ 298-302, 6-13-2017) 
Appendix VII - ANNEXATIONS AND CORPORATE BOUNDARIES[1] 
ORDINANCES EXTENDING CORPORATE LIMITS 
[1]  By virtue of the authority granted in G.S. 160-452, the following described territory is hereby annexed to the Town of Morehead City effective immediately: Beginning at a point, said point being the southwest intersection of the west right-of-way line of Seashore Lane and the south right-of-way line of Old Highway No. 70 (Bridges Street), said point also being the northeast corner of Lot No. 17 of the Rex H. Burton [Rex K. Bruton] Subdivision as recorded in Map Book 1, page 289; thence with the west right-of-way line of Seashore Lane south 9 degrees, 30 minutes west 222 feet, to a point, said point being the common corner of Lots 16, 17 and 18 of the Rex H. Burton [Rex K. Bruton] Subdivision; thence along the common property line between Lots 16 and 17 in a northerly direction 204 feet, to a point in the southern right-of-way line of Old Highway No. 70 (Bridges Street), said point being the common corner between Lots 16 and 17; thence in a easterly direction along the southern right-of-way line of Old Highway 70 (Bridges Street) 102 feet to the point of beginning and being all of Lot No. 17 in the Rex H. Burton [Rex K. Bruton] Subdivision as recorded in the Office of the Carteret County Registry in Map Book 1, page 289. 
(Ord. No. 1973-2, § 1, 4-10-1973) 
[2]  By virtue of the authority granted in G.S. 160A-31, the following described territory is hereby annexed to the Town of Morehead City effective immediately: Beginning at the common corner between A. T. Leary, Jr. and the northeast corner of North Morehead Extension Subdivision and in the corporate limits line of Morehead City; thence with the city limit line north 69 degrees, 14 minutes west 268.09 feet to an iron pipe; thence leaving the existing city limit line north 17 degrees, 09 minutes west with the western edge of Calico Court Subdivision, 1,059.64 feet to an iron pipe in the southern right-of-way of State Road #1179; thence with the southern right-of-way of State Road #1179 the following courses and distances: (1) south 67 degrees, 41 minutes east 294.31 feet, (2) south 66 degrees, 56 minutes, 30 seconds east 100 feet and (3) south 65 degrees, 55 feet [minutes], 30 seconds east 273.97 feet to the point of intersection with the western right-of-way of Easy Street; thence with the western right-of-way of Easy Street south 17 degrees, 09 minutes east 697.61 feet to the point of intersection with the northern right-of-way of North Youpon Terrace; thence south 69 degrees, 16 minutes east 4.5 feet to a point; thence south 20 degrees, 47 minutes west 260.67 feet to an iron pipe in A. T. Leary Jr.'s rear line, also the corporate limit line; thence with the corporate limit line north 68 degrees, 21 minutes west 181.4 feet to the point of beginning, containing 11.667 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 1973-8, § 1, 11-13-1973) 
[3]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31 amended, the following described territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the eighteenth day of May, 1976: Beginning at a point on the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70-A (Bridges Street) where the center line of North 35th street intersects U.S. Highway 70-A; thence running with the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70-A, said line also being the present corporate limit line the following seven (7) calls and distances; north 86 degrees, 30 minutes west 337.28 feet; north 89 degrees, 00 minutes west 103.58 feet, south 88 degrees, 55 minutes west 104.58 feet, south 86 degrees, 54 minutes west 101.28 feet, south 84 degrees, 57 minutes west 100.50 feet, south 82 degrees, 58 minutes west 103.44 feet, south 80 degrees, 52 minutes west 70.42 feet to a point where the present corporate limit line crosses the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70-A; thence with the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70-A, said line also being the new corporate limit line the following three (3) calls and distances; south 80 degrees, 52 minutes west 27.78 feet, south 77 degrees, 49 minutes west 205.38 feet, south 75 degrees, 03 minutes west 100.00 feet to a point on the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70-A; thence leaving the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70-A north 14 degrees, 51 minutes west 125.54 feet to a point on the present corporate limit line; thence with the present corporate limit line the following [three] (3) calls and distances; south 87 degrees, 00 minutes east 360.00 feet, north 5 degrees, 00 minutes east 326.44 feet, north 85 degrees, 59 minutes, 30 seconds west 678.57 feet to a southeast corner of the J. C. Banks Heirs land; thence with said Banks line north 9 degrees, 36 minutes, 30 seconds east 510.00 feet; thence south 85 degrees, 59 minutes, 30 seconds east 850.00 feet to the southwest corner of the Platt land; thence with said Platt line south 76 degrees, 09 minutes east 321.20 feet to the southwest corner of the Eaton land; thence with said Eaton line south 85 degrees, 53 minutes east 286.75 feet to a point in the center line of North 35th Street; thence south 6 degrees, 23 minutes east along said center line 349.98 feet to a point; thence along said center line south 4 degrees, 48 minutes east, 107.0 feet to a point in the center line; thence leaving the center line of North 35th street and with the Morehead Garden Subdivision line south 85 degrees, 51 minutes east 676.37 feet to a point; thence south 2 degrees, 00 minutes west 271.4 feet to a point on the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70-A; thence along the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70-A said line also being the present corporate limits line north 86 degrees, 17 minutes west 679.4 to the point of beginning. Containing 28.09 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1976-6, § 1, 5-18-1976) 
[4]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the twelfth day of December, 1978: Beginning at a point, which point is identified as being the northwest corner of Lot 28 of the Rex K. Bruton Subdivision as shown in Map Book 1, page 289, Carteret County Registry, said point being further identified as being in the southern boundary line of that property formerly known as the Rifle Range property; thence from said point and with the western line of Lot 28, Rex K. Bruton Subdivision, south 7 degrees, 09 minutes, 50 seconds west 288.92 feet to a point in the northern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70-A (Bridges Street), said point being further identified as being the southwest corner of Lot 28, Rex K. Burton [Rex K. Bruton] Subdivision as shown in Map Book 1, page 289, Carteret County Registry; thence from said point and with the northern line of said right-of-way south 65 degrees, 06 minutes, 30 seconds west 31.64 feet to a point, said point being the southeast corner of Lot 8, John C. Banks Subdivision, north 24 degrees, 54 minutes, 30 seconds west 332.55 feet to a point in the line of that property formerly known as the Rifle Range; thence from said point south 89 degrees, 00 minutes east 215 feet to the point of beginning. Being all of Lot 9 of the John C. Banks Subdivision, containing 0.83 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, § 1, 12-12-1978) 
[5]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the tenth day of June, 1980: Beginning at an iron stake at a point on the northwest city limits intersects with property owned by the Carteret County Board of Education running south 8 degrees, 33 minutes west 552.11 feet to a point; thence north 86 degrees, 02 minutes west 475.95 feet to a point which is the southwest corner of the Board of Education property; thence north 8 degrees, 58 minutes east 494.49 feet to a corner; thence north 85 degrees, 31 minutes west 287.0 feet to a point in the ditch on the south side of Country Club Boulevard; thence north 10 degrees, 09 minutes, 10 seconds east 1,160.39 feet along the south side of Country Club Boulevard; thence north 58 degrees, 11 minutes east 228.06 feet to a point in the Calico Creek; thence south 66 degrees, 30 minutes, 20 seconds east 563.57 feet to an iron stake which was the northeast corner of the original Carteret County Board of Education property; thence north 8 degrees, 12 minutes east 113.50 feet to the high water mark of Calico Creek; thence south 33 degrees, 41 minutes east 874.04 feet; thence south 27 degrees, 33 minutes west 476.0 feet to an iron pipe which is the southwest corner of the Carteret County Board of Education property; thence north 89 degrees, 49 minutes west 430.0 feet along the Morehead City limits to the beginning, containing 35.61 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 1980-5, § 1, 6-10-1981) 
[6]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the sixteenth day of October, 1980: Beginning at a point which can be found by beginning where the western right-of-way line of 35th Street intersects the southern right-of-way line of Elm Street, if extended, said point being the northeast corner of the lift station property as shown on that subdivision map duly recorded in the Carteret County Registry in Map Book 14, page 34, and running north 85 degrees, 53 minutes west 256.24 feet to a concrete monument; thence running north 76 degrees, 09 minutes west 201.65 feet to a concrete monument; thence running north 76 degrees, 09 minutes west 120.05 feet to a concrete monument; thence running north 85 degrees, 59 minutes, 30 seconds west 334.81 feet to a concrete monument, the last two (2) calls following the northern boundary line of that subdivision recorded in Map Book 13, page 79, Carteret County Registry; thence running north 85 degrees, 59 minutes, 30 seconds west 60.19 feet to a point in the western right-of-way line of that road known as Penny Lane; thence running north 85 degrees, 59 minutes, 30 seconds west 455 feet to a point in the present municipal boundary line of the Town of Morehead City, that point being the point and place of beginning: thence running north 85 degrees, 59 minutes, 30 seconds west 812.22 feet to a point; thence running south 17 degrees, 17 minutes west 221.5 feet to a concrete monument; thence running south 85 degrees, 59 minutes, 30 seconds east 300.0 feet to a point; thence running south 17 degrees, 17 minutes west about 305 feet to a point near the southeast corner of Lot 3, Block B, Tract 3, as shown on that certain map entitled Tracts 1, 2 and 3, "Professional Park" recorded in Map Book 15, Page 38, Carteret County Registry, said point being in the present boundary line of the Town of Morehead City; thence following the present boundary line of the Town of Morehead City south 85 degrees, 59 minutes, 30 seconds east 582.24 feet to the point where said boundary line corners; thence following the present boundary line of the Town of Morehead City north 9 degrees, 36 minutes, 30 seconds east 510 feet to the point and place of beginning. This tract contains approximately 7.85 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1980-12, § 1, 10-16-1980) 
[7]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the twenty-fifth day of May, 1981: Beginning at a point in the R. R. Barbour Torrens line, in the Calico Creek Marsh, and being the point of intersection of said Torrens line and the west line of the Country Club Heights Subdivision as shown on that map or plat thereof recorded in Book 5, at page 19 of the Carteret County Registry; from said point of beginning running thence south 09 degrees, 03 minutes west, 699.57 feet to an existing iron pipe, the northwest corner of Lot 15, of the Country Club Heights Subdivision; thence south 79 degrees, 31 minutes, 20 seconds east with the north line of the said Lot 15, 129.93 feet to an existing iron pipe in the west right-of-way line of Country Club Boulevard; thence south 10 degrees, 29 minutes, 40 seconds west with the said right-of-way line 100.18 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence north 79 degrees, 23 minutes west, 127.52 feet to an iron pipe, the southwest corner of the said Lot 15; thence south 09 degrees, 08 minutes west, 204.60 feet to a point in a ditch; thence with the center line of said ditch north 68 degrees, 37 minutes west, 164.25 feet to a point; continuing with the said ditch north 65 degrees, 32 minutes, 30 seconds west, 103.45 feet to a point; continuing thence with said ditch north 77 degrees, 57 minutes, 30 seconds west, 200.18 feet to a point in the R.E. Willis east line; running with the Willis east line north 09 degrees, 35 minutes, 30 seconds east, 842.02 feet to a point in the R. R. Barbour Torrens line; thence with the Barbour Torrens line, north 87 degrees, 55 minutes east, 461.30 feet to the point or place of beginning; consisting of approximately 9.88 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 1980-15, § 1, 11-26-1980) 
[8]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the first day of September, 1982: 
[1]  Area A. Beginning at a point in the existing corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City at the southwest corner of Evergreen Park Subdivision as recorded in Map Book 5, page 40, Carteret County Registry: North 20 degrees, 47 minutes, 00 seconds east 260.670 feet with the existing corporate limits, crossing North Yaupon Terrace to a point in the north line of North Yaupon Terrace; thence north 69 degrees, 16 minutes, 00 seconds west 4.500 feet with the existing corporate limits and North Yaupon Terrace to a point; thence north 17 degrees, 09 minutes, 00 seconds west 697.610 feet with the existing corporate limits to a point in the south line of Mayberry Loop Road, also designated as N.C. Secondary Road 1179; thence leaving the existing corporate limits, along the south line of Mayberry Loop Road, south 64 degrees, 24 minutes, 28 seconds east 280.000 feet to a point; thence north 25 degrees, 35 minutes, 32 seconds east 210.000 feet to a point; thence south 64 degrees, 24 minutes, 28 seconds east 150.00 feet to a point; thence south 25 degrees, 35 minutes, 32 seconds west 210.000 feet to a point in the south line of Mayberry Loop Road; thence along the south line of Mayberry Loop Road and crossing Crab Point Road (NCSR 1176) south 64 degrees, 24 minutes, 28 seconds east 279.040 feet to a point in the east line of Crab Point Road; thence north 16 degrees, 11 minutes, 51 seconds west 159.076 feet to the northwest corner of the Howard Williams lot; thence south 66 degrees, 15 minutes, 56 seconds east 189.688 feet with the Williams line and the line of Marvin Moore to the northeast corner of the Marvin Moore lot; thence south 10 degrees, 38 minutes, 13 seconds west 136.812 feet with the Marvin Moore line to his corner in the Joseph Lewis line; thence south 66 degrees, 15 minutes, 56 seconds east 68.470 feet with the Lewis line to the northeast corner of the Joseph Lewis lot; thence south 08 degrees, 08 minutes, 05 seconds west 139.900 feet with the east line of Joseph Lewis lot, to a point in the line of Sally McKitrick; thence south 65 degrees, 46 minutes, 22 seconds east 111.577 feet to the northeast corner of the Sally McKitrick lot; thence south 15 degrees, 22 minutes, 45 seconds west 109.813 feet with the east line of the McKitrick lot to a point in the line of Alma Brock; thence south 68 degrees, 06 minutes, 21 seconds east 101.452 feet with the Brock line to the northeast corner of the Brock lot; thence south 15 degrees, 49 minutes, 50 seconds west 178.761 feet with the Brock eastern line to a corner with Charles Kennedy; thence south 68 degrees, 32 minutes, 57 seconds east 71.018 feet with the north line of the Kennedy lot to the northeast corner of the Charles Kennedy lot; thence south 23 degrees, 12 minutes, 24 seconds west 128.406 feet with the east line of the Charles Kennedy lot, to the line of Arnold Christensen; thence south 73 degrees, 59 minutes, 09 seconds east 121.785 feet to the northeast corner of the Arnold Christensen lot; thence south 18 degrees, 09 minutes, 14 seconds west 169.435 feet with the eastern line of the Arnold Christensen lot, crossing Morris Road to a point in the south line of Morris Road, and the existing corporate limits, and, thence with the existing corporate limits and the north lines of Sections 1, 2 and 3 of North Morehead Subdivision, the following courses and distances; thence north 69 degrees, 46 minutes, 07 seconds west 177.363 feet crossing Crab Point Road to a point in the western line of Crab Point Road; thence south 00 degrees, 14 minutes, 00 seconds west 8.090 feet with the western line of Crab Point Road; thence north 69 degrees, 15 minutes, 00 seconds west 274.570 feet to the east line of North Yaupon Terrace; thence north 69 degrees, 15 minutes, 00 seconds west 60.520 feet to a point in the western line of North Yaupon Terrace; thence north 69 degrees, 15 minutes, 00 seconds west 413.750 feet to the point beginning containing 15.96 acres, all according to a plat by McDavid Associates, Inc., entitled Area A, Corporate Limits Extension, Town of Morehead City, dated April, 1982. 
[2]  Area B. Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 5 of Section 1, Morehead Gardens Subdivision recorded in Map Book 3, page 129, said beginning point being in the current Morehead City corporate limits boundary; thence from said point of beginning along the new corporate limits the following courses and distances: North 4 degrees, 15 minutes east 320 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 12, Morehead Gardens, Section 1; thence south 85 degrees, 45 minutes east 192 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 22; thence north 4 degrees, 15 minutes east 125 feet with the west line of Lot 22 to Elm Street; thence north 4 degrees, 43 minutes east 61 feet crossing Elm Street to the north line of Elm Street, the southwest corner of Lot 31; thence north 4 degrees, 15 minutes east 145 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 31; thence north 85 degrees, 45 minutes west 53.8 feet with the line of Lot 49 to the southwest corner of Lot 49; thence north 10 degrees, 00 minutes east 512.7 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 10, Morehead Gardens Subdivision Section 2, Lot 10; thence south 80 degrees, 45 minutes east 154.9 feet with the north line of Lot 10 to Maple Lane; thence north 10 degrees, 45 minutes east 22.7 feet with the west line of Maple Lane to a point; thence south 79 degrees, 15 minutes east 60 feet crossing Maple Lane to a point in the east line of Maple Lane, the northwest corner of Lot 2, Maple Lane Subdivision, Map Book 13, page 100; thence north 10 degrees, 45 minutes east 660.21 feet with the east line of Maple Lane to a point in the north line of the Carolina Power & Light Company substation tract; thence north 85 degrees, 54 minutes east 282.63 feet to the northeast corner of the Carolina Power & Light Company tract; thence south 11 degrees, 20 minutes west 1854 feet, more or less, with the east line of the Carolina Power & Light Company tract, and the east line of Maple Lane Subdivision to an old axle in the north line of the Mrs. Julius Lewis lot, the southwest corner of the Gunhilde Gunnerson tract as described in Deed Book 317 page 443; thence south 87 degrees, 05 minutes, 44 seconds east 527 feet, more or less, to an old fence post, the southeast corner of the Gunnerson property, a corner with M. R. Willis; thence south 87 degrees, 05 minutes, 44 seconds east 390 feet, more or less, crossing the M. R. Willis tract to a point in the line of Russell Willis; thence north 10 degrees, 32 minutes east 829 feet, more or less, with the Russell Willis line to a ditch; thence about north 73 degrees east 486 feet to a bend in the ditch; thence about south 88 degrees east 320 feet with the ditch to an iron pipe, the southwest corner of Ekklesia Housing Development, a corner of the existing corporate limits; thence with the existing corporate limits the following courses and distances: South 77 degrees, 57 minutes, 30 seconds east 200.18 feet; thence south 65 degrees, 32 minutes, 30 seconds east 103.450 feet; thence south 68 degrees, 37 minutes, 00 seconds east 164.250 feet; thence north 09 degrees, 08 minutes east 204.6; thence south 79 degrees, 23 minutes, 00 seconds east 127.52 feet to the west line of Country Club Boulevard (NCSR 1243); thence north 10 degrees, 29 minutes, 40 seconds, east 100.180 feet with Country Club Boulevard to a point; thence north 79 degrees, 31 minutes, 20 seconds west 129.93 feet; thence north 09 degrees, 03 minutes east 400 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 19, Country Club Heights; thence south 79 degrees, 36 seconds east 200 feet, a new corporate limits line, with the north line of Lot 19 and crossing Country Club Boulevard to a point in the east line of Country Club Boulevard, the existing corporate limits line; thence with the existing corporate limits line the following courses and distances: South 11 degrees west 697 feet, more or less, with the east line of Country Club Boulevard to the northwest corner of Lot 5, Block B, Country Club Heights Subdivision; thence south 85 degrees, 31 minutes east 287 feet to a concrete monument in the center line of Church Street; thence south 08 degrees, 58 minutes west 494.49 feet with the center line of Church Street to a point; thence south 86 degrees, 02 minutes east 475.95 feet with the north line of Bailey Manor Subdivision to a point; thence south 02 degrees, 39 minutes west 700.59 feet with the east line of Baily Manor to a point; thence south 84 degrees, 15 minutes east 1,156.6 feet to a point in 25th Street; thence south 02 degrees, 39 minutes west 575 feet with the old Sabiston line in 25th Street to a point in 25th Street; thence north 78 degrees, 45 minutes west 540 feet to a point in the Atlantic and East Carolina Railroad wye; thence south 13 degrees, 45 minutes west 82 feet with the railroad right-of-way to the northwest corner or [of] Morehead Builders Supply Company lot; thence south 82 degrees east 125 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence south 14 degrees west 100 feet with the east line of said lot to the northwest corner of the Florence McElroy lot; thence south 75 degrees east 100 feet to the northeast corner of the J. P. Noland lot; thence south 16 degrees, 30 minutes west 137.7 feet with the east line of the J. P. Noland lot to the north line of Bridges Street; thence north 59 degrees, 40 minutes west 1,530 feet with the north line of Bridges Street to a point; thence north 64 degrees, 40 minutes west 227 feet with the north line of Bridges Street to a point; thence north 81 degrees, 30 minutes west 317 feet with the north line of Bridges Street to a point; thence south 88 degrees, 04 minutes west 2,270 feet, more or less, with the north line of Bridges Street to a point; thence north 2 degrees, 00 minutes east 291.4 feet leaving the north line of Bridges Street to a point; thence north 85 degrees, 51 minutes west 341.8 feet to the point of beginning containing 106.14 acres, more or less, all according to a plat by McDavid Associates, Inc., entitled Area B, Corporate Limits Extension, Town of Morehead City, dated May, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 1982-25, § 1, 8-26-1982) 
[9]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58, as amended, the following described property is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1983: 
[1]  Tract One. Beginning at a point on the eastern right-of-way of N. C. State Road 1176, also known as the Crab Point Road, which point is the corner northwest corner of the James Willis land, and running thence along the eastern margin of the Crab Point Road, in the Danny Oglesby line; running thence with the Danny Oglesby line, south 14 degrees, 40 minutes east 580.0 feet to a point at the northeast corner of the 992.0 feet to the point or place of beginning, and being 9.03 acres. 
[2]  Tract Two. Beginning at a pipe in the center of ditches on the south side of the Shep Willis Road at the westernmost corner of Tract 3, which is a common corner of Tract 3, Tract 2 (William Willis) and Grady Willis, all according to the survey for Shepard Willis Heirs, recorded in Map Book 16, page 28 of the Carteret County Registry in Beaufort, North Carolina and running thence south 14 degrees, 34 minutes, 40 seconds east 199.80 feet to the intersection of ditches; running thence south 50 degrees, 57 minutes, 30 seconds 207.60 feet to a pipe; running thence north 67 degrees, 45 minutes W 679.50 feet to a pipe in the eastern right-of-way of 1176; running thence with the eastern right-of-way of State Road 1176 north 14 degrees, 55 minutes west 248.0 feet north 11 degrees, 35 minutes west 100 feet east to place of beginning, and containing 7.03 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1983-6, § 1, 5-10-1983) 
[10]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described property is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of July, 1983: Being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point which can be found by proceeding south 13 degrees 46 minutes 40 seconds west 1,394.71 feet to a point, then south 83 degrees 01 minutes 20 seconds east 105.04 feet, both from the southwest corner of the CP&L property as described in Deed Book 292, page 206, Carteret County Registry; and from this point of beginning running north 83 degrees 01 minutes 20 seconds west 105.04 feet to a point; then running north 13 degrees 46 minutes 40 seconds east 1,394.71 feet to a point; then running south 76 degrees 13 minutes 20 seconds east 105.00 feet to a point; then running north 13 degrees 46 minutes 40 seconds east 20 feet to a point; then running south 76 degrees 13 minutes 20 seconds east 370 feet to a point; then running south 12 degrees 0 minutes 40 seconds west 1,138.74 feet to a point; then running north 77 degrees 59 minutes 20 seconds west 194.0 feet to a point; then running south 12 degrees 0 minutes 40 seconds west 12 feet to a point; then running south 0 degrees 19 minutes 40 seconds east 153.62 feet to a point; then running south 5 degrees 40 minutes 40 seconds west 70 feet to a point; then running north 84 degrees 19 minutes 20 seconds west 58.46 to an iron pipe; then running north 84 degrees 22 minutes 3 seconds west 220.83 feet the point and place of beginning, containing 14.87 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1983-11, § 1, 7-12-1983) 
[11]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described property is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of August, 1983: 
Area C. Beginning at a point in the existing corporate limits of Morehead City at the southwestern corner of the corporate limits and the high water mark of Bogue Sound as shown on the "Official Map of the Town of Morehead City" made by Philip K. Ball, February, 1955, and recorded in Map Book 3, Page 100, Carteret County Registry; thence, from the beginning and with the existing corporate limits, north 4 degrees 51 minutes east 1,334 feet, more or less, to a point in the eastern right-of-way line of Seashore Lane; thence, crossing Seashore Lane and continuing with the existing corporate limits in a westerly direction 28.4 feet, more or less, to the common corner of Lots 16, 17, and 18 of the Rex K. Bruton Subdivision; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and along the common property line between Lots 16 and 17 in a northerly direction 204 feet, more or less, to a point in the southern right-of-way line of Bridges street, said point being the common corner between Lots 16 and 17; thence, in an easterly direction along the southern right-of-way line of Bridges Street and with the existing corporate limits 102 feet, more or less, to the southeastern corner of Bridges Street and Seashore Lane; thence, crossing Bridges Street with the existing corporate limits in a northerly direction 105 feet, more or less, to a point in the northern right-of-way of Bridges Street; thence, with the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street and the existing corporate limits in a westerly direction 304.5 feet, more or less, to the southeastern corner of Lot 34 of Rex K. Bruton Subdivision; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and along the common property line between Lots 34 and 35 in a northerly direction 120 feet, more or less, to the northeastern corner of Lot 34; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and along the northern property line of Lot 34 in a westerly direction 55 feet, more or less, to the northwestern corner of Lot 34; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and along the western property line of Lot 34 in a southerly direction 138 feet, more or less, to the southwestern corner of Lot 34, said corner being in the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and with the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street in a southwesterly direction 100 feet to the eastern corner of Lot 31 of the Rex K. Bruton Subdivision; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and along the eastern property line of Lot 31 in a northerly direction 176 feet, more or less, to the northeastern corner of Lot 31; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and along the northern property line of Lots 29, 30, 31 in a westerly direction 149 feet, more or less, to the northwestern corner of Lot 29, said corner also being the northern corner of Lot 28; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and along the western property line of Lot 28 in a southerly direction 280 feet, more or less, to the southwestern corner of Lot 28, said corner being in the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and along the northern right-of-way line to Bridges Street, south 65 degrees 06 minutes 30 seconds west 31.64 feet to the southwestern corner of Lot 9 of the John C. Banks Subdivision; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and along the western property line of Lot 9, north 24 degrees 54 minutes 30 seconds west 332.55 feet to the northwestern corner of Lot 9, said corner being in the southern line of that property formerly known as the Rifle Range; thence, continuing with the existing corporate limits and along the southern line of that property formerly known as the Rifle Range, north 88 degrees 03 minutes west 248.85 feet to the northwestern corner of that property described in Deed Book 400 at Page 318 recorded in the Carteret County Registry; thence, leaving the existing corporate limits and along the western property line of that property described in Deed Book 400, Page 318, south 01 degrees 47 minutes west 14.7 feet to a corner of that property described in Deed Book 367, Page 231, recorded in the Carteret County Registry; thence, with the northern property line of that property described in Deed Book 367, Page 231, north 89 degrees 00 minutes west 214.00 feet to a corner; thence, with the western property line of that property described in Deed Book 367 at Page 231, south 19 degrees 56 minutes west 448 feet, more or less, to the northern right-of-way line of the A&EC Railroad Company; thence, along the northern right-of-way line of the A&EC Railroad Company, the following courses and distances, north 66 degrees 09 minutes 50 seconds west 244.72 feet, north 62 degrees 58 minutes 30 seconds west 475.77 feet, north 62 degrees 07 minutes 08 seconds west 1,618.54 feet, north 62 degrees 09 minutes 25 seconds west 1,548.60 feet to a point; thence south 27 degrees 27 minutes 15 seconds west 402 feet, more or less, to the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70; thence, along the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70 in a westerly direction 208 feet, more or less, to a point; thence, crossing U.S. Highway 70 and continuing in a southerly direction along the western property line of Lot 4 in Block 21 of Morehead Bluffs Subdivision, 310 feet, more or less, to the southwestern corner of Lot 4, in Block 21; thence, along the southern property lines of Lots 4 and 5 in an easterly direction 50 feet, more or less, to the southeastern corner of Lot 5 in Block 21 of Morehead Bluffs Subdivision; thence, along the western property lines of Lots 22 through 37, inclusive, in Block 21, in a southerly direction 400 feet, more or less, to the northern right-of-way line of Central Drive; thence, crossing Central Drive and continuing on along the western property lines of Lots 36 through 60 inclusive, in Block 20 in a southerly direction 675 feet, more or less, to the southwestern corner of Lot 36 in Block 20 of Morehead Bluffs Subdivision, thence, along the northern property line of Lot 30 in Block 20, in a westerly direction 25 feet, more or less, to the northwestern corner of Lot 30 in Block 20; thence, along the western property line of Lot 30 in Block 20 in a southerly direction 140 feet, more or less, to the northern right-of-way line of South Shore Drive; thence, crossing South Shore Drive in a southerly direction to the northwestern corner of Lot 19 in Coral Point Subdivision (Map Book 2, Page 214); thence, along the western property line of Lot 19 in coral Point Subdivision south 28 degrees 00 minutes west to the high water mark of Bogue Sound; thence, a line out into Bogue sound south 28 degrees 00 minutes west 200 feet, more or less, to a point; thence, south 69 degrees 30 minutes east 1050 feet, more or less, to a point; thence, south 82 degrees 15 minutes east 2800 feet, more or less, to a point; thence, south 62 degrees 00 minutes east 1500 feet, more or less, to a point; thence, north 83 degrees 30 minutes east 800 feet, more or less, to a point; thence, north 09 degrees 00 minutes east 300 feet, more or less, to a point in the high water mark of Bogue Sound, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1983-16A, § 1, 8-30-1983) 
Editor's note- See Areas A and B under subsection [8] above. 
[12]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described property is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of October, 1983: Being situated in Morehead City, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at an existing iron pipe at the northwest corner of the D. N. Toler lands, which point is the northwest corner of Lot 2 in the Maple Lane Subdivision, as recorded in that map recorded in Map Book 13, page 100, Carteret County Registry, which point of beginning is also located north 10 degrees 45 minutes east, 1.477.05 feet from a nail in the center line of Bridges Street where the same is intersected by the eastern right-of-way margin of the Carolina Power and Light Company 60-foot right-of-way. From said point of beginning as identified above running thence north 79 degrees 15 minutes west and along the corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City 60.0 feet to the eastern right-of-way margin of Maple Lane as the same appears of record in map recorded in Map Book 4, page 16, Carteret County Registry, at an iron pipe in the western edge of the Carolina Power and Light Company 60-foot right-of-way, and running thence north 10 degrees 45 minutes east 644.69 feet to a 3-inch cast-iron pipe at the northwest corner of the Carolina Power and Light Company substation lot; running thence north 86 degrees 40 minutes 15 seconds east 61.86 feet to a point which intersects the northwest line of the new corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City as the same bisects the undersigned's property; running thence south 10 degrees 34 minutes west and along the western margin of the new corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City 659.74 feet to the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1983-19, § 1, 10-1-1983) 
[13]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described property is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of August, 1984: Beginning in the north right-of-way margin of Pine Street where said margin is intersected by the present municipal limits of the Town of Morehead City; and running thence for a first call north 85 degrees 45 minutes west 42.21 feet; thence 04 degrees 15 minutes east 125.0 feet to a point in the south property line of the property of Wesley Long; thence with said property line south 85 degrees 45 minutes east 42.46 feet to a point which is a corner of the existing municipal limits of the Town of Morehead City; thence with the municipal limits line south 04 degrees 15 minutes west 125.0 feet to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. 1984-14, § 1, 8-14-1984) 
[14]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the first day of March, 1986: Beginning at a point in the northeast corner of Lot Number 30, in Block 30, and running thence eastwardly along an eastward prolongation of the north line of Lot Number 30 for a distance of 30 feet to a point in the center of Lake Avenue; running thence southwardly along the center line of Lake Avenue and across North Coral Drive to a point in the mean highwater mark of the waters of Coral Bay; running thence westwardly along the mean highwater mark of the waters of Coral Bay to a point marked by the point of intersection of the mean highwater mark of Coral Bay and the southward prolongation of the centerline of Bayview Avenue; running thence northwardly across North Coral Drive and down the center of Bayview Avenue to a point in the center of Bayview Avenue located 30 feet westwardly from the northwest corner of Lot Number 15, in Block Number 30; running thence eastwardly along a westward prolongation of the north line of Lot Number 15, in Block 30, for a distance of 30 feet to the northwest corner of Lot Number 15, in Block Number 30; running thence southwardly along the west lines of Lots Numbers 15, 16, 17, and 18 to the southwest corner of Lot Number 18, in Block Number 30; running thence eastwardly along the south lot lines of Lots Numbers 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 to the southeast corner Lot Number 26; running thence northwardly along the east line of Lots Numbers 26, 27, 28, 29 and 30, to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 1, 1-14-1986) 
[15]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the first day of March, 1986: Beginning at a point which is the southwest corner of Lot 1, Block EE, Mandy Farms, Section III, as the same is shown in Map Book 18, Page 21, Carteret County Registry, and running thence for a first call south 78 degrees 41 minutes west 259.06 feet; thence north 9 degrees 11 minutes east 9.40 feet; thence north 75 degrees 03 minutes 30 seconds west 262.72 feet to a point which in 35th Street; thence north 72 degrees 41 minutes 20 seconds west, leaving 35th Street, 393.70 feet; thence north 9 degrees 36 minutes 30 seconds east 88.0 feet; thence south 89 degrees 27 minutes 30 seconds west 785.16 feet; thence north 0 degrees 2 minutes 20 seconds west 66.0 feet; thence north 85 degrees 51 minutes 40 seconds west 137.10 feet; thence north 10 degrees 14 minutes 20 seconds east 589.79 feet; thence north 85 degrees 42 minutes west 149.96 feet; north 10 degrees 14 minutes 20 seconds east 25.59 feet; thence north 8 degrees 30 minutes 20 seconds east 43.93 feet to a point in the centerline of Mandy Lane; thence north 28 degrees 18 minutes 30 seconds east 50.20 feet to the southwest corner of lot 5 of Mandy Farms Subdivision, Section IV, Phase 3, as shown on the map thereof in Map Book 21, Page 84, Carteret County Registry; thence with the north line of Mandy Lane North 78 degrees 41 minutes 30 seconds east 659.20 feet; thence with a circular curve a chord distance of 80 feet to a point; thence leaving Mandy Lane North 16 degrees 18 minutes 51 seconds west 717 feet to a point in the south right-of-way margin of Sunny Drive; thence with the south right-of-way margin of Sunny Drive North 85 degrees 55 minutes east 284.55 feet to the intersection of said margin with the west right-of-way margin of 35th Street; thence with the west right-of-way margin of 35th Street north 16 degrees 23 minutes 40 seconds west 61.41 feet to the intersection of the north right-of-way margin of Sunny Drive with the west right-of-way margin of 35th Street; thence north 73 degrees 36 minutes 20 seconds east 80 feet to the east right-of-way margin of 35th Street; thence with the east right-of-way margin of 35th Street southwardly to its intersection with the north right-of-way margin of Mandy Lane; thence with the north right-of-way margin of Mandy Lane eastwardly to its intersection with the western property line of Mandy Farms, Section II as shown on the map thereof recorded in Map Book 15, Page 15, Carteret County Registry; and running thence with the western property line of Mandy Farms Section II south 7 degrees 49 minutes 20 seconds east 61.36 feet to a point in the southern right-of-way margin of Mandy Lane; thence south 15 degrees 46 minutes 10 seconds east 720.60 feet; and thence south 3 degrees 11 minutes 50 seconds west 599.31 feet to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1986-2(a), § 1, 3-1-1986) 
[16]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City as of the first day of March, 1986: 
[1]  Tract One: Beginning at a concrete monument in the north line of Professional Park as the same is shown in Map Book 15, Page 38, Carteret County Registry, said concrete monument being south 85 degrees 59 minutes 30 seconds east 187.76 feet from the intersection of said north line of Professional Park Subdivision with the eastern margin of Brook Street, a 60-foot right-of-way, and running thence from said point of beginning north 85 degrees 59 minutes 30 seconds west 904.98 feet; thence north 17 degrees 17 minutes east 1,296.20 feet to a concrete monument in the south line of Mandy Farms, Section IV, Phase 2; running thence with said south line of Mandy Farms, Section IV, Phase 2, south 82 degrees 53 minutes 20 seconds east 410.40 feet to a concrete monument; thence north 10 degrees 14 minutes 20 seconds east 86.22 feet to a concrete monument, a corner of the Hamilton property; thence south 85 degrees 51 minutes 40 seconds east 287.10 feet to a concrete monument; thence south 0 degrees 02 minutes 20 seconds east 66 feet; thence north 89 degrees 27 minutes 30 seconds east 19.81 feet to a concrete monument; thence south 9 degrees 36 minutes 30 seconds west 1,266.35 feet to a concrete monument, the point of beginning. 
[2]  Tract Two: Beginning at a point in the eastern right-of-way maring [marring] of North Gate Road, which point is also the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block C, Mandy Farms Subdivision, Section II as per map of same recorded in Map Book 15 at Page 15, Carteret County Registry; running thence from said point of beginning as identified above, running thence S83-03-40E and along an existing 15-foot drainage canal a distance of 931.68 feet to an existing iron pipe marking the Barbour Torrens corner and the Tootle property west line; running thence with the said Tootle West line the following courses and distances: S17-55-W, 18.76 feet; S45-13E a distance of 117.20 feet: S54-26E a distance of 183.80 feet; S17-14E a distance of 168.80 feet; and S06-55E a distance of 334.86 feet to a point in the headwaters of Calico Creek; running thence S66-35W a distance of 845.39 feet to a point; running thence S87-55W a distance of 570.0 feet to a point in the lands of R.E. Willis and Section III of Mandy Farms Subdivision; running thence N03-51-20E a distance of 290.0 feet to a point in the southern right-of-way margin of Old Gate Road; running thence N15-15W a distance of 63.50 feet to a point in the eastern right-of-way margin of North Gate Road; running thence N06-56-20E and along the eastern right-of-way margin of said North Gate Road a distance of 828.33 feet to a point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1986-2(b), § 1, 2-11-1986) 
[17]  By virtue of the authority granted G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the first day of October, 1986: Beginning at a point at the intersection of the east line of 35th Street and the south line of Eaton Drive; thence from said beginning point and with the southern right-of-way line of Eaton Drive, south 85 degrees 45 minutes 254.0 ft., to the northeast corner of lot 33; thence with the east line of Lot 33, south 4 degrees 15 minutes west 150.0 feet, to the southeast corner of Lot 33; thence north 85 degrees 45 minutes west, 229.45 feet, to the east right-of-way line of 35th Street; thence with the east line of 35th Street, north 6 degrees 06 minutes 35 seconds east, 152.51 feet, to the point of beginning; containing 0.83 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1986-21, § 1, 9-25-1986) 
[18]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina, as of the first day of July, 1987: Beginning at an old fence post at the southeast corner of the Gunhilde Gunnerson Tract, a point in the existing corporate limits of Morehead City, said beginning point being located north 69 degrees 41 minutes 52 seconds east, 3,444.876 feet from a concrete monument at North Carolina Geodetic Survey Station Spur (x = 2 673 044.230, y = 362 383.970) and running thence from said beginning point and fence post, north 02 degrees 35 minutes 30 seconds east, 1,346.131 feet to an iron stake, a corner with the Gunnerson Tract; thence, north 86 degrees 11 minutes 16 seconds west, 465,830 feet to a point in the Carolina Power and Light Company line, said line being also the existing corporate limits of Morehead City; thence with said line, north 04 degrees 53 minutes 12 seconds east, 439,000 feet to an iron in the line of Mandy Farms Subdivision, a corner of the existing corporate limits; thence with the Mandy Farms Subdivision property the following courses: north 83 degrees 43 minutes 26 seconds east, 404.461 feet; north 58 degrees 57 minutes 29 seconds east, 83.866 feet; north 85 degrees 07 minutes 57 seconds east, 376.631 feet to an iron, a corner with R.E. Willis in the Mandy Farms line; thence with the R.E. Willis Tract, south 03 degrees 09 minutes 57 seconds west, 574.890 feet to a point, thence south 03 degrees 02 minutes 8 seconds west, 492.000 feet to a point, a corner in the existing corporate limits of Morehead City; thence with the existing corporate limits of Morehead City, south 03 degrees 02 minutes 18 seconds west, 829.000 feet to a point in the R.E. Willis line, a corner of the existing corporate limits of Morehead City; thence with the existing corporate limits of Morehead City, south 84 degrees 05 minutes 39 seconds west, 382.891 feet to the point of beginning containing 21.8482 acres all according to a survey and map entitled "Malcolm Ray Willis' Annexation" dated March 31, 1987, by McDavid Associates, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 1987-08, § 1, 6-9-1987) 
[19]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made a part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the first day of July 1990: Beginning at a point in the northern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70, at the point of intersection with the centerline of Swinson Road, a ten-foot road formerly leading northward from U.S. Highway 70, said point also being the southwest corner of the Perry and Carey tract described in Book 132, Page 324, Carteret County Registry, and from this point of beginning running north 64 degrees 44 minutes west 280 feet to a point; then running north 65 degrees 16 minutes east 180 feet to a point; then running south 24 degrees 44 minutes east 15 feet to a point; then running north 67 degrees 24 minutes 24 seconds east 87.16 feet to a point; then running south 64 degrees 39 minutes east 65 feet to a point; then running along the eastern boundary of the Perry-Carey property above referenced south 16 degrees 37 minutes west 195 feet to the point and place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1990-09, § 1, 6-28-1990) 
[20]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the first day of December, 1992: Beginning at an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70 located north 62-14-50 east 119.92 feet from an iron pipe that marks the northwest corner of Block 30 Morehead Bluffs according to Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry. From said point of beginning run thence north 27-40-40 east 312.75 feet to an iron pipe in the right-of-way line of the Atlantic & East Carolina Railroad; thence with the right-of-way line of the Atlantic & East Carolina Railroad south 61-11-20 east 75 feet to an iron pipe; thence south 27-40-40 west 108.67 feet to an iron pipe; thence south 61-15 east 80 feet to an iron pipe; thence south 27-40-40 west 204 feet to an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70; thence with the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70 north 61-15 west 155 feet to the iron pipe at the point or place of beginning. Being identified as "Property of Robert H. Davenport and Mary Catherine Davenport" on that survey of Mills, Hankins, and Davenport property dated March 4, 1986, prepared by Donald C. Clements, Jr., R.L.S. recorded in Map Book 25, Page 117-A, Carteret County Registry. This is the same lot of land described in that Deed to "King & Morgan Partnership" which is recorded in Book 595, Page 106, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1992-19, § 1, 11-10-1992) 
[21]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made a part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the first day of January, 1993: 
[1]  Tract A: On the north side of U.S. Highway 70, and in the Bluffs area, and bounded and described as follows: Beginning at a concrete marker on U.S. Highway 70 right-of-way, which concrete marker is located fifty (50) feet northwardly from the center of U.S. Highway 70, and fifty-five (55) feet eastwardly from the center of the Kater Swinson Road, at the southeast corner of the property heretofore conveyed to Will Howland, Jr.; runs thence northwardly and along the eastern line of the Will Howland, Jr. property approximately three hundred six (306) feet to a stake in the southern right-of-way line of the NC Railroad Company; runs thence eastwardly and with said Railroad right-of-way fifty (50) feet to a stake; runs thence southwardly and paralleling the Will Howland, Jr. line, three hundred six (306) feet to another stake in the north right-of-way margin U.S. Highway 70; runs thence westwardly along said U.S. Highway 70 right-of-way, fifty (50) feet to the point of beginning. And being the same property conveyed to George W. Deans (now deceased) and wife, Christine F. Deans, by M.L. Piner and wife, Mabel T. Piner, by deed dated January 6, 1956, and recorded in the Wayne County Registry in Book 164, Page 518. 
[2]  Tract B: Beginning at a point in the north right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70, at a concrete monument located fifty-five (55) feet eastwardly from the center of the Kater Swinson road; runs thence northwardly and paralleling the centerline of the Kater Swinson Road, approximately three hundred six (306) feet to a concrete monument in the southern right-of-way line of the NC Railroad Company; runs thence westwardly and with the southern right-of-way line of the NC Railroad Company fifty-five (55) feet to the center of the Kater Swinson road; runs thence southwardly and with the center line of the Kater Swinson Road approximately three hundred six (306) feet to the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70; runs thence eastwardly and with the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70, fifty-five (55) feet to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1992-24, § 1, 12-8-1992) 
[22]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the first day of July, 1993: Beginning at a 6" × 6" concrete monument, said monument being located at the northwest corner of Tract Number Six (6) of the Morehead Section Base Magazine Area, and running thence along the northern boundary of said Tract Number Six (6) South 87-00 east 150 feet to a stake in the said northern boundary of Tract Number Six (6); thence south 9-15 west 590 feet to a stake situated in the northern boundary of Tract No. Five (5) and in the southern boundary of Tract No. Six (6), Morehead Section Base Magazine Area; thence with the said northern boundary of Tract No. Five (5) and the southern boundary of Tract No. Six (6) north 87-00 west 150 feet to a stake situated in the northwest corner of Tract No. Five (5) and in the southwest corner of Tract No. Six (6), Morehead Section Base Magazine Area; thence north 9-15 east and parallel with the second call herein 590 feet to the point or place of beginning. Containing 2 [two] acres, more or less, and being the western portion of Tract No. Six (6), Morehead Section Base Magazine Area. 
(Ord. No. 1993-09, § 1, 5-11-1993) 
[23]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1993: Lying and being in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being a tract or parcel of land described according to map prepared by J.G. Hassell, Registered Surveyor, dated May, 1964, and being further described, to wit: Beginning at a point in the southern margin of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway #70 west of Morehead City, which point is also the northeast corner of the lands constituting the Subdivision of Mitchell Village in accordance with map of same of record in Map Book 3, page 155, Carteret County Registry; running thence with the southern margin of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway #70 S 66-35 E 713.95 feet to a stake; thence N 23-35 E 9.9 feet to a stake; thence continuing with the southern right-of-way of U.S. Highway #70 S 66-21 E 207.25 feet to an iron stake; thence S 63-53 E 200 feet to an iron stake; thence S 61-53 E 200 feet to an iron stake; thence S 60-23 E 200 feet to a concrete marker in the western margin of Mansfield Parkway at its intersection with U.S. Highway #70; running thence with the western margin of Mansfield Parkway S 0-07 W 727.6 feet to the center of Coral Drive where the same intersects with the western margin of Mansfield Parkway; running thence with the center of Coral Drive the following courses and distances: S 75-10 W 58.8 feet, S 59-25 W 95.6 feet, N 88-15 W 50.9 feet, N 71-05 W 62.6 feet, N 61-53 W 67.4 feet, N 54-08 W 107.8 feet, N 62-48 W 90.1 feet, N 69-58 W 107.0 feet, N 71-08 W 63.2 feet, N 76-53 W 83.2 feet, N 75-23 W 90.2 feet, N 71-30 W 142.4 feet, N 66-00 W 59.2 feet, N 70-43 W 186.1 feet to a point in the dividing line between Morehead Bluffs property and Mitchell Village Subdivision property; running thence N 11-00 W along the dividing line between Morehead Bluffs property and Mitchell Village Subdivision property 1,071.4 feet to the point of beginning, excepting the right-of-way of said Coral Drive. 
(Ord. No. 1993-11, § 1, 6-8-1993) 
[24]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1993: 
[1]  Tract No. 1: Lot Numbers Nine (9) and Ten (10) of the W.P. Freeman Subdivision according to the map thereof recorded in Map Book 1, page 203, in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County; the same being also designated as Lot Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the James property according to the map thereof in Map Book 1, page 290, Office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County, being described by metes and bounds as follows: Beginning at a point in the north line of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway #70, runs thence N 29-30 E, 336.4 feet to the south line of the right-of-way of the Atlantic and North Carolina Railroad track; thence S 61-33 E, along the south line of the right-of-way of the Atlantic and North Carolina Railroad track 200 feet to a point; thence S 29-30 W, 335.03 feet to the north right-of-way line of U.S. Highway #70; thence N 61-45 N, along the north line of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway #70, 200 feet to the point of beginning, together with all buildings and improvements situate thereon, and being the same property conveyed to the Grantor herein by deed of First Baptist Church of Morehead City, North Carolina, dated 3 May, 1960, and recorded in Book 207, page 204, Carteret County Registry. 
[2]  Tract No. 2: In the community of Mansfield, Carteret County, N.C., and located on the North side of U.S. Highway #70, and being Lot Number Eight (8) as shown on that map or plat showing property of W.P. Freeman, as surveyed by George J. Brooks, Engineer, in June, 1943, said lot being 100 feet wide on U.S. Highway #70 and 334 feet deep, said map being filed in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County on July 6, 1943, in Map Book 1, page 203; being the same property conveyed to the Grantor by deed of Pearl Austin Brown and husband, Clarence D. Brown, Jr., dated 5 February, 1966, and recorded in Book 272, page 207, Carteret County Registry. 
    The conveyance of the above-described Tracts 1 and 2 is made subject to the outstanding deed of trust dated 5 February 1966 to Cooperative Savings & Loan Association, in the principal original amount of twenty-eight thousand dollars ($28,000.00), and recorded in Book 272, page 212, Carteret County Registry, which the Grantee corporation assumes and agrees to pay in accordance with its terms. 
    In Mansfield Section, on the north side of U.S. Highway #70, being Lot Seven (7), as shown by that map prepared by George J. Brooks in June, 1943, recorded in Map Book 2, at page 203, Carteret County Registry, together with any and all buildings thereon, and being the same land as that conveyed to the grantors by Shade Smith, Jr., and wife, Sallie W. Smith, by deed dated July 3, 1950, and recorded in Book 130, at page 201. 
    A strip of land 6 [six] feet in width, laying along the east line of the said lot is by this conveyance dedicated for roadway purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1993-12, § 1, 6-29-1993) 
[25]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1993: 
[1]  Tract One: Being Lot Numbers 1 through 8 and 11 through 15 in Block 35, as shown on map of Morehead Bluffs recorded in Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry, reference to said map is hereby made for a more accurate description of said lots by metes and bounds. 
[2]  Tract Two: Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot Number 1, Block 35, as shown on map recorded in Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry, and runs westwardly with the southern right-of-way of U.S. Highway #70, 23 feet to the rededicated eastern right-of-way of Onslow Avenue; thence southwardly with the rededicated eastern right-of-way of Onslow Avenue and parallel with the western lines of Lots 1 and 11 through 15 in Block 35 about 250 feet to a point; thence in an easterly direction and parallel with U.S. Highway #70, 23 feet to the southwest corner of Lot Number 15, Block 35, as shown on the above-referenced map; thence in a northerly direction and with the western lines of Lots 15 through 11 125 feet to a point being the northwest corner of Lot Number 11, Block 35; thence continuing northerly along the same course approximately 16 feet to a point being the southwest corner of Lot Number 1; thence continuing northerly the same course along the western line of Lot Number 1 a distance of approximately 109 feet to the point of beginning. Reference is hereby made to the Declaration Withdrawing A Portion Of The Subdivision Of Morehead Bluffs From Its Former Dedication dated February 18, 1960, and recorded in Book 171, Page 649, Carteret County Registry. 
    This conveyance includes all right, title and interest in that portion of the formerly dedicated 16 feet alley which lies within the bounds of the property described herein as Tract Two. 
[3]  Tract Three: Beginning at a point being the northwest corner of Lot Number 11, Block 35, Morehead Bluffs Subdivision, as recorded in Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry; then North 27 degrees 30 minutes East 16 feet to the southwest corner of Lot Number 1, Block 35, Morehead Bluffs Subdivision, as depicted on Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry; then South 62 degrees 30 minutes East with the southern lines of Lots 1 through 8, 200 feet to a point being the southeast corner of Lot Number 8, Block 35, Morehead Bluffs Subdivision, as recorded in Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry; thence South 27 degrees 30 minutes West 8 feet to a point, being the centerline of the formerly dedicated 16 feet alley referred to on Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry; then North 62 degrees 30 minutes West along an imaginary line which was formerly the centerline of the aforementioned 16 feet alley withdrawn from dedication by a declaration of withdrawal recorded in Book 503, Page 230, Carteret County Registry, 75 feet to a point; then South 27 degrees 30 minutes West approximately 8 feet to a point being the northeast corner of Lot Number 11, Block 35, Morehead Bluffs Subdivision; then running North 62 degrees 30 minutes West with the northern line of Lot 11, Block 35, as shown on Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry, 125 feet to the point and place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1993-18, § 1, 6-29-1993) 
[26]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1993: Glad Tidings Pentecostal Holliness Church, Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina: Property is located south of and adjacent to NCSR 1177 (Country Club Road): Beginning at a concrete monument at the northeast corner of the property described herein and in the southern right-of-way line of NCSR 1177, said concrete monument being located the following courses and distances from a point in the centerline intersection of NCSR 1177 and the Atlantic and North Carolina Railroad: N81°55'30"E, 969.94' to a point; thence S81°47'40"E, 1,218.83' to a P.K. nail in the centerline of NCSR 1177; thence S16°26'29"W, 30.32' to a concrete monument, the point of beginning; thence S16°26'29"W, 472.09' to an iron pipe; thence N63°26'02"W, 463.07' to an iron pipe; thence N16°39'00"E, 324.99' to an iron pipe in the southern right-of-way line of NCSR 1177; thence with the southern right-of-way line of NCSR 1177 S81°47'40"E, 459.40' to a concrete monument, the point of beginning, containing 4.17 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 1993-19, § 1, 6-29-1993) 
[27]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1993: Beginning at an iron pipe located the following four courses and distances from N.C. Geodetic Survey Monument "SWINSON": (1) N 76-16-45 W 4.15 feet to an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way line of Country Club Road (said right-of-way line for purposes of this deed being 30 feet north of the centerline of the existing pavement), (2) with the northern right-of-way line of Country Club Road N 78-35-10 W a chord distance of 99.96 feet, (3) continuing with the northern right-of-way line of the road N 76-08-00 W a chord distance of 99.87 feet, (4) continuing with the northern right-of-way line of the road N 74-54-45 W 50 feet to the point or place of beginning. From said point or place of beginning running thence N 21-54-20 E 149.68 feet to an iron pipe in the Carolina Power and Light Company southwestern right-of-way line; thence with the Carolina Power and Light Company right-of-way line N 56-00-00 W 136 feet to an iron pipe; thence S 33-38-20 W 203.26 feet to an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way line of Country Club Road; thence with the northern right-of-way line of the road S 74-54-45 E 175.56 feet to the point or place of beginning. See survey for Joy W. Moore and husband, William H. Moore dated November 14, 1991, prepared by W.D. Daniels, Jr., Registered Land Surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 1993-20, § 1, 6-29-1993) 
[28]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1993: 
[1]  Tract 1: Beginning at an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177 (Country Club Road), said iron pipe being the following courses and distances from a railroad spike in the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177 and the centerline of Pistol Range Road: S81°15'10"E, 1,235.08' to a cap and nail in the centerline of NCSR 1177; thence N03°57'10"E, 30.41' to the point of beginning. 
    Thence from said point of beginning N03°57'50"E, 1,090.00' to an iron pipe in the southern line of a 70' CP&L powerline easement; thence S48°51'08"E, 1,378.11' to an iron pipe in the south line of said powerline easement; thence S37°15'00"W, 474.61' to an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177; thence N76°34'10"W with the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177, 849.01' to an iron pipe, the point of beginning; containing 17.97 acres more or less. 
[2]  Tract 2: Beginning at an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177 (Country Club Road), said iron pipe being the following courses and distances from a railroad spike in the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177 and the centerline of Pistol Range Road: S81°15'10"E, 1,235.08' to a cap and nail in the centerline of NCSR 1177; thence N03°57'10"E, 30.41' to an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177; thence with the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177 S76°34'10"E, 849.01' to an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177, the point of beginning. 
    Thence N37°15'00"E, 474.61' to an iron pipe in the southern line of a 70' powerline easement (CP&L): thence with said powerline easement S48°51'08"E, 315.49' to a point in said southern line of said powerline easement; thence continuing with the southern line of said powerline easement S51°25'50"E, 388.45' to an iron pipe at the northwest corner of the Joy W. Moore and W.H. Moore property; thence S38°12'30"W, 203.26' to an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way line of NCSR 1177; thence with the northern right-of-way line of NCSR 1177 N71°45'18"W 740.06' to an iron pipe, the point of beginning, containing 5.39 acres more or less. 
[3]  Tract 3: Beginning at an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177 (Country Club Road), said iron pipe being the following courses and distances from a railroad spike in the northern right-of-way line of NCSR 1177 and the centerline of Pistol Range Road: S81°15'10"E, 1,235.00' to a cap and nail in the centerline of NCSR 1177; thence N03°57'50"E, 30.41' to an iron pipe; thence S76°34'10"E, 849.01' to an iron pipe; thence S71°45'18"E, 740.06' to an iron pipe; thence S70°20'35"E, 175.56' to an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177, the point of beginning. 
    Thence with the northern right-of-way line of NCSR 1177 the following courses and distances: S70°20'35"E, 50.00' to an iron pipe; thence S71°33'50"E, 99.87' to an iron pipe; thence S74°01'10"E, 99.96' to an iron pipe (said iron pipe being N71°42'35"W, 4.15' from N.C. Geodetic Survey Monument "SWINSON"); thence from the last-mentioned iron pipe S79°45'26"E, 120.92' to an iron pipe at the intersection of the northern right-of-way line of NCSR 1177 and the southern line of a 70' CP&L powerline easement; thence with the southern line of said powerline easement N51°25'50"W, 371.16' to an iron pipe; thence S26°28'26"W, 149.63' to an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way line of NCSR 1177, the point of beginning, containing 0.68 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 1993-21, § 1, 6-29-1993) 
[29]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1993: Lots numbered one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5), six (6), seven (7) and eight (8), in Block (square) thirty-one (31), Morehead Bluffs, according to map duly of record of Carteret County Registry, in Map Book 1, Page 13, being all of Lots 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, and 61 in Block 31 of Morehead Bluffs Properties, as fully described in Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry; being lots #62, 63, 64 and 65 in Block 31 of Morehead Bluffs Properties as fully described in Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry, reference to which is hereby made for a more accurate description. 
(Ord. No. 1993-22, § 1, 6-29-1993) 
[30]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of September, 1993: Tract #2. Lying and being in Carteret County, North Carolina, and more particularly described as follows: In Morehead Township, near the Town of Morehead City and in the Mansfield Section: On the north side of U.S. Highway 5#70, and being known and designated as all of lots numbers thirty-two (32), thirty-three (33), thirty-four (34), thirty-five (35), thirty-six (36), and thirty-seven (37) of the W.P. Freeman Subdivision as recorded in Map Book 2, page 147, Carteret County Registry, each of said lots fronting twenty-five (25) feet on U.S. Highway #70, and running back between parallel side lines one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1993-30, § 1, 9-14-1993) 
[31]  That from and after the eighth day of November, 1993, the effective date of this annexation, the following territory shall be annexed to and become a part of the Town of Morehead City, and the corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City shall on said eighth day of November, 1993, be extended to include said territory more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: U.S. Highway 70 West (Area 1): Beginning at a corner in the existing corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City, said point being located N64-35-54 W471.020 feet from a concrete monument marking North Carolina Geodetic Survey station "V-112" (x = 2,669,412.770 feet, y = 363,945.679 feet on the North Carolina Coordinate System, North American Datum of 1983) and running thence from said beginning point and with the existing corporate limits S22-27-37W 410.493 feet to a point in the north line of U.S. Highway 70; thence with the north line of U.S. 70 Highway and the existing corporate limits N67-36-15W 208.000 feet to a point; thence crossing U.S. Highway 70 to the south line of U.S. Highway 70 S23-02-38W 101.567 feet to a point; thence leaving the existing corporate limits along the south line of U.S. Highway 70 N67-32-15W 75.004 feet to the northwest corner of East Coral Drive; thence continuing along the south line of U.S. Highway 70 N67-32-15W 31.741 feet to a point; thence with the lines of the Jesse W. Davis lot and the north line of Coral Bay the following six courses: N79-35-45W 694.199 feet, S22-55-45W 20.390 feet, N77-12-15W 115.700 feet, S24-05-15W 137.470 feet, S68-32-25W 61.620 feet and S50-23-15W 97.630 feet to a point a corner of the Frank Styers lot; thence with the Styers line S50-23-15W 50.000 feet; thence with the Styers line S77-21-33W 71.891 feet to a point; thence with the Styers line and the William D. Daniels line N67-19-41W 150.000 feet to the east line of Lake Avenue; thence with the east line of Lake Avenue N22-40-19E 210.000 feet to an iron pipe at the northwest corner of the William D. Daniels lot; thence crossing Lake Avenue N66-45-17W 57.561 feet to an iron pipe; thence with the south line of the Belver C. Cottle lot N67-36-11W 120.155 feet to an iron pipe marking the southwest corner of the Belver C. Cottle lot and the southeast corner of the Robert H. Davenport lot; thence with the east line of the Robert H. Davenport line N22-27-90E 224.977 feet to a point at the northeast corner of the Davenport lot, a corner with Walter C. Gentry; thence along the same course continued through the Gentry property to and crossing U.S. 70 Highway N22-27-09E 200.535 feet to a point in the south line of U.S. 70 Highway; thence with the north line of U.S. 70 Highway N67-36-15W 240.944 feet to a point at the southwest corner of the Samuel A McConkey lot; thence with the west line of the McConkey lot and the west line of the McConkey lot extended N17-25-41E 414.739 feet to a point in the north line of the Atlantic and East Carolina Railway line; thence with the north line of the said railway S67-31-22E 1,889.452 feet to the point of beginning containing 27.45 acres all according to a survey and plat by McDavid Associates, Inc. dated June 30, 1993 and revised September 22, 1993 entitled "Survey for Town of Morehead City, Proposed Annexation." 
(Ord. No. 1993-31, § 1, 9-28-1993) 
[32]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of October, 1993: Being Lots Nos. 9 and 10 in Block 35 of Morehead Bluffs Properties, as fully described in Map Book 1, Page 13, Carteret County Registry, reference to which is hereby made for a more accurate description. This property was devised to the grantee under the Will of William Penn Willis dated May 18, 1958; grantor was the Executor of the Estate of William Penn Willis. 
(Ord. No. 1993-34, § 1, 10-26-1993) 
[33]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City as of the thirty-first day of October, 1993: Beginning at a 3/4" galvanized steel pipe at the northeast corner of that 8.26-acre tract deeded to Aviation Fuel Terminals, Inc., by George R. Ballou by deed dated October 1, 1978, and recorded in Book 419, page 12, Carteret County Registry; thence with the northern line of that 8.26 acre tract, N 84-54 W, 600.0 feet to a 1/2" galvanized steel pipe in the eastern right-of-way line of a 60-foot right-of-way designated as Little Nine Drive; thence with said right-of-way, N 4-35-05-E, 19.78 feet to a 3/4" steel pipe at the point of curvature of a circular curve; thence in a northerly direction along the circumference of a circular curve having a delta angle of 14-15-35 to the left and a radius of 549.054 feet, an arc length of 136.81 feet to a 3/4" steel pipe at the point of tangency of said circular curve; thence continuing with the eastern right-of-way line of Little Nine Drive, N 9-41-30 W, 157.70 feet to a 3/4" steel pipe at the point of curvature of another circular curve; thence in a northerly direction along the circumference of a circular curve having a delta angle of 16-20 to the right and a radius of 562.267 feet, an arc length of 160.29 feet to a 3/4" steel pipe at the point of tangency of said circular curve; thence continuing with the eastern right-of-way line of Little Nine Drive, N 6-38-30 E, 641.10 feet to a concrete monument, said monument being located S 6-38-30 W, 300.0 feet from the intersection of the eastern right-of-way of Little Nine Drive and the southern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70; thence S 71-22-30 East, 700.0 feet to a concrete monument; thence S 6-38 W with the lines of H.B. Smith and Charles S. Hester, 828.10 feet to a 2" galvanized iron pipe; thence S 4-35-05 W, 115.49 feet to the point of beginning, containing 15.65 acres and in accordance with a survey by James L. Powell, RLS L-1531 dated September, 1979 and all bearing based on N.C. grid. 
(Ord. No. 1993-37, § 1, 10-26-1993) 
[34]  From and after the thirty-first day of March, 1994, the effective date of this annexation, the following territory shall be annexed to and becomes a part of the Town of Morehead City, and the corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City, shall on said thirty-first day of March, 1994, be extended to include said territory more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: U.S. Highway 70 West (Area 2). Beginning at a point in the north line of the Atlantic and East Carolina Railway, a corner on the western side of the existing corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City, said point being located S75-24-00E 4,613.351 feet from a concrete monument marking North Carolina Geodetic Survey station "Hunter" (x = 2,662,775.770 feet, y = 366,030.587 feet on the North Carolina Coordinate System, North American Datum of 1983) and running thence from said beginning point and with the existing corporate limits S17-25-41W 414.739 feet to a point in the north line of U.S. 70 Highway; thence with the north line of U.S. 70 Highway and the existing corporate limits S67-36-15E 240.944 feet to a point; thence crossing U.S. 70 Highway and beyond S22-27-09W 200.535 feet with the existing corporate limits to the southeast corner of the Walter C. Gentry lot; thence running with the south line of the Gentry lot and the Gentry line extended N67-40-02W 299.754 feet crossing Bayview Avenue to an iron pipe in the Catherine Wilan east line at the southwest corner of the Cherry Point Credit Union lot; thence with the east line of Wilan lot S22-23-17W 99.866 feet to the southeast corner of the Wilan lot; thence with the south line of the Wilan lot N67-55-11W 120.049 feet to a point in the east line of Riverside Avenue; thence with the east line of Riverside Avenue S22-29-30W 50.000 feet to a point; thence crossing Riverside Avenue N67-14-17W 60.134 feet to an iron pipe in the west line of Riverside Avenue, the southeast corner of Coral Bay Development Company; thence with the south lines of the Coral Bay Development Company the following four courses: N67-14-17W 115.000 feet, N05-22-05E 35.000, N80-23-06W 241.686, N01-48-18E 151.673 feet to the southeast corner of the Melvin Mansfield lot; thence with the south line of the Mansfield lot N67-14-27W 241.770 feet to an iron pipe in the south line of the Mansfield lot; thence with the same course continued along the south line of the Mansfield lot N67-14-27W 124.929 feet to an iron pipe in the east line of Salem Avenue; thence the same course continued N67-14-27W 30.000 feet to a point in the centerline of Salem Avenue; thence N67-32-45W 30.000 feet to a point in the west line of Salem Avenue, the southeast corner of the Joel Locke lot; thence N67-32-45W 82.413 feet to a point in the Joel Locke line; thence continuing with the Joel Locke line N67-43-45W 51.657 feet to an iron pipe in the Joel Locke line, a corner with James Cooper; thence with the east line of the James Cooper lot S21-03-54W 124.947 feet to an iron pipe at the southeast corner of the James Cooper lot; thence with the south line of the Cooper lot N67-27-02W 148.070 feet to an iron pipe in the east line of Miami Avenue; thence crossing Miami Avenue N67-27-02W 20.000 feet to a point in the west line of Miami Avenue; thence with the west line of Miami Avenue N22-26-47E 124.693 feet to the southeast corner of the J.R. House lot; thence with the south line of the House lot N67-36-24W 72.686 feet to an iron pipe at the southwest corner of the House lot, a corner with James Hancock; thence with the Hancock line N67-36-24W 75.150 feet to an iron pipe; thence with the Hancock line S22-19-16W 124.537 feet to an iron pipe; thence with the south line of the Hancock lot N67-49-58W 125.071 feet to the east line of Onslow Avenue; thence crossing Onslow Avenue N67-49-58W 22.965 feet to the west line of Onslow Avenue; thence with the west line of Onslow Avenue N22-23-07E 133.083 feet to the southeast corner of the David Freshwater lot; thence with the Freshwater line N67-21-49W 143.464 feet to the southwest corner of the Freshwater lot; thence with the west line of the Freshwater lot N22-38-11E 16.000 feet, a corner with Carteret Pride; thence with the south line of the Carteret Pride lot N67-21-49W 100.000 feet to the southwest corner of the Carteret Pride lot; a corner with David Freshwater; thence with the Freshwater south line N67-21-49W 70.000 feet to the east line of Mansfield Parkway; thence crossing Mansfield Parkway N67-21-49W 115.750 feet to a point in the west line of Mansfield Parkway; thence with the west line of Mansfield Parkway N07-21-49W 115.470 feet to a concrete monument as set by the North Carolina Department of Transportation in the south line of U.S. 70 Highway; thence crossing said U.S. 70 Highway N07-21-49W 114.670 feet to a point in the north line of U.S. 70 Highway; thence with the north line of U.S. 70 Highway S67-36-15E 670.351 feet to a point at the southwest corner of the Leslie D. Norris, Jr. lot; thence with the west line of the said Norris lot and the west line of the Norris lot extended across the right-of-way of the Atlantic and East Carolina Railway N22-25-38E 415.332 feet to a point in the north line of the Atlantic and East Carolina Railway line; thence with the north line of the said railway S67-31-22E 1,511.978 feet to the point of beginning containing 29.97 acres all according to a survey and plat by McDavid Associates, Inc. dated September 30, 1993 entitled "Survey for Town of Morehead City, Annexation U.S. 70 West (Area 2)." 
(Ord. No. 1994-01, § 1, 1-25-1994) 
[35]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 28th day of February, 1994: Beginning at an iron pipe in the center of a ditch in the southern right-of-way of State Road 1179 (Mayberry Loop Road), said point of beginning being south 54 degrees 39 minutes 31 seconds east 543.73 feet from the intersection of State Road 1179 and the Treatment Plant Road; thence from said point of beginning running with the southern right-of-way line of State Road 1179 south 64 degrees 37 minutes 19 seconds east 54.08 feet to a point; thence south 65 degrees 31 minutes 34 seconds east 50.27 feet to an iron pipe; thence south 17 degrees 01 minutes 07 seconds west 184.65 feet to an iron pipe in the center of a ditch; thence with the center line of said ditch north 70 degrees 43 minutes 33 seconds west 104.35 feet to an iron pipe; thence with the center of a ditch north 17 degrees 17 minutes 19 seconds east 194.93 feet to the point and place of beginning. This according to a survey by Larry C. Pittman, R.L.S., dated November 9, 1993. 
[36]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of March, 1994: 
[1]  Tract One: Being all of Lots 23 and 24 in Section I of the Morehead Gardens Subdivision as the same is identified and shown on that map or plat thereof recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County in Map Book 3 at page 129. 
[2]  Tract Two: Beginning at a point in the northern right-of-way margin of Elm Street where the same intersects the eastern right-of-way margin of 35th Street; which point of beginning is also located N85-45W a distance of 40.0 feet from the southwest corner of Lot # 23, Morehead Gardens Subdivision, as shown by the plat of record in Map Book 3 at page 129, Carteret County Registry. From said beginning point established above, running thence N06-06-35W and along the eastern right-of-way margin of 35th Street a distance of 148.36 feet to a point marking the southwest corner of that 0.34-acre tract now owned by Hanson; running thence S85-45E and along the Hanson south line a distance of 79.45 feet to an existing iron pipe; running thence S09-15W and along the western margin of Tract One above, a distance of 146.50 feet to a point in the northern right-of-way margin of Elm Street, the southwest corner of Lot # 23, Morehead Gardens as referenced in Tract One above; running thence N85-45W and along the northern right-of-way margin of Elm Street a distance of 40.0 feet to the point or place of beginning. Tract Two containing 0.20 acres, more or less, as per survey by Powell Surveying Co., Beaufort, North Carolina, dated April 21, 1986. 
(Ord. No. 1994-04, § 1, 2-8-1994; Ord. No. 1994-11, § 1, 3-29-1994) 
[37]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following-described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1994: Beginning at a nail in the center line of the paved Country Club Road (also known as the Crab Point-Morehead City Road), which said point is in the center of the intersection of said road; and the paved road locally known as the Pistol Range Road, and running thence with the center of said Pistol Range Road north 01-45 east 898.5 feet to a nail in the center of the said Pistol Range Road at the northern end thereof; thence true west 790.6 feet to a concrete monument in the center of a branch and also a wire fence; thence with said wire fence north 49-17 east 1,418.25 feet to a concrete monument in the south line of the Carolina Power & Light Company's power line right-of-way; thence with the south line of said right-of-way south 49-07 east 305.35 feet to point; thence south 03-40 west 1,663.1 feet to a point in the center of the paved Country Club Road; thence with the center of said road north 88-11 west 450 feet to the beginning, containing 24.99 acres, according to the survey of Philip K. Ball, R.S., of March, 1962; all courses true. 
    This conveyance is made subject to the following rights-of-way: 
(1)  The right-of-way of the Country Club Road which extends along the southern boundary of this tract, which said right-of-way is thirty (30) feet north of the center line of said road; 
(2)  The right-of-way of Carteret-Craven Electric Membership Corporation as described in Book 144, page 377, Carteret County Registry; 
(3)  The right-of-way of Carteret-Craven Electric Membership Corporation as described in Book 188, page 93, Carteret County Registry; 
(4)  The right-of-way in favor of Carolina Power & Light Company as described in Book 158, page 360, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1994-24, § 1, 5-31-1994) 
[38]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following-described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1994: Beginning at a point marked by a P.K. nail in the present center line of Country Club Road (N.C.S.R. 1177), said nail being located north 83 degrees 17 minutes 13 seconds west 303.61 feet from North Carolina Geodetic Survey monument "SWINSON" 1994 (which monument is located in the Country Club Road right-of-way near the entrance to Swinson Park). From said point or place of beginning running thence south 14 degrees 15 minutes 9 seconds west 230 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe; thence south 75 degrees 44 minutes 51 seconds east 399.92 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe; thence continuing south 75 degrees 44 minutes 51 seconds east 30.00 feet to an iron pipe in the center line of that 60 feet right-of-way that contains a part of the "Old 15' Farm Rd." as shown on the map of a portion of K.S. Swinson property prepared by C.C. King, registered surveyor, recorded in Map Book 14, Page 53, Carteret Country Registry; thence with the center line of the said 60 feet right-of-way, south 19 degrees 59 minutes 49 seconds east 266.23 feet of a P.K. nail in or near the western edge of the pavement of that road known as "Swinson Park Road"; thence continuing with the center line of said 60 feet right-of-way south 6 degrees 34 minutes 00 seconds east 412.89 feet to a point in the center line of said 60 feet right-of-way which is marked by a P.K. nail in or near the western edge of the pavement of Swinson Park Road; thence continuing with the center line of said 60 feet right-of-way south 6 degrees 34 minutes 39 seconds east 474.28 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe; thence north 78 degrees 34 minutes 13 seconds west 565.50 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe; thence south 27 degrees 48 minutes 27 seconds west 169.97 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe at the center line of the Atlantic and North Carolina Railroad right-of-way; thence with the center line of the Atlantic and North Carolina Railroad right-of-way north 62 degrees 01 minutes 36 seconds west 909.82 feet to a railroad spike; thence north 11 degrees 45 minutes 36 seconds east 757.59 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe; thence south 75 degrees 22 minutes 31 seconds east 198.52 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe; thence north 11 degrees 16 minutes 01 seconds east 271.35 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe; thence south 75 degrees 44 minutes 51 seconds east 287.92 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe; thence north 14 degrees 15 minutes 9 seconds east 230 feet to a point in the present center line of Country Club Road marked by a P.K. nail; thence with the center line of Country Club Road south 75 degrees 44 minutes 51 seconds east 154.00 feet to the point or place of beginning. This tract contains approximately 33.01 acres more or less. This description is taken from a boundary survey for the proposed Morehead Elementary School site, dated July 25, 1991, prepared by Stroud Engineering, P.A. 
    Grantors also grant and convey unto grantee, its successors and assigns, a permanent easement or right-of-way for ingress and egress along the 60' Farm Road from the right-of-way line of the Atlantic and North Carolina Railroad track to the Country Club Road as said right-of-way is identified and described in that deed dated April 27, 1968 recorded in Book 302, Page 27, Carteret Country Registry. 
Grantors also grant and convey to grantee all of their right, title and interest in and to the "Swinson Park Road" as the same has been located and used from time to time for ingress, egress and regress from the tract above-described to Country Club Road. 
(Ord. No. 1994-25, § 1, 5-31-1994) 
[39]  That from and after the thirty-first day of July, 1994, the effective date of this annexation, the following territory shall be annexed to and become a part of the Town of Morehead City, and the corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City shall on said thirty-first day of July, 1994, be extended to include said territory more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
    U.S. Highway 70 West (Area 3) 
    Beginning at an iron pipe at intersection of the south line of NC Highway 24 and the east line of Hodges Street, said iron located S75-47-59W 1, 174.335 feet from a concrete monument marking NC Geodetic Station "Hunter" (N = 366,030.587 feet, E = 2,662,775.770 feet, NC Coordinate System, North American Datum of 1983) and thence crossing NC Highway 24 N04-30-57 W 160.859 feet to a point in the north line of NC Highway 24; thence with the west line of the Centura Bank lot N03-33-29E 118.978 feet to an iron pipe; thence along the south line of the Neimar, Inc., lot N84-13-49W 307.873 feet to a point in the east line of the Mildred E. Phillips lot; thence with said Phillips line S23-33-44W 34.150 feet; thence along the south line of said Phillips lot S89-45-34W 67.988 feet to a point; thence along the south line of the G.D.J. Coggin lot S78-43-21W 208.521 feet and S84-49-36W 60.080 feet to a point; thence along the Oakwood Mobile Homes lot S79-43-29W 240.450 feet to a point; thence N21-33-46W 26.618 feet; thence along the south line of the Jolene McCarn lot N80-41-35W 221.810 feet to a point; thence along the McCarn west line N14-27-05W 258.909 feet to a point; thence along the south line of Peachtree Properties S83-00-46W 235.724 feet to a point in the George P. Culbertson east line; thence with the said Culbertson east line S15-53-09E 191.127 feet; thence with the Culbertson south line and continuing with the Julian Willis south line N80-56-02W 470.430 feet; thence with the Willis line N04-42-20E 140.181 feet; thence with the Willis line and continuing with the south line of Pearl of the Coast lot N74-34-42W 459.384 feet to a point in the east line of Walmart Stores, Inc.; thence with the east line of said Walmart lot S09-57-13W 907.106 feet to an iron pipe in the north line of NC Highway 24; thence with the north line of NC Highway 24 S88-39-05W 60.692 feet; thence N01-19-54W 170-008 feet to a point; thence N85-29-23W 195.848 feet to a point; thence S01-19-54E 190.000 feet to a point in the north line of NC Highway 24; thence with the north line of NC Highway 24 S88-39-05W 747.360 feet to an iron pipe; thence along the Paine Webber Retail Property Investments tract the following seven (7) courses: N00-38-59W 647.730 feet, S83-50-09E 368.930 feet, N06-09-51E 221.000 feet, N83-50-09W 221.500 feet, N06-09-51E 173.220 feet, N83-54-43W 194.500 feet and N00-38-59W 332.890 feet to a point in the south line of the Gerald O. Moore lot; thence N70-57-59W 33.036 feet to the southwest corner of the said Moore lot; thence crossing the Hestron Corporation tract N80-42-47W 415.381 feet to the southeast corner of the Herbert Kelly lot; thence N71-19-28W 861.205 feet to the southwest corner of the Hubert Smith lot; thence S18-25-49W 142.015 feet along the Bobby H. Morgan line to the southeast corner of said Morgan lot; thence along the said Morgan south line N71-34-11W 100.570 feet; thence along the said Morgan lot west line N06-26-39E 401.560 feet to the south line of U.S. Highway 70; thence along the south line of U.S. Highway 70 the following thirteen (13) courses: S71-19-28E 1,046.241 feet, S71-23-56E 409.908 feet to an iron pipe, S71-15-32E 149.986 feet to an iron pipe, S71-15-04E 182.791 feet to an iron pipe, S71-20-31E 663.310 feet, S69-12-59E 289.772 feet, S74-05-12E 75.100 feet, S73-41-22E 63.120 feet, S74-15-02E 95.290 feet, S75-46-42E 91.249 feet to an iron pipe, S80-04-53E 583.390 feet to an iron pipe, S80-22-31E 250.746 feet to an iron pipe, and S80-37-29E 87.748 feet; thence N13-29-39E 154.682 feet crossing U.S. 70 to a nail in the north line of U.S. 70 and in the center line of Willis Road; thence along the center line of Willis Road N13-29-39E 130.406 feet to a nail in the pavement center line, a corner with the Lampe Company; thence with the Lampe Company the following five (5) courses; S82-53-16E 144.494 feet, S84-53-13E 82.020 feet, N55-52-42E 82.900 feet, N70-17-22E 22.460 feet and N02-28-18W 684.701 feet to a point in the south line of the Atlantic & East Carolina Railroad; thence S67-31-48E 835.847 feet to a point; thence S19-51-40W 491.000 feet to the northwest corner of the Grace Stamps lot; thence with Grace Stamps line the following four (4) courses: S88-45-13E 99.422 feet, N12-35-40E 110.395 feet S70-08-20E 107.369 feet and N20-01-26E 249.000 feet to 50.046 feet to the center line of said railroad; thence continuing N20-01-26E 50.046 feet to a point in the north line of said railroad; thence along the north line of said railroad S67-31-45E 2,435.425 feet; thence continuing along said north line S67-31-22E 1, 716.783 feet to a point in the existing city limits of Morehead City; thence crossing said railroad and with the east line of Kathryn Ridley, Hazel T. Ives, and Edna Blanton S22-25-38W 415.332 feet to a point in the north line of U.S. Highway 70; thence with the north line of U.S. Highway 70 N67-36-15W 100.000 feet; thence along the west line of Edna Blanton, Hazel T. Ives and Kathryn Ridley N22-25-38E 315.474 feet to a point in the south line of the Atlantic & East Carolina Railroad; thence with said railroad N67-31-22W 80.000 feet; thence continuing with said railroad N67-35-16W 314.463 feet to an iron pipe; thence along the east line of Lynn Diebert S22-31-29W 315.680 feet to a point in the north line of U.S. Highway 70; thence with the north line of U.S. Highway 70 N67-36-15W 175.351 feet; thence crossing U.S. Highway 70 S07-21-49E 114,670 feet to a point in the west line of Mannsfield Parkway in the south line of U.S. Highway 70; thence along the south line of U.S. Highway 70 the following six (6) courses: N67-08-18W 199.950 feet, N69-06-46W 200.000 feet, N71-06-46W 200.000 feet, N73-34-46W 207.250 feet, S16-31-44W 9.756 feet to a concrete right-of-way marker, and N73-48-46W 712.393 feet to a concrete right-of-way marker; thence with the east line of Morehead Marine lot S16-13-41E 381.349 feet to a point; thence S88-41-11W 252.980 feet with the south line of said lot to the east line of Rochelle Drive; thence crossing Rochelle Drive S88-41-11W 60.000 feet to a point in the west line of Rochelle Drive; thence with the west line of Rochelle Drive N01-18-49W 69.749 feet to an iron pipe; thence with the south line of Wachovia Bank & Trust Co. S88-42-43W 199.770 feet to an iron pipe; thence S88-42-43W 30.000 feet to a point; thence N01-28-43W 79.265 feet to a point; thence with the south line of William E. Bolton and NCNB National Bank lots N74-07-41W 440.910 feet to a point at the southwest corner of NCNB National Bank lot; thence N15-53-03E 30.000 feet to the southeast corner of the Hestron Corporation lot: thence along the south line of the Hestron Corporation the following four (4) courses: N74-07-41W 76.700 feet, N77-15-57W 68.000 feet, N81-39-58W 19.080 feet, and S88-18-43W 76.250 feet to the southeast corner of Byrd's Metal Works lot; thence with south line of said lot S86-43-34W 36.548 feet to the east line of a street; thence crossing said street S86-43-34W 110.707 feet to the west line of said street; thence along the south line of Nations Bank of NC lot S78-08-56W 200.000 feet to the southeast corner of the Hestron Corporation lot; thence with south line of said lot S68-49-39W 231.848 feet to a point at the southeast corner of the State Employees Credit Union lot; thence with the south line of said lot the following three (3) courses: S78-10-26W 57.750 feet, S65-27-26W 142.870 feet, and S52-44-26W 18.480 feet to a point in the east line of Hodges Street; thence along the east line of Hodges Street the following three (3) courses: N37-15-34W 77.500 feet, N24-55-58W 182. 699 feet and N11-00-47W 111.320 feet to the point of beginning containing 151.16 acres, all according to a survey and map by McDavid Associates, Inc., entitled "Survey for Town of Morehead City, Proposed Annexation, Area 3, Highway 70 West" dated February 14, 1994. 
(Ord. No. 1994-18, § 1, 6-14-1994) 
[40]  That from and after the thirty-first day of July, 1994, the effective date of this annexation, the following territory shall be annexed to and become a part of the Town of Morehead City, and the corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City, shall on said thirty-first day of July, 1994, be expected to include said territory more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
    North 35th Street (Area 4) 
    Beginning at a concrete monument located N79-09-54E 3,065.005 feet from a concrete monument marking NC Geodetic Station "Friendly" (N = 363,449.094 feet, E= 2,670,470.140 feet, North Carolina Coordinate System, North American Datum of 1983) and running thence with existing city limits and the western line of the Doris Banks Powell tract N03-10-25E 1,266.150 feet to the northwest corner of Powell tract; thence with the northern line of said Powell tract N83-03-15E 766.527 feet to the northeast corner of the said tract; thence with existing city limits and the east line of Powell tract S03-14-37W 85.070 feet to an iron pipe; thence with the north line of the Catherine A. Platt lot S78-37-16E 324.400 feet to an iron pipe at the northeast corner of the Platt lot, a corner with Barbara R. Caldwell; thence along the north line of the Caldwell S81-22-16E 69.750 feet to a point in the western line of 35th Street; thence crossing 35th Street S81-40-03E 59.873 feet to a point in the east line of said street; thence along the north line of the Leonard Devries lot S81-22-14E 202.300 feet to an iron pipe; thence along said Devries east line S02-53-43W 9.376 feet to an iron pipe a corner in the existing city limits; thence continuing with the Devries line and the Thomas J. Dillion line S02-52-16W 789.731 feet to iron pipe in the south line of Eaton Drive; thence along the south line of Eaton Drive S87-56-56W 117.815 feet to the eastern line of 35th Street; thence with the eastern line of 35th Street S12-04-34E 151.990 feet; thence continuing with said street line S12-04-34E 148.360 feet to an iron pipe in the north line of Elm Street; thence with the north line of Elm Street N87-45-42E 185.800 feet to a point; thence crossing Elm Street S10-50-37E 60.670 feet; thence along the south line of Elm Street S87-45-42W 79.000 feet to an iron pipe; thence along the eastern line of the John Hoover lot S02-15-27E 124.995 feet to an iron pipe in the north line of the Leonard Jones lot; thence with the said Jones line and continuing with the Elba G. McLawhorn line N88-56-30E 237.445 feet to an iron pipe; thence along the east line of said McLawhorn lot S02-11-03E 125.018 feet to an iron pipe in the north line of Pine Street; thence with the north line of Pine Street N87-43-52E 42.210 feet; thence crossing Pine Street and continuing with the east line of the James Q. Wallace, III lot S02-04-21E 194.402 feet to the southeast corner of the said Wallace lot; thence along the said Wallace line S87-43-54W 333.449 feet to an iron pipe in the centerline of 35th Street; thence along the centerline of 35th Street the following four (4) courses: N11-32-00W 136.637 feet, N12-28-35W 60.501 feet, N12-32-07W 134.542 feet, and N13-13-07W 111.591 feet; thence along the south line of the Stephen M. Smith lot N89-39-36W 289.470 feet to a concrete monument, a corner with Barbara R. Caldwell; thence along the south line of said Caldwell lot N82-33-09W 320.948 feet to a concrete monument, a corner with Doris Banks Powell; thence along the south line of said Powell tract S87-34-25W 756.595 feet to the point of beginning containing 43.27 acres all according to a survey and map by McDavid Associates, Inc. entitled "Survey for Town of Morehead City, Proposed Annexation, Area 4, North 35th Street Area" dated February 14, 1994. 
(Ord. No. 1994-19, § 1, 6-14-1994) 
[41]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of December, 1994: 
[1]  Tract 1: Lying and being in the Mitchell Village Subdivision, and being known and designated as all of Lot #1 in Block "C," of said subdivision according to map recorded in Map Book 3 at page 155, office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County, to which map reference is made for greater particularity of reference. 
[2]  Tract 2: Lying and being in the Mitchell Village Subdivision, and being an unnumbered parcel of land in Block "C," of said subdivision according to map of record in Map Book 3 at page 155, Carteret County Registry, and more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the point where the southwest corner of Lot #1, Block "C," intersects the right-of-way line of Rochelle Drive; running thence south 05-15 west 86.7 feet to the northwest corner of the tract of land conveyed to David M. Lindsay by deed appearing in Book 308, page 116; running thence south 84-20 east along the said David M. Lindsay's north line a distance of 387.9 feet to a point in the eastern boundary line of the Mitchell Village Subdivision; running thence north 11-49 west 93.55 feet to the southeast corner of Lot #1, Block "C;" running thence along the southern lot line of Lot #1, Block "C," a westerly direction for a distance of 360.4 feet to the point of beginning. 
[3]  Tract 3: Lying and being in the Mitchell Village Subdivision, and being known and designated as all of Lot #2 in Block "C," of said subdivision according to map recorded in Map Book 3 at page 155, office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County to which map reference is made for greater particularity of description. 
(Ord. No. 1994-38, § 1, 9-27-1994) 
[42]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of December, 1994: Being a 51.07-acre tract of land on the east side of Friendly Road, in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, bounded on the north by Oaksmith Acres Subdivision and Section IV, Phase 2, Mandy Farms Subdivision; on the east by Professional Park Subdivision and the Longley Supply Company property; on the south by the Noble's property; and on the west by Friendly Road and Section One Friendly Subdivision, being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point in the east right-of-way line of Friendly Road, said point being S42-44-30E, 30.00 feet from a point in the centerline of Friendly Road, said point being N47-15-30E, 88.11 feet from a P.K. Nail in the centerline of Friendly Road, said P.K. Nail being N41-56-20E, 324.90 feet from a railroad spike in the centerline of Friendly Road, said railroad spike being N27-37-30E, 547.47 feet from a railroad spike in the centerline of Friendly Road and the centerline of the A. & E.C. Railroad, said railroad spike being N55-13W, 122.93 feet from North Carolina Geodetic Survey Monument Friendly, 1992 GPS, thence from the point of beginning N47-15-30E, 375.15 feet, with the east right-of-way of Friendly Road to a point; thence with the east right-of-way of Friendly Road, a curve of radius 477.57 feet, and a chord of N41-37-50E, 93.00 feet to a point; thence N34-19-50E, 30.88 feet, with the east right-of-way of Friendly Road to a point, the southwest corner of Section One Friendly Subdivision; thence with the boundary of Section One Friendly Subdivision the following courses and distances, S59-06-20E, 200.90 feet to an iron pipe; thence N28-41-40E, 137.00 feet to an iron pipe; thence N15-43-20E, 251.00 feet to an iron pipe; thence N14-15-20W, 219.00 feet to an iron pipe; thence S87-48-00W, 189.60 feet to an iron pipe in the east right-of-way of Friendly Road; thence with the east right-of-way of Friendly Road N17-52-50W, 153.23 feet to a point; thence with the south boundary of Oaksmith Acres Subdivision and Section IV, Phase 2, Mandy Farms Subdivision N89-18-20E, 1,526.00 feet to a point; thence with the west boundary of Professional Park Subdivision, S10-56-40W, 1,656.32 feet to an iron pipe, the northeast corner of the Longley Supply Company property; thence with the north boundary of the Longley Supply Company property N67-30-20W, 192.11 feet to an iron pipe; thence with the west boundary line of the Longley Supply Company property S23-30-30W, 379.25 feet to a point; thence with the north boundary of the Noble property N67-32-00W, 827.36 feet to a point; thence N22-28-00E, 301.75 feet to a point; thence N67-32-00W, 490.00 feet to a point; thence N53-32-30W, 82.72 feet to a point; thence N42-44-30W, 124.53 feet to the beginning point. The north reference is North Carolina grid North. Said property contains 51.07 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 1994-42, 10-25-1994) 
[43]  From and after the thirtieth day of June, 1995, the effective date of this annexation, the following territory shall be annexed to and become a part of the Town of Morehead City, and the corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City shall, on said thirtieth day of June, 1995, be extended to include said territory more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
    Mitchell Village, Mansfield Park, Morehead Bluffs and Coral Point (Area 5) 
    Beginning at an iron stake at the intersection of the south line of North Carolina Highway 24 with the east line of Hodges Street, a corner of the existing corporate limits, said iron being located S75-47-59W, 1,174.335 feet from a concrete monument marking North Carolina Geodetic survey station "HUNTER" having North Carolina Coordinate System coordinates X = 2,662,689.550 feet and Y = 365,959.297 feet, North American Datum of 1927, and running thence from said beginning point and with the existing corporate limits the following courses: S-11-00, 47E, 111.320 feet; S24-55-58E, 182.699 feet; S37-15-34E, 77.500 feet; N52-44-26E, 18.480 feet; N65-27-26E, 142.870 feet; N78-10-26E, 57.570 feet; N68-49-39E, 231.848 feet; N78-08-56E, 200.000 feet; N86-43-34E, 110.707 feet; N86-43-34E, 36.548 feet; N88-18-43E, 76.250 feet; S81-39-58E, 19.080 feet; S77-15-57E, 68.000 feet; S74-07-41E, 76.700 feet; S15-53-03W, 30.000 feet; S74-07-41E, 440.910 feet; S01-28-43E, 79.265 feet; N88-42-43E, 30.000 feet; N88-42-43E, 199.770 feet; S01-18-49E, 69.749 feet; N88-41-11E, 60.000 feet; N88-41-11E, 252.980 feet; S28-36-50E, 657.745 feet; S78-05-59E, 185.885 feet; S73-35-23E, 59.067 feet; S78-54-45E, 142.255 feet; S82-52-03E, 189 feet; S84-23-00E, 83.224 feet; S78-42-13E, 63.151 feet; S77-25-16E, 106.874 feet; S70-17-06E, 89.872 feet; S61-34-53E, 107.402 feet; S69-26-05E, 67.186 feet; S78-39-22E, 551 feet; N84-08-00E, 51.156 feet; N52-00-51E, 96.249 feet; N67-38-08E, 59.300 feet; N16-52-17W, 559.228 feet; S67-21-49E, 115.750 feet; S67-21-49E, 70.000 feet; S67-21-49E, 100.000 feet; S22-38-11W, 16.000 feet; S67-21-49E; 143.464 feet; S22-23-07W, 133.083 feet; S67-49-58E, 22.965 feet; S67-49-58E, 125.071 feet; N22-19-16E, 124.537 feet; S67-36-24E, 75.150 feet; S67-36-24E, 72.686 feet; S22-26-47W, 124.693 feet; S67-27-02E, 20.000 feet; S67-27-02E, 148.070 feet; N21-03-54E, 124.947 feet; S67-43-45E, 51.657 feet; S67-32-45E, 82.413 feet; S67-32-45E, 30.000 feet; S67-14-27E, 30.000 feet; S67-14-27E, 124.929 feet; S67-14-27E, 241.770 feet; S01-48-18W, 151.673 feet; S80-23-06E, 241.686 feet; S05-22-05W, 35.000 feet; S67-14-17E, 115.000 feet; S67-14-17E, 60.134 feet; N22-29-30E, 50.000 feet; S67-55-11E, 120.049 feet; S22-07-48W, 51.431 feet; S68-18-38E, 120.040 feet; N22-31-25E, 149.95 feet; S67-40-02E, 179.136 feet; S22-23-23W, 250.038 feet; N67-01-51W, 149.472 feet; S22-31-25W, 314.00 feet; S76-27-57E, 302.275 feet; N22-40-19E, 291.00 feet; S65-49-53E, 27.568 feet; S22-40-19W, 210.000 feet; S67-19-41E, 150.000 feet; N77-21-33E, 71.891 feet; N50-23-15E, 50.000 feet; N50-23-15E, 97.630 feet; N68-32-25E, 61.620 feet; N24-05-15E, 137.470 feet; S77-12-15E, 115.700 feet; N22-55-45E, 20.390 feet; 79-35-45E, 694.199 feet; S67-32-15E, 106.744 feet; S23-02-38W, 199.924 feet; S66-57-22E, 50.000 feet; S22-28-03W, 1,075.000 feet; N67-31-57W, 25.000 feet; S22-28-03W, 330.000 feet; S22-28-03W, 200.000 feet to a point in Bogue Sound, the southwest corner of the existing corporate limits; thence running along new corporate limit lines westwardly approximately parallel to and about 250 feet south of the north coast line of Bogue Sound the following seven courses: S89-26-49W, 342.250 feet; N90-00-00W, 2,500.000 feet; N90-00-00W, 1,000.000 feet; N73-18-03W, 1,044.031 feet; N90-00-00W, 500.000 feet; S73-18-03W, 1,044.031 feet; N90-00-00W, 1,500.000 feet; thence N00-00-00E, 357.000 feet; to a point in the mouth of Spooner's Creek; thence up the center of Spooner's Creek N74-02-22W, 520.047 feet; N45-00-00W, 707.107 feet; and N00-00-00E, 650.000 feet to the east prong of Spooner's Creek; thence up the east prong of Spooner's Creek N68-11-55E, 538.516 feet; N90-00-00E, 915.00 feet; S45-00-00E, 120.208 feet, and N82-35-35E, 592.013 feet to a point in the west line of Bryan Street; thence with the west line of Bryan Street N12-46-43W, 1,857.514 feet to and crossing NC Highway to a point in the north line of NC 24; thence with the north line of NC 24 N78-21-44E, 523.550 feet; thence continuing with the north line of NC 24 N78-10-41E, 357.000 feet to a point, a corner of the existing corporate limits; thence crossing NC 24 S04-30-57E, 160.859 feet to the point of beginning, containing 520.993 acres all according to a map by McDavid Associates, Inc., dated September 27, 1994, entitled "Survey for Town of Morehead City, Proposed Annexation Area 5." 
(Ord. No. 1994-45, § 1, 12-13-1994) 
[44]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of April, 1955: Being all of Lots Twenty (20) and Twenty-One (21), Block A, of the Country Club Heights Subdivision, per map recorded in Map Book 5, Page 19, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1995-07, § 1, 4-11-1995) 
[45]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1995: Lying and being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at an existing iron rod located at the southwest corner of the Gerald Moore property as recorded in deed Book 591, page 122 of the Carteret County Registry; thence along the southern line of said tract S71° 11'12" E 33.05 feet to an existing iron rod thence leaving said line and following the western line of the Paine-Webber tract S00 47'42" 200.63 feet to a point; thence leaving said line and following the northern line of an existing drainage easement S89° 12'27"W 213.55 feet to a point; thence leaving said easement and following the western line of the Hestron property as recorded in Deed Book 218, page 476 of the Carteret County Registry the following bearings and distances: S23 10°'59" W 10.96 feet, S00° 45'18" E 106.00 feet, N89°14'42"E 18.00 feet, S00°45'18" E 147.17 feet; thence along the northern line of said Hestron property the following bearings and distances: S89°14'42"W 555.00 feet, N61°56'39"W 178.19 feet; thence leaving said northern line and following the eastern line of said Hestron property the following bearings and distances: N00°45'18"W 378.86 feet, N02° 42"E 207.77 feet; thence N12°17'07"E 32.31 feet; thence leaving said eastern line S71°32'41"E 479.00 feet; thence S80°56'00" 415.30 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 10.47 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 1, 6-27-1995) 
[46]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of August, 1995: 
    Legal Description John Oglesby Heirs 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at a point in the southern right-of-way line of S.R. 1179, at the northwest corner, of the now former Calico Court Apartments property, said beginning point being located the following three (3) courses and distances from the intersection of the centerline of S.R.1179 and an extension of the east right-of-way line of Easy Street: N 64° 53' 10" W, 350.43 feet; N 66° 27' 50" W, 383.33 feet; S 16° 03' E, 38.93 feet to said point of beginning; thence from said point of beginning, S 16° 03' E, 1,059.28 feet to a point in the north line of North Morehead Extension; thence with said line, N 68° 30' W, 1,057.13 feet to the northwest corner of lot 40 Block F, North Morehead Extension; thence N 18° 31' E, 678.56 feet to point; thence N 18° 01' E, 178.05 feet to a point in the south right-of-way line of S.R. 1179; thence with said right-of-way S 66° 31' 03" E, 457.98 feet to the point and place of beginning, all bearings magnetic 1964 (declination 5° 14' west) and containing 14.66 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1995-27, § 1, 8-29-1995) 
Editor's note- Upon request of the town, section 2.1.1 has been added by the editor in order to facilitate inclusion of ordinances extending the corporate limits. This section is not an official part of the Charter. 
[47]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of May, 1996: In Morehead Township: Beginning at a point in the center of the County Club Road, it being the northwest corner of the tract of land of the parties of the first part (see map by P.K. Ball, January 1936,): runs thence south 75-30 east, along the center line of Country Club Road, 200 feet to a point; thence south 14-30 west, in a line at right angles with County Club Road, 200 feet to a point; thence north 75-30 west, to a point in the west line of the Swinson property; and thence north 13-00 east, approximately 200 feet to the center line of Country Club Road, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1996-27, § 1, 5-31-1996) 
[48]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of June, 1996: Beginning at a point on the south side of Shep Willis Road, said point located S 69° 02' 00" E-669.71'; S 67° 41' 00" E248.57' along and with the south side of said road from its intersection with the center line of NCSR 1176 (20th Street-Crab Point Road); and running thence the following courses and distances; S 78° 01' E-42.77'; S 49° 23' 24" 5-81.52' N 38° 24' 48" E-83.32' to a point on the high water mark of a branch of Dills Creek; thence with said high water mark N 38° 36' 59" E-188.30', N 41° 16' 30" E-93.67', N 75° 20' 02" E-60.58'; S 83° 41' 50" E-66.37'; S 62° 35' 15" E-36.57'; S 59° 25' 40" E-231.57'; S 30° 36' 50" E-37.56'; thence leaving said high water mark and running with a line of marked trees S 00° 48' 40" W-510.20' to a point on the south side of a ditch; thence along and with the south side of the ditch S 72° 24' 40" W-538.25' to a stake located in a bend of said ditch; thence along and with the east line of Apple Mobile Home Park N 17° 16' 10" W-206.78'; N 67° 59' 20" W-249.70'; N 49° 35' 50" E 210.18' to a ditch; thence with said ditch N 17° 16' 10" W-192.13'; to the beginning, containing 10.07 acres or less. 
(Ord. No. 1996-28, § 1, 6-25-1996) 
[49]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of July, 1996: Beginning at a point in the southern right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70 (178-foot right-of-way) said being located S 71°-05'-00" E, 259.60 feet from NCGS Monument "Marker" 1963. From said beginning point, S 18°-40'-00" E, 400.0 feet to a point; thence N 71°-20'-00" W, 320.0 feet to a point; thence N 15°-48'-15" E, 400.50 feet to a point in the southern right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70; thence, with said southern right-of-way margin, S 71°-20'-00" E, 340.0 feet to a point, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1996-32, § 1, 7-30-1996) 
[50]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of July, 1996: Being that certain area fronting 208.8 feet on U.S. Highway #70, which was excluded from the Dennis L. Turner Sr. 114.5-acre tract in that deed from Dennis B. Turner Sr. and wife, Amy H. Turner, and Dennis B. Turner Jr. and wife, Doris G. Turner, to Dwight C. Gregory, Jr. and wife, Lonora S. Gregory, recorded in Book 239, page 246, Carteret County Registry, and more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the B.O. Ketner northwest corner; running thence along the B.O. Ketner, west line S. 09° 45' W. 308.56 feet to a point in the Brandywine northline; running thence N. 65° 31' W. 210.2 feet to a point thence in U.S. Highway #70; running thence, S. 67° 58' E. 208.45 feet to the B.O. Ketner northwest corner, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1996-33, § 1, 7-30-1996) 
[51]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of July, 1996: Being all of Lot 12, Section 2, Morehead Gardens Subdivision, in accordance with that map thereof recorded in Map Book 4, Page 16, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1996-37, § 1, 8-27-1996) 
[52]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of September, 1996: Beginning at an existing concrete monument located in the southern right-of-way margin of the east bound lane of U.S. Highway 70, which existing concrete monument is located N 54°-02'-30"W 104.12 feet from the centerline of N.C. State Road #1137 (McCabe Road) and where the same is intersected by the aforesaid southern right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70. From said point of beginning as identified above running thence S 0°-05'-40" W and along the western right-of-way margin of the McCabe Road 124.46 feet to an existing concrete monument; thence S 36°-38'-30" W continuing along the McCabe Road western right-of-way margin 149.46 feet to a point; thence S 32°-22'-50" W also said McCade Road Western right-of-way margin 134.15 feet to an iron rod located in the lands of Alexander J. Chester and Rebecca C. Piver; from said point running thence N 78°-03'-10" W and along the said Chester and Piver north line 65.78 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence N 73°-06' W also along said Chester and Piver North line 254.30 feet to an existing iron pipe set in the center of an old ditch line; running thence N 17°-08' E and along the center of said ditch 86.90 feet; thence N 21°-32'-20" E also along said ditch 131.70 feet to a point at the northeast corner of the Chester and Piver lands and the southeast corner of the lands formerly owned by George R. Ballou; thence N 23°-36'-10"E 34.69 feet to a point; thence N 23°-36'-10" E 217.64 feet to a point; thence N 20°-39'-20" E 39.10 feet to a point in the southern right-of-way margin of the eastbound lane of U.S. Highway 70; thence S 54°-02'-30" E and along the southern right-of-way margin of said U.S. Highway 70 346.10 feet to the point or place of beginning. Containing 3.664 acres more or less as per survey by James L. Powell Registered Surveyor, dated December 23, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 1996-40, § 1, 9-24-1996) 
[53]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of December, 1996: Being located in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and beginning at a point in the eastern line of Lot 1, Block A, as shown on the map of Calvin Heights Subdivision, as the same is recorded in Map Book 5, page 52, Carteret County Registry, which point is also located at the intersection of the western right-of-way margin of Harris Street as the same is shown on the above-referenced map, and the northern right-of-way margin of the westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70. From said point of beginning described above, running thence with the northern right-of-way margin of the westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70 the following courses and distances: N 64°-37'-30" W a distance of 250.67 feet to a point; N 64°-32'-30" W a distance of 50.00 feet to a point; and N 64°-30'-14" W a distance of 98.94 feet to a point marking the southwest corner of the Murdoch lot; thence leaving the right-of-way margin of the westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70 and running N 25°-23'-30" E with the eastern line of the Murdoch property a distance of 279.77 feet to a point; running thence along the northern line of the Murdoch property, N 64°-31'-50" W a distance of 125.00 feet to a point; running thence along the western line of the Murdoch property, S 25°-23'-30" W a distance of 279.70 feet to a point marking the intersection of the northern right-of-way margin of the westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70 and the southwest corner of the Murdoch lot; running thence along the northern right-of-way margin of the westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70, N 64°-30'-00" W, a distance of 128.94 feet to a point marking the intersection of the northern right-of-way margin of the westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70 and the southeast corner of the Whitley property; thence leaving the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70 and running with the eastern line of the Whitley property N 11°-44'-30" E a distance of 184.51 feet to a point which marks the southwest corner of Lot 7, Block B, Calvin Heights Subdivision, as referenced above; running thence with the southern line of said Lot 7, S 64°-30'-00" E a distance of 96.97 feet to the southeast corner of said Lot 7; running thence along the eastern line of Lot 7, N 25°-25'-40" E a distance of 150.44 feet to a point marking the intersection of the northeast corner of Lot 7, Block B, Calvin Heights and the southern margin of Lydia Drive as the same is shown on the map of Calvin Heights Subdivision as referenced above; running thence with the southern right-of-way margin of Lydia Drive, S 64°-31'-50" E a distance of 599.90 feet to a point marking the intersection of the southern margin of Lydia Drive and the western margin of Harris Street as per map referenced above; running thence with the western margin of Harris Street, S 25°-22'-10" W a distance of 329.39 feet to the point and place of beginning. Containing 4.07 acres, more or less, as shown on a survey by Powell Surveying P.A., dated August, 1995, amended September 4, 1996, entitled "Annexation Survey for Phil Munden," to which reference is made for greater certainty of description. The above-described property being a portion of Tract 1 and all of Tract 2, as conveyed to Annette M. Lawrence on September 26, 1996, by deed recorded in Book 785, page 170, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1996-47, § 1, 11-26-1996) 
[54]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1997. 
[1]  Tract 1. Beginning at an iron pipe located on the eastern right-of-way of NCSR 1177 (County [Country] Club Road), at a point where the eastern right-of-way of NCSR 1177 intersects the southern property line of the Haystacks, Phase I, as recorded in Map Book 10-G, Page 53 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds, said iron pipe also being located S 75°36'54" E 5,675.50 feet from NC Geodetic Monument "Cull". From the above-described beginning, so located, running thence as follows: Leaving the right-of-way of NCSR 1177 and with the southern, western and eastern line of the Haystacks, Phase I, as recorded in Map Book 10-G, page 53 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds. S 76° 03'05" E 119.43 feet, S 13°56'55" W 428.76 feet, S 76°03'05" E 433.90 feet, N 13°56'55" E 243.97 feet, S 76°03'05" E 84.00 feet, N 13°56'55" E 215.00 feet and S 76°03'05" E 230.91 feet to the mean high water mark of Newport River; thence with the mean high water mark of Newport River S 20°19'07" W 63.54 feet, S 10°11'17" W 70.08 feet, S 04°18'56" W 60.83 feet, S 41°04'55" W 13.58 feet, S 02°49'43" W 100.98 feet, S 01°26'41" W 161.62 feet, S 23°49'16" W 137.52 feet, S 00° 54'27" E 119.94 feet, S 06°49'25" W 61.07 feet, S 12°37'10" E 71.10 feet, S 26°40'27" E 86.65 feet, S 04°55'19" E 61.82 feet, S 25°30'54" W 35.23 feet, S 09°26'31" W 228.26 feet, S 02°24'33" E 113.67 feet, S 10°43'10" E 101.77 feet, S 30°17'31" W 55.40 feet, S 03°29'29" W 110.35 feet, S 24°32'11" E 99.39 feet, S 28°40'51" E 57.94 feet, S 75°10'01" W 24.27 feet, S 46°28'43" W 45.36 feet, S 34°09'57" W 102.08 feet, S 00°13'55" W 89.33 feet, S 24°37'10" W 231.29 feet, to the mean high water line of Dills Creek; thence with the mean high water line of Dills Creek N 09°02'18" W 80.14 feet, N 43°50'12" W 113.76 feet, S 81°43'13" W 97.33 feet, S 14°30'48" W 31.78 feet, S 31°40'25" W 35.65 feet, S 60°01'39" W 22.21 feet, S 71°36'16" W 39.82 feet, S 53°31'29" W 27.43 feet, N 77°34'08" W 45.23 feet, N 66°30'21" W 43.10 feet, N 54°02'29" W 66.51 feet, N 41°37'01" W 109.47 feet, N 31°47'20" W 137.87 feet, N 69°00'51" W 109.29 feet, N 49°42'42" W 117.70 feet, N 03°03'59" W 111.70 feet, N 27°52'06" E 40.83 feet, N 10°48'28" E 114.78 feet, to the southern right-of-way of NCSR 1177; thence with the southern right-of-way of NCSR 1177, S 77°22'26" E 288.78 feet, and N 12°37'34" E 60.00 feet to the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177; thence with the northern right-of-way of NCSR 1177 N 77°22'26" W 448.49 feet to the point of curvature, thence with the curved right-of-way of NCSR 1177 an arc distance of 69.45 feet, said arc being to the right having a radius of 45.00 feet and a chord bearing N 33°09'38" W 62.76 feet to the point of tangency; thence continuing with the eastern right-of-way of NCSR 1177 N 11°03'10" E 697.35 feet, N 10°57'32" E 99.91 feet, N 11°18'04" E 99.57 feet, N 12°32'50" E 99.46 feet, N 13°17'43" E 99.74 feet, N 13°37'28" E 99.88 feet and N 13°38'39" E 353.73 feet to the point of beginning containing 40.139 acres and being a portion of the property recorded in Deed Book 569, page 310 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds. 
[2]  Tract 2. Beginning at a point on the western right-of-way of NCSR 1177, said point being located S 60°42'40" E 5,873.64 feet from NC Geodetic Survey Monument "Cull". From the above-described beginning, so located, running thence as follows: With the western right-of-way of NCSR 1177, S 11°03'10" W 40.99 feet to the point of curvature; thence with the curved right-of-way of NCSR 1177 an arc distance of 162.05 feet, said curve being to the left having a radius of 105.00 feet and a chord bearing S 33°09'38" E 146.44 feet to the point of tangency; thence with the southern right-of-way of NCSR 1177, S 77°22'26" E 49.83 feet to the mean high water line of Dills Creek; thence with the mean high water line of Dills Creek S 04°53'06" W 240.55 feet, N 76°03'26" W 94.99 feet, N 12°05'43" W 246.09 feet and N 16°08'24" E 156.03 feet to the point of beginning containing 0.794 acre and being a portion of the property recorded in Deed Book 569, page 310 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, § 1, 1-6-1997) 
[55]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1997: Beginning at an iron pipe located at the southwestern corner of the Haystacks, Section One, Phase One as recorded in Map Cabinet 10, Page 53 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, said iron pipe also being located S 75°35'26" E 5,374.95 feet from NC Geodetic Monument "Cull". From the above-described beginning, so located, running thence as follows: With the common line with the United Pacific Insurance Company property as recorded in Deed Book 569, Page 310 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds, N 13°56'55" W 410.36 feet to an iron pipe N 61°59'08" W 77.11 feet to an iron pipe N 28°00'25" E 100.00 feet to an iron pipe, S 61°59'08" E 52.07 feet to an iron pipe, and N 13°56'55" E 51.55 feet to an iron pipe located at the southwestern corner of the Jane R. Lampley Rosen property as recorded in Deed Book 518, Page 368 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds; thence with the southern line of said Rosen property, S 61°59'08" E 276.42 feet to a Parker Kalon nail located in the centerline of NCSR 1177; thence with the centerline of NCSR 1177, S 13°45'25" W 106.71 feet to an existing nail; thence leaving said centerline of NCSR 1177 S 76°03'05" E 912.89 feet to the mean high water line of the Newport River; thence with the mean high water line of the Newport River, S 10°39'03" W 103.88 feet, S 41°15'16" W 30.92 feet, S 00°20'38" W 27.79 feet, S 26°47'09" W 68.06 feet, S 36°11'40" W 13.80 feet, S 05°16'17" W 47.19 feet, S 08°26'37" W 52.72 feet, and S 20°19'07" W 24.59 feet to the northern line of the United Pacific Insurance Company property as recorded in Deed Book 569, Page 310 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds; thence with the northern line of the United Pacific Insurance Company property N 76°03'05" W 230.91 feet, S 13°56'55" W 215.00 feet, N 76°03'05" W 84.00 feet, S 13°56'55" W 243.97 feet, N 76°03'05" W 433.90 feet, N 13°56'55" E 428.76 feet, and N 76°03'05" W 119.43 feet to the eastern right-of-way of NCSR 1177; thence N 76°03'05" W 30.00 feet to the centerline of NCSR 1177; thence N 76°03'05" W 30.00 feet to the western right-of-way of NCSR 1177; thence continuing with the northern line of the United Pacific Insurance Company property N 76°03'05" W 240.57 feet to the point of beginning containing 16.020 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1997-03, § 1, 1-6-1997) 
[56]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of March 1997: In Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and all of that certain tract or parcel of land lying and being part of Tract No. 7 of the "Property of Mrs. Addie Gray Taylor," according to the map thereof recorded in Map Book 2, page 107, Carteret County Registry, said tract or parcel of land being described by metes and bounds as follows: Beginning at an existing iron pipe in the southern right-of-way line of the County Club Road, which iron pipe is located at the northwest corner of the S.W. Barnes lot as recorded in Book 306, Page 404, Carteret County Registry, said iron pipe also being located N 81°-54' W along the southern right-of-way margin of the County Club Road, 100 feet from the northeast corner of Tract No. 7 according to the aforementioned map; from said point so identified, running thence S 11°-23'-20" W along the western property line of said Barnes lot, 200.13 feet to an existing iron pipe, the southwest corner of said Barnes lot; thence S 79°-50'-40" E and along the said Barnes south line, 99.87 feet to an existing iron pipe located at the southeast corner of said Barnes lot in the eastern line of Tract No. 7 in the aforementioned map and in the western line of the R.M. Russell property; running thence S 10°-59'-40" W and along the eastern line of Tract No. 7 and the western line of said Russell lot, 266.35 feet to an existing iron pipe located at the intersection of the Davenport and Russell property lines; and running thence S 11°-47'-40" W along the Davenport west line, 350.28 feet to an existing iron pipe located at the southeastern corner of Tract No. 7 as referenced herein at the intersection of the lands of H.M. Smith; and running thence N 61°-35'-40" W and with the southern line of said Tract No. 7 and the northern line of the Smith and Butt property, 699.46 feet to an existing concrete monument located at the southwest corner of Tract No. 7 and the northeast corner of the D.A. Lind property; running thence N 16°-38' E and along the western line of said Tract No. 7 and the eastern line of the Grace Missionary Baptist Church property, 111.74 feet to an existing concrete monument in the southern right-of-way line of the power line easement; and continuing thence N 16°-39' E along said west line of Tract No. 7 and the east line of the Pentecostal Holiness Church property, 271.10 feet to an existing iron pipe marking the southwest corner of the L.E. Lewis property as is recorded in Book 387, Page 258, Carteret County Registry, and which is located S 16°-39' E, 230.22 feet from an existing nail in the center of the County Club Road; running thence S 81°-48'-40" E and along the southern line of the said Lewis property, 121.38 feet to an existing iron pipe; running thence N 16°-43'-40" E and along the east line of said Lewis tract, 210 feet to an existing iron pipe in the southern right-of-way margin of the Country Club Road; thence S 81°-54' E and along the southern right-of-way margin of said County Club Road, approximately 400 feet to the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1997-04, § 1, 1-14-1997) 
[57]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of March, 1997: 
    Lying and being in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being bounded on the north by Glad Tidings Pentecostal Holliness Church property, on the east by Department of Transportation property, on the south by Atlantic and East Carolina Railroad, on the west by "Taylor Street" and being described as follows: Beginning at a concrete monument in the eastern right-of-way of Taylor Street, said concrete monument being located the following courses and distances from a concrete monument in the southern right-of-way of N.C.S.R. 1177 and the eastern right-of-way of Taylor Street; S 06° 35' 20" W, 331.72' and S 02° 58' 07" W, 64.09' to the point of beginning; thence from said point of beginning S 01° 11' 55" E, 49.70' to a point; thence S 30° 11' 36" W, 121.88' to a point; thence S 61° 34' 00" E, 936.14' to a point; thence N 16° 56' 50" E, 154.58' to an iron pipe; thence N 61° 39' 25" W, 817.75' to an iron pipe; thence N 16° 24' 56" E, 15.13' to an iron pipe; thence N 61° 32' 51" W, 105.29' to a concrete monument in the eastern right-of-way of Taylor Street; the point of beginning, containing 3.22 acres more or less. 
    Lying and being in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being bounded on the north by N.C.S.R. 1177 ("Country Club Road") on the east by Glad Tidings Pentecostal Holliness Church property, Thomas S. Bennett property and Department of Transportation property, on the south by Department of Transportation Project No. 980022831 (Carteret County, Tract 2), and on the west by "Taylor Street" and being described as follows: Beginning at a concrete monument in the southern right-of-way of N.C.S.R. 1177 and the eastern right-of-way of Taylor Street, thence with said right-of-way of N.C.S.R. 1177 S 86° 54' 40" E, 179.12' to a concrete monument; thence continuing with said right-of-way of N.C.S.R. 1177 S 82° 29' 41" E, 421.92' to an iron pipe; thence cornering and leaving said right-of-way S 16° 39' 00" W, 324.99' to an iron pipe; thence S 63° 26' 02" E, 463.07' to an iron pipe; thence S 18° 15' 13" W, 110.61' to a concrete monument; thence N 63° 28' 39" W, 66.39' to a concrete monument; thence S 16° 56' 50" W, 196.48' to an iron pipe; thence N 61° 39' 25" W, 817.75' to an iron pipe; thence N 16° 24' 56" E, 15.13' to an iron pipe; thence N 61° 32' 51" W, 105.29' to a concrete monument in the eastern right-of-way of Taylor Street; thence with said right-of-way of Taylor Street N 02° 58' 07" E, 64.09' to a concrete monument thence continuing with said right-of-way of Taylor Street N 06° 35' 20" E, 331.72' to a concrete monument, the point of beginning, containing 9.40 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 1997-11, § 1, 3-25-1997) 
[58]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1997: 
    Beginning at an iron stake in the east line of the property formerly owned by R.R. Barbour, said point now lying in the boundary line of the Mandy Farms Subdivision, and said point being the point of beginning of that tract conveyed in that deed of record in Book 362, Page 265, Carteret County Registry; said point of beginning also being the north westernmost corner depicted on that survey hereinafter referenced; and from said point of beginning so described runs thence the following courses and distances: south 80-28-00 east, 161.06 feet to an iron pipe; south 09-58-07 west, 67.71 feet to a point; south 78-41-00 east, 124.90 feet to a point; north 18-36-00 east, 72.50 feet to an existing iron rod; south 80-28-00 east, 40.93 feet to an existing iron rod; south 09-32-00 west, 444.41 feet to a point; south 80-28-00 west, 305.61 feet to a point; north 11-13-00 east, 444.29 feet to an existing iron pipe; north 11-13-00 east, 21.96 feet; south 68-09-38 east, 9.60 feet; south 75-35-29 east, 11.62 feet; south 11-13-00 west, 222.43 feet; north 81-16-42 west, 90 feet; south 11-13-00 west, 924.57 feet; north 09-05-00 west, 67.20 feet to a point; north 30-00-00 west, 138 feet to a point; north 47-00-00 west, 102.00 feet to a point; north 44-00-00 west, 145 feet to a point; north 01-45-00 west, 153.00 feet to a point; north 20-15-00 east, 92 feet to a point; north 33-14-52 west, 183.13 feet to a point; north 32-47-01 west, 88.48 feet to a point; north 54-50-00 west, 184.50 feet to a point; north 45-23-00 west, 117.00 feet to a point; north 17-54-00 east, 248.00 feet to the point or place of beginning. For further deed reference, see Book 362, Page 265, and Book 404, Page 29, Carteret County Registry. Also see Map Book 8, Page 84, Carteret County Registry. Courses and distances used herein are taken from that survey entitled "Willie Little Tract" dated January 23, 1995, prepared by Stroud Engineering, P.A., Registered Land Surveyor, Morehead City, North Carolina, reference to which is made for greater certainty of description, said survey being recorded in Map Book 28, Page 727, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § 1, 6-10-1997) 
[59]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1997: 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being a sixty-feet-wide strip of land immediately adjacent to and east of lots 6, 7, 8, and 9, of the Little Nine Subdivision as recorded in Map Book 18, Page 97, Carteret County Registry, and being the northernmost 551.21 (centerline measurement) of Little Nine Drive (State Road 1601); more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at the southwestern intersection of Little Nine Drive (State Road 1601) and U.S. Hwy. 70; thence with the southwestern right-of-way of U.S. Hwy. 70, S71°-22'-30"E, 61.34 ft., to the southeastern intersection of Little Nine Drive, (State Road 1601) and U.S. Hwy. 70; thence with the eastern line of Little Nine Drive, S6°-38'-30"W, 544.84 ft., to a point; thence N83°-21'-30"W, 60.0 ft., to the southeast corner of Lot 9, Little Nine Subdivision (Map Book 18, Page 97); thence with the western line of Little Nine Drive (State Road 1601) N6°-39'-30"E, 557.58 ft., to the point and place of beginning containing 0.759 Acres, all bearing reference Map Book 18, Page 7. 
    The corporate limits of the Town of Morehead City are extended to include the following described areas (Areas 1-4) as enacted by the General Assembly of North Carolina, Session Law 2001-75, House Bill 712: 
Area 1: Medical Park Foundation 6/30/97 Voluntary Annexation Correction: 
Being all of lots 6, 7, 8 and 9 inclusive of the Little Nine Subdivision as per survey by James L. Powell, Registered Surveyor, dated December 23, 1981, recorded in Map Book 18, Page 97, Carteret County Registry. Being a part of the property conveyed by Ballou Enterprises, Inc., a North Carolina corporation to William H. Page and wife, Jane W. Page, by deed dated October 18, 1983, recorded in Book 489, Page 51, Carteret County Registry, and being the same property conveyed by William H. Page and wife, Jane W. Page to Bay Foods, Inc., a North Carolina corporation, by deed dated December 14, 1983, recorded in Book 491, Page 274, Carteret County Registry. 
Area 2: Annexation of Waterways Adjacent to Corporate Limits: 
Beginning at a point on the southwesternmost corporate boundary at the point of intersection with the eastern shore of Spooners Creek, then traveling due south a distance of 500 feet, then eastward remaining parallel with and 500 feet south of the corporate limit boundary the length of the Bogue Sound shoreline to the point of intersection with the western shoreline of Sugarloaf Island, then continuing eastward along the northernmost boundary of Sugarloaf Island to a point 500 feet east of the NC State Ports Authority property [Morehead City Port Terminal], then southwardly and then eastwardly remaining 500 feet from and parallel to the Port Terminal property and continuing in an eastwardly direction to a point of 500 feet west of the western shoreline of Radio Island, then southwardly remaining 500 feet west of and parallel to the shoreline of Radio Island to a point 500 feet due south of the southernmost point of Tax Parcel Identification Number (PIN) 639566594100 NC State Port Authority property located on Radio Island, then due north 500 feet to the point of intersection with the shoreline of Radio Island, then northwardly following the westernmost shoreline of Radio Island and crossing the causeway to the point of intersection with the northernmost right-of-way boundary of the Morehead-Beaufort high rise bridge [U.S. Highway 70 right-of-way], then westwardly following the northernmost boundary of the Morehead-Beaufort high rise bridge right-of-way to a point 500 feet west of the easternmost Morehead City limits line, then northwardly remaining 500 feet east of and parallel to the easternmost boundary of the Morehead City limit line and continuing in this direction northwardly until the point of intersection with the easternmost shoreline of the Haystack Marshes, identified by Tax Parcel Identification Number (PIN) 639625456300, then following the shoreline of this marsh in a southwardly, then northwestwardly, then northwardly direction along the property line of Tax PIN 639607251800 to a point due east of the northeasternmost corner of Tax PIN 638608884980 [Haystacks Property], then southwardly following the shoreline, encompassing the entire westernmost boundary of Calico Bay and its tributaries to the point of intersection with the northeasternmost corner of Tax PIN 638614349096 [Lot 12, Sec 4, Block F, N Morehead Subdivision property] and being the point of intersection with the primary Morehead City Corporate limit line. 
Area 3: Annexation of Bridges Street Extension Right-of-Way and Remnant State Owned Parcels: 
Beginning on the northernmost boundary of the Bridges Street Extension [SR 1176] right-of-way at the point of intersection with the southwesternmost corner of Tax PIN 637614227856 [Carteret County Property/former "A&P" location] then westwardly, including the portion of Country Club Road [SR 1177] right-of-way northwardly to the existing corporate limit [in the vicinity of West Carteret High School], along the entire length of Bridges Street Extension [SR 1176] to its intersection with the northernmost right-of-way boundary of U.S. Highway 70 and including the full width of these sections of SR 1176 and SR 1177 highway rights-of-way and all the adjoining state-owned remnant properties acquired by the NC Department of Transportation and referenced as follows: Tax PIN 636616748607, 636610468193, 636610464057, 636610361969 and 636610268767. 
Area 4: Annexation of Railroad Right-of-Way: 
Beginning at the point of intersection with the southeasternmost corner of Tax PIN 636601089018 [NC State Port Authority "Edgewater" Tract] then westwardly and crossing the Arthur Farm Road [SR 1153] right-of-way to the point of intersection with the westernmost right-of-way boundary of Arthur Farm Road [SR 1153] and the point of intersection with the southeasternmost corner of Tax PIN 635607791542 [Town of Morehead City owned property] and including the full width of the railroad right-of-way [North Carolina Railroad Company]. 
(Ord. No. 1997-24, § 1, 6-10-1997; Res. No. 2001-12, 3-15-2001) 
[60]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of September, 1997. 
    In the Township of Morehead, being the easternmost 23.9 feet of Lot 48 and all of Lots 49, 50, 51, and 52 of the Braemer Company property as the same appears of record in Map Book 3, page 130, which lots are shown on that map of Industrial Park dated February 22, 1978, as the same is recorded in Map Book 15, page 49, Carteret County Registry. 
    This is the same property described in that deed recorded in Book 488, page 456, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1997-28, § 1, 8-26-1997) 
[61]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of October, 1997: 
    Beginning at a concrete monument marking the intersection of the north line of Bridges Street Extension with the west line of Country Club Road and running thence with the north line of Bridges Street Extension N 49° 34' 37" W 25.988 feet to a concrete monument; thence continuing along the north line of Bridges Street Extension N 49° 02' 18" W 2.794 feet to a point; thence with the west line of the Michael Dorman lot N 02° 14' 46" W 89.210 feet to the south line of NCSR 1177; thence with the south line of NCSR 1177 N 81° 07' 14" E 96.729 feet to an iron stake, a corner with Pablo Mojica; thence with the Mojica line S 03° 30' 56" E 114.823 feet to the west line of Country Club Road; thence with the west line of Country Club Road S 83° 58' 36" W 77.649 feet to the beginning containing 0.25 acres all according to a survey and map by McDavid Associates, Inc., entitled "Annexation Survey, Town of Morehead City, The Michael Dorman Lot," dated August 13, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 1997-42, § 1, 10-28-1997) 
[62]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of November, 1997; 
    Being a tract of land in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, said tract being adjacent to a tract of land located on U.S. Highway 70 that was deeded to Larry D. Holler and Sharon Y. Holler in Deed Book 783, Page 549, Carteret County Registry; 
    From Holler's northwest corner, in the southern margin of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70, following a heading of South 09° 45' West 299.45 feet, there is a set iron rod (said rod being the same course and 418.63 feet from the centerline of the westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70), said rod being the point and place of beginning; and from said point of beginning following the Holler line South 65° 31' East 210.2 feet to an existing iron rod, a common corner with property now or formerly owned by Ketner; thence following the Ketner line South 09° 25' 35" West 180.28 feet to a set iron rod, a corner; thence North 65° 31' West 211.25 feet to a set iron rod corner in the property of Colonial Carolina Pottery, Inc., thence North 09° 45' East 180.00 feet to the point and place of beginning, this being a 0.84-acre tract of land as shown on that survey entitled "Larry D. Holler, Map 3" by Collier Survey Company dated August 28, 1997; said map showing this 0.84-acre tract as Tract "A." 
    Being a tract of land in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, said tract being south of a tract of land located on U.S. Highway 70 that was deeded to Larry D. Holler and Sharon Y. Holler in Deed Book 783, Page 549, Carteret County Registry; 
    From Holler's northwest corner, in the southern margin of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70, following a heading of South 09° 45' West 479.45 feet, there is a set iron rod (said rod being the same course and 598.63 feet from the centerline of the westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70), said rod being the point and place of beginning; and from said point of beginning heading South 65° 31' East 211.25 feet to an set iron rod, a common corner with property now or formerly owned by Ketner; thence following the Ketner line South 09° 25' 35" West 180.28 feet to an existing iron rod, a corner with property owned by Colonial Carolina Pottery, Inc.; thence North 65° 31' West 212.33 feet to a set iron rod and corner in the property of Colonial Carolina Pottery, Inc.; thence North 09° 45' East 180.00 feet to the point and place of beginning, this being a 0.84-acre tract of land as shown on that survey entitled "Larry D. Holler, Map 3" by Collier Survey Company dated August 28, 1997; said map showing this 0.84-acre tract as Tract "B." 
    Being a tract of land in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, said tract being south of a tract of land located on U.S. Highway 70 that was deeded to Larry D. Holler and Sharon Y. Holler in Deed Book 783, Page 549, Carteret County Registry and being adjacent to a tract of land deeded to Larry D. Holler and Sharon Y. Holler and Henry E. Caudle and Barbara A. Caudle in Deed Book 806, Page 113, Carteret County Registry; 
    In the southwest corner of the Holler and Caudle tract referenced above, there is an existing iron rod, said rod being South 09° 45' West 778.63 feet from a point in the centerline of the westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70, and said rod being the point and place of beginning; and from said point of beginning heading South 65° 31' East 212.33 feet to an existing iron rod, a common corner with property now or formerly owned by Ketner; thence following a new line with property owned by Colonial Carolina Pottery, Inc. and heading South 05° 25' 35" West 180.28 feet to a set iron rod; thence North 65° 31' West 213.36 feet to a set iron rod and corner in the property of Colonial Carolina Pottery, Inc.; thence North 09° 45' East 180.00 feet to the point and place of beginning, this being a 0.84-acre tract of land as shown on that survey entitled "Larry D. Holler, Map 4" by Collier Survey Company dated September 26, 1997; said map showing this 0.84-acre tract as Tract "C." 
(Ord. No. 1997-45, § 1, 11-11-1997) 
[63]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of September, 1997: 
    Being a tract of land in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, said tract being near Little Nine Drive, also known as NCSR 1601, on which road stands an existing concrete monument in the western right-of-way of the road, said concrete monument also being the same control monument between lots 11 and 12 as shown on Map Book 18, Page 97, Carteret County Registry; thence from said concrete monument heading South 02° 42' 54" West 375.68 feet to an iron pipe set in the western right-of-way of said Little Nine Drive, thence leaving Little Nine Drive and following the centerline of a paved 51-foot-wide easement and right-of-way, South 82° 45' 20" West 231.15 feet to an iron pipe, the POINT AND PLACE OF BEGINNING; and from said point of beginning following the line of property also owned by Colonial Carolina Pottery, Inc., heading South 02° 32' 54" East 208.34 feet to an iron pipe, thence South 01° 12' 16" East 577.06 feet to a corner and iron pipe set; thence North 84° 36' 00" West 295.33 feet to an iron pipe and corner; thence North 00° 33' 00" West 187.90 feet to an iron pipe; thence South 89° 27' 00" West 69.35 to an iron pipe; thence North 00° 33' 00" West 233.60 feet to an iron pipe; thence North 89° 27' 00" East 69.35 feet to an iron pipe; thence North 00° 33' 00" West 121.27 feet to an iron pipe; thence North 54° 34' 07" West 26.85 feet to a nail; thence along property now or formerly owned by Edgar L. Harrington, Jr. and wife, Lynda R. Harrington, North 00° 49' 55" West 315.40 feet to an iron pipe set and a corner; thence following the line of property also owned by Colonial Carolina Pottery, Inc., North 87° 49' 21" East 298.81 feet to an iron pipe; thence heading South 02° 32' 54" East 127.89 feet to an iron pipe, the POINT AND PLACE OF BEGINNING, this being a 6.43&pm; acre tract of land as shown on that survey entitled "Survey for Colonial Carolina Pottery, Inc." by W.D. Roberts, Jr., R.L.S. and dated September 2, 1993. 
    BEING all of Lots 10 through 18, inclusive, of the Little Nine Subdivision as per survey by James L. Powell, Registered Surveyor, dated December 23, 1981, of record in Map Book 18, Page 97, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1997-31, § 1, 9-9-1997) 
[64]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the fifteenth day of December, 1997: 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County and being a 47.57 acre tract, bounded on the south by NC Hwy. 24; on the North by Hestron Corp., Glyn C. Williams, Hubert Smith, Jr. and Bobby and Betty Morgan; on the East by Cypress Bay Plaza; and on the West by Refrigerated Box Cars LLC and others; and more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at a concrete monument in the northern right-of-way line of NC Hwy. 24 (the southwest corner of the now or former property of Glimcher Properties Ltd; said monument being located N83° 31' 14"E (NC Grid), 147.86' (horizontal ground) from NCGS Monument "INLIKE" 1992 (y = 365,445.92' x = 2,658,065.42'-NAD '83); thence from said beginning point and with the northern right-of-way line of NC Hwy. 24, S88° 41' 10"W, 715.92' to a concrete monument at the P.C. of a circular curve; thence with said curve having a Delta of 15° 03' 24," a radius of 2,523.22 ft. and an arc length of 663.07 ft., a chord bearing and distance of S81° 09' 28"W 661.17 ft. to a concrete monument at the P.T. of said curve; thence continuing with the northern right-of-way line of NC Hwy. 24, S73° 37' 46"W, 256.93 ft. to a concrete monument at the southeastern corner of the now or former Robert A. Burr, Trustee property; thence with the eastern line of Robert A. Burr, Eastern Carolina Broadcasting, and R.B.I. Properties LLC, N06° 19' 32"E, 1,830.47 ft. to a concrete monument at the southwestern corner of the now or former Bobby H. and Betty Morgan property; thence with the southern line of said property, S71° 16' 27"E, 100.90 ft. to a concrete monument at the southeastern corner of said property; thence N18° 33' 45"E, 209.46 ft. to a concrete monument in the southern line of Hubert Smith, Jr. property; thence with the southern lines of Hubert Smith, Jr., Hestron Corporation, and Glyn C. Williams, S71° 27' 03"E, 375.19 ft. to a concrete monument at the southwestern corner of Hestron Corporation; thence S12° 18' 41"W, 103.32 ft. to a point; thence S02° 17' 16"W, 207.77 ft. to a point; thence S06° 43' 44"E, 378.65 ft. to a point; thence S61° 22' 47"E, 178.45 ft. to a point; thence N89° 16' 16"E, 555.0 ft. to a point; thence N00° 43' 44"W, 147.17 ft. to a point; thence S89° 16' 16"W, 18.0 ft. to a point; thence N00° 43' 44"W, 106.0 ft. to a point; thence N23° 12' 33"W, 10.96 ft. to a point; thence N89° 14' 01"E, 213.55 ft. to a point in the line of Glimcher Properties, LLC; thence with the Glimcher Properties LLC lines in the following Seven (7) courses and distances: S00° 46' 08"E, 132.33 ft. to a concrete monument; S84° 00' 12"E, 194.47 ft. to a concrete monument; S06° 12' 37"W, 172.64 ft. to a concrete monument; S83° 49' 31"E, 221.56 ft. to a concrete monument; S06° 10' 16"W, 221.03 ft. to a concrete monument; N83° 49' 25"W, 369.10 ft. to a concrete monument; S00° 38' 02"E, 647.86 ft. to the point and place of beginning, containing 47.57 acres, all bearings NC Grid (NAD '83). 
(Ord. No. 1997-47, § 1, 11-25-1997) 
[65]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described non-contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the twenty-eighth day of February, 1998: 
    Beginning at a set iron rod at the northwest intersection of the northern right-of-way of U.S. Hwy. 70 and the western right-of-way of Murdoch Road (NCSR 1151), thence from said point of beginning the following courses and distances: N64° 51' 10"W 938.86 feet, N23° 10' 00"E 1,275.61 feet, S71° 38' 57"E 966.60 feet, S49° 21' 00"W 150.28 feet, S41° 39' 00"E 191.91 feet, S31° 44' 39"W 1,185.17 feet to the point of the beginning containing 30.58 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1998-02, § 1, 2-24-1998) 
[66]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the twenty-eighth day of February, 1998: 
    BEING ALL of Lot 8, Block EE, of the Mandy Farms Subdivision, Section III, as per survey thereof by Powell Surveying Company dated June 9, 1981, as recorded in Map Book 18, Page 21, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1998-03, § 1, 2-24-1998) 
[67]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of March, 1998. 
    Being all of Lots 1 and 2, Block E, in Subdivision known as Calvin Heights as shown on a map recorded in Map Book 5, Page 52. 
(Ord. No. 1998-07, § 1, 3-10-1998) 
[68]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of June, 1998. 
    Being all of Lot 12-A as shown on that plat entitled "Morehead Gardens No. 2" of record in Map Book 4, page 16, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1998-25, § 1, 6-30-1998) 
[69]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made a part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirty-first day of July, 1998: 
    LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY 
    TO BE ANNEXED INTO THE CITY OF 
    MOREHEAD FOR BLAIR POINTE, LLC 
    TRACT 1 
    MOREHEAD TOWNSHIP, 
    CARTERET COUNTY, NC 
    MAY 29, 1998 
    Beginning at an existing iron pipe located at the southeasterly corner of Andrew A. Midgett, Sr. as recorded in Deed Book 755, Page 458 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, said iron pipe being referenced S 00°30'53" W 3,601.26' and S 89°24'48" E 1,473.81' from an existing parker kalon nail located at the centerline intersection of NCSR 1176 (20th Street Extension) and NCSR 1177 (County [Country] Club Road). 
    Thence from said point of beginning N 04°11'03" W 873.10' along the easterly boundaries of Andrew A. Midgett, Sr. (Deed Book 755, Page 458), Andrew A. Midgett, Jr. (Deed Book 591, Page 465), Cecelia O. Quillen (Deed Book 596, Page 40) and Lottie P. Oglesby (Deed Book 778, Page 444) to an existing iron pipe located on the southerly line of James Boyd (Lot 12) as recorded in Map Book 9, Page 18 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, thence S 61°54'58" E 470.56' along the southerly boundaries of James Boyd, Sara E. Adams (Deed Book 769, Page 250) and Robert Boyd (Deed Book 523, Page 142) to an existing concrete monument located at the southeasterly corner of Robert Boyd (Deed Book 523, Page 142) and the southwesterly corner of Jean B. Siebenschuh as recorded in Deed Book 602, Page 40 and Map Book 15, Page 48 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, thence S 62°00'01" E 615.46' along the southerly boundaries of Jean B. Siebenschuh (Deed Book 602, Page 40), Milton W. Boyd (Deed Book 663, Page 256) and Doris B. Teeter (Deed Book 602, Page 39) to a point, thence through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC as recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 99 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office S 27°59'59" W 52.05' to a point, thence S 10°48'20" W 1,075.33' continuing through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC to a point on the northern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway, thence along said northern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway on a curve to the left with a radius of 1,088.50', an arc distance of 356.98', and a chord bearing of S 89°46'26" W 355.38' to a point of reverse curvature, thence on a curve to the right with a radius of 533.61', an arc distance of 321.54' and a chord bearing N 82°21'31" W 316.70' to the point of tangency, thence N 65°05'46" W 204.20' to a point of curvature, thence continuing along said northern right-of-way on a curve to the left with a radius of 1,029.65', an arc distance of 9.60', and a chord bearing N 65°20'32" W 9.60' to a point, said point being referenced S 82°13'56" E 1,280.05' from NCGS Monument "CULL," thence leaving said right-of-way and through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC (Deed Book 788, Page 991) N 18°25'16" E 146.57' a point, thence continuing through said lands of Blair Pointe, LLC N 02°16'34" E 473.84' to a point on the southerly boundary of Andrew A. Midgett, Sr. as recorded in Deed Book 755, Page 458 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, thence along the southerly boundary of Andrew A. Midgett, Sr. S 89°24'48" E 129.24' to a point and place of beginning. 
    Said parcel of land containing 27.212 acres of land and being a portion of the property recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office. 
    LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY 
    TO BE ANNEXED INTO THE CITY OF 
    MOREHEAD FOR BLAIR POINTE, LLC 
    TRACT 2 
    MOREHEAD TOWNSHIP, 
    CARTERET COUNTY, NC 
    MAY 29, 1998 
    Beginning at an iron pipe set on the eastern right-of-way of NCSR 1176 (20th Street Extension), said iron pipe being located at the northwesterly corner of Marvin T. Moore as recorded in Deed Book 536, Page 340 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, said point being further referenced S 15°01'07" W 484.20' from NCGS Monument "cull." 
    Thence from said point of beginning N 16°21'27" E along the eastern right-of-way of NCSR 1176 (20th Street Extension) 23.59' to a point, thence N 15°40'22" E 100.35' to a point, thence N 15°05'53" E 100.26' to a point, thence N 14°49'50" E 100.29' to a point, thence N 13°59'26" E continuing along the eastern right-of-way of NCSR 1726 (20th Street Extension) 50.27' to a point on the southerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway, said point being referenced S 14°42'08" W 109.46' from NCGS Monument "cull," thence from said point S 87°43'26" E along the southerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway 910.46' to a point of curvature, thence on a curve to the right with a radius of 969.65' an arc distance of 382.94', and a chord bearing of S 76°24'26" E 380.46' to the point of tangency, thence S 65°05'46" E 204.20' to a point of curvature, thence on a curve to the left with a radius of 593.61', an arc distance 357.70', and chord bearing of S 82°21'31" E 352.31' to a point of reverse curvature, thence continuing along the southerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway on a curve to the right with a radius of 1,028.50', an arc distance of 337.30' and a chord bearing N 89°46'26" E 335.79' to a point of tangency, thence S 33°13'30" W through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC (Deed Book 788, Page 991) 70.79' to a point at the mean high water line of Dills Creek, thence continuing along the mean high water line of Dills Creek the following courses: 
Course Bearing Distance 301 S 79°00'11" W 26.66' 302 S 31°35'40" W 30.82' 303 S 22°17'00" W 38.66' 304 S 22°35'51" W 70.83' 305 S 52°09'16" W 32.51' 306 S 61°20'29" W 28.72' 307 N 51°01'17" W 41.54' 308 N 13°43'37" W 60.70' 309 S 13°07'06" W 13.85' 310 S 52°42'51" W 53.22' 311 S 24°25'37" W 28.25' 312 S 59°29'51" W 36.96' 313 N 67°00'25" W 77.15' 314 S 02°59'11" E 29.16' 315 S 45°22'49" E 72.77' 316 S 34°18'13" E 35.82' 317 S 08°03'57" E 66.62' 318 S 02°09'58" W 66.89' 319 W 03°19'28" W 29.91' 320 S 15°15'20" W 102.15' 321 S 06°14'04" W 104.94' 322 S 00°06'31" E 74.10' 323 S 09°35'04" W 68.56' 324 S 27°00'01" W 39.02' 325 S 46°55'56" W 34.87' 326 S 11°18'08" W 81.21' 327 S 08°19'05" W 203.99' 328 S 07°59'21" W 157.87' 329 N 67°50'17" W 100.83' 330 N 67°51'26" W 54.10' 331 N 62°49'56" W 44.02' 332 N 45°37'02" W 34.60' 333 N 34°14'42" W 69.05' 334 N 58°38'30" W 36.65' 335 N 30°34'38" W 45.74' 336 N 33°56'46" W 21.45' 337 N 45°28'04" W 45.02' 338 N 43°12'30" W 28.61' 339 N 16°15'35" W 22.77' 340 N 41°55'13" W 69.91' 341 N 51°44'32" W 37.27' 342 N 46°59'22" W 22.67'  
to an existing iron pipe on the eastern boundary of Marvin T. Moore as recorded in Deed Book 536, Page 340 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, thence N 36°27'01" E along said eastern line 184.17' to an existing iron pipe at the northeasterly corner of said Marvin T. Moore, thence N 53°33'34" W along the northerly line of Marvin T. Moore 900.09' to an existing iron pipe, thence N 79°56'21" W continuing along the northerly line of Marvin T. Moore (Deed Book 536, Page 340) 718.31' to the point and place of beginning. 
    Said parcel containing 32.516 acres of land and being a portion of the property recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office. Subject to any easements and restrictions of record. 
    LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY 
    TO BE ANNEXED INTO THE CITY OF 
    MOREHEAD FOR BLAIR POINTE, LLC 
    TRACT 3 
    MOREHEAD TOWNSHIP, 
    CARTERET COUNTY, NC 
    MAY 29, 1998 
    Beginning at a point on the southerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway, said point being located S 81°13'29" E 2,778.21' from NCGS Monument "cull". 
    Thence from said point of beginning along the southerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway on a curve to the left with a radius of 1,629.17', an arc distance of 46.91', and a chord bearing of N 85°44'06" E 46.91' to the point of tangency, thence N 84°54'44" E 200.31' to a point of curvature, thence continuing along said southerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway on a curve to the right with a radius of 1,988.67', an arc distance 490.07' and a chord bearing of S 88°01'41" E 488.83' to the point of tangency, said point being referenced S 09°01'54" W 60.00' from the southeastern corner of tract 3, thence S 22°39'22" E through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC as recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office 286.24' to a point at the mean high water line of Dills Creek, thence continuing along said mean high water line the following courses: 
Course Bearing Distance L-31 S 71°51'22" W 41.13' L-32 N 68°15'36" W 24.00' L-33 S 53°29'24" W 35.88' L-34 S 71°23'13" W 17.17' L-35 N 44°16'55" W 31.28' L-36 S 27°28'37" W 32.77' L-37 S 33°52'02" E 33.17' L-38 S 52°19'14" W 17.13' L-39 S 02°08'31" W 18.62' L-40 S 60°02'26" E 16.53' L-41 S 19°36'41" W 14.76' L-42 S 66°58'44" E 33.62' L-43 S 13°02'56" E 10.10' L-44 N 49°43'56" E 19.39' L-45 S 47°29'56" E 30.41' L-46 S 18°57'13" E 44.47' L-47 S 07°35'42" E 22.52' L-48 N 70°50'16" W 18.59' L-49 S 73°22'46" W 17.07' L-50 S 14°25'49" E 19.80' L-51 S 47°33'36" W 15.83' L-52 S 03°52'33" E 31.19' L-53 S 16°09'44" W 16.85' L-54 S 40°46'26" W 43.39' L-55 S 38°10'49" W 68.87' L-56 S 47°34'39" W 38.64' L-57 S 04°01'20" W 21.18' L-58 S 49°45'07" W 21.69' L-59 S 86°09'11" W 18.59' L-60 S 84°31'32" W 37.60' L-61 N 35°41'25" W 28.65' L-62 N 09°50'52" W 42.12' L-63 N 25°59'41" W 41.01' L-64 N 14°17'59" W 20.67' L-65 N 00°32'52" E 38.19' L-66 N 22°06'25" W 41.61' L-67 N 05°05'33" W 36.22' L-68 N 06°04'40" E 33.04' L-69 N 02°30'03" E 45.74' L-70 N 12°11'12" W 34.61' L-71 N 22°54'03" W 36.44' L-72 N 09°48'39" W 13.86' L-73 N 57°26'17" W 19.51' L-74 N 07°26'18" W 18.01' L-75 N 41°23'58" W 29.42' L-76 N 29°49'03" W 26.08' L-77 N 30°30'14" W 26.87' L-78 S 54°47'59" W 23.96' L-79 S 25°28'00" E 28.42' L-80 S 28°04'35" E 37.82' L-81 S 06°56'47" W 27.22' L-82 S 00°35'25" E 25.79' L-83 S 56°31'21" E 26.21' L-84 S 25°15'16" E 27.25' L-85 S 03°24'30" W 33.11' L-86 S 17°08'21" W 27.44' L-87 S 00°39'34" W 54.88' L-88 S 04°39'15" W 29.83' L-89 S 26°50'49" E 23.87' L-90 S 09°14'31" W 15.63' L-91 S 46°20'46" E 12.09' L-92 S 27°36'06" W 65.30' L-93 S 47°40'36" E 60.69' L-94 S 19°04'02" E 44.93' L-95 S 17°25'32" E 64.71' L-96 S 42°04'33" E 51.18' L-97 S 55°44'03" E 21.25' L-98 S 61°33'48" E 61.24' L-99 N 88°46'35" E 16.11' L-100 S 56°16'58" E 51.60' L-101 S 14°41'45" E 34.44' L-102 S 10°25'37" E 55.59' L-103 S 04°57'58" W 89.16' L-104 S 05°54'47" W 69.67' L-105 S 02°35'01" W 71.02' L-106 S 04°05'47" E 42.65' L-107 S 46°18'56" E 17.63' L-108 S 01°58'10" W 55.91' L-109 S 04°03'45" W 61.40' L-110 S 05°07'57" E 24.28' L-111 S 12°56'12" W 38.07' L-112 S 06°47'58" W 58.49' L-113 S 10°37'50" W 89.80' L-114 S 18°38'31" W 74.13' L-115 S 18°44'05" W 25.90' L-116 S 48°41'35" W 69.55' L-117 S 45°25'55" W 39.71' L-118 N 54°44'12" W 46.91' L-119 S 58°35'20" W 18.93' L-120 N 23°57'08" W 92.32' L-121 S 85°45'16" W 23.84' L-122 N 36°56'46" W 67.36' L-123 N 89°49'32" W 44.50' L-124 S 49°04'07" W 71.56' L-125 N 38°16'09" W 68.17' L-126 N 03°23'03" W 78.39' L-127 S 89°33'52" W 49.43' L-128 N 48°09'27" W 34.04' L-129 N 31°29'42" W 49.73' L-130 N 43°20'48" E 79.91' L-131 N 15°20'13" W 86.50' L-132 N 36°49'45" E 116.06' L-133 S 68°16'09" W 89.68' L-134 N 63°51'15" W 84.73' L-135 N 10°39'06" W 38.10' L-136 N 28°38'49" E 47.21' L-137 N 60°29'06" E 36.32' L-138 N 34°59'15" W 16.78' L-139 N 53°22'56" W 44.60' L-140 N 05°49'32" W 35.22' L-141 N 73°04'48" W 46.37' L-142 N 50°51'12" W 41.38' L-143 N 12°10'43" W 78.70' L-144 N 00°59'07" W 102.68' L-145 N 00°04'41" E 104.43' L-146 N 03°30'09" W 162.46' L-147 N 13°37'56" W 64.92' L-148 N 07°00'00" W 46.37' L-149 N 02°57'36" W 76.57' L-150 N 02°13'53" W 72.70' L-151 N 11°42'54" E 56.05' L-152 N 04°01'44" E 60.94' L-153 N 02°16'20" E 67.40' L-154 N 14°27'05" E 37.72' L-155 N 07°28'25" E 52.35'  
to the point of beginning. 
    Said parcel containing 23.813 acres of land and being a portion of the property recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office. Subject to any easement and restrictions of record. 
(Ord. No. 1998-34, § 1, 7-28-1998) 
[70]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made a part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the thirtieth day of April, 1999: 
    LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY 
    TO BE ANNEXED INTO THE CITY OF 
    MOREHEAD FOR BLAIR POINTE, LLC 
    TRACT 4 
    MOREHEAD TOWNSHIP, 
    CARTERET COUNTY, NC 
    September 14, 1998 
    Beginning at an iron pipe on the eastern right-of-way of 20th Street Extension, and at the southwesterly corner of Andrew A. Midgett, Sr. as recorded in Deed Book 755, page 458 of Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, said iron pipe being referenced S 00°30'53" W 3,601.26' and S 89°24'48" E 30.00' from a parker kelon nail located at the centerline intersection of 20th Street Extension, (NCSR 1176) and Country Club Road (NCSR 1177). 
    Thence from said point of beginning so described, along the southerly boundary of Andrew A. Midgett, Sr. S 89°24'48" E 1,314.56' to a point, thence through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC as recorded in Deed Book 788, page 991, S 02°16'34" W 473.84' to a point, thence continuing through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC S 18°25'16" W 146.57' to a point on the northern right-of-way of Blair Pointe, LLC S 18°25'16" W 146.57' to a point on the northern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway, thence along said northern right-of-way on a curve to the left with a radius of 1,029.65', an arc distance of 406.64', and a chord bearing of N 76°40'40" W 394.58' to a point of tangency, thence continuing along said northern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway N 87°43'26" W 898.40' to a point on the eastern right-of-way of 20th Street extension, thence along the eastern right-of-way of 20th Street extension N 11°58'20" E 40.13' to a point, thence N 10°05'00" E 51.39' to a point, thence N 06°54'44" E 51.38' to a point, thence N 04°17'30" E 51.11' to a point, thence N 02°18'45" E 50.75' to a point, thence N 01°01'50" E 50.27' to a point, thence N 00°41'30" E 50.03' to a point, thence N 00°36'26" E 99.96' to a point, thence continuing along said eastern right-of-way N 00°21'35" E 56.61' to the point and place of beginning. 
    Said parcel containing 15.885 acres of land and being a portion of the property recorded in Deed Book 788, page 991 [of] the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office. 
    LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY 
    TO BE ANNEXED INTO THE CITY OF 
    MOREHEAD FOR BLAIR POINTE, LLC 
    TRACT 5 
    MOREHEAD TOWNSHIP, 
    CARTERET COUNTY, NC 
    September 14, 1998 
    Beginning at an iron pipe at the southeasterly corner of William E. Boyd, Jr. as recorded in Deed Book 663, page 72 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, said iron pipe being referenced as the southwesterly corner of Bobby W. Oglesby as recorded in Deed Book 516, page 336. 
    Thence from said point of beginning so described along the southerly boundary of Bobby W. Oglesby S 61°59'08" E 900.00' to a point, thence through the lands of Blair Point, LLC as recorded in Deed Book 788, page 991, S 11°30'59" W 412.23' to a point on the northern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway, thence along the northern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway on a curve to the left with a radius of 2,048.67', and an arc distance of 504.85' and a chord bearing of N 88°01'41" W 503.58' to the point of tangency, thence S 84°54'44" W 200.31' to a point of curvature, thence on a curve to the right with a radius of 1,569.17', an arc distance of 390.46' and a chord bearing of N 87°57'31" W 389.45' to the point of tangency, thence continuing along said northern right-of-way N 80°49'51" W 269.89' to a point, said point being referenced S 81°53'27" E 2,153.04' from NCGS Monument "cull," thence through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC N 10°48'20" E 1,075.33' to a point, thence continuing through said lands N 27°59'59" E 52.05' to a point on the southerly line of William E. Boyd, Jr. as recorded in Deed Book 663, page 72, thence along the southerly line of William E. Boyd, Jr. S 62°00'01" E 498.47' to the point and place of beginning. 
    Said parcel containing 25.830 acres of land and being a portion of the property recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office. 
    LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY 
    TO BE ANNEXED INTO THE CITY OF 
    MOREHEAD FOR BLAIR POINTE, LLC 
    TRACT 6 
    MOREHEAD TOWNSHIP, 
    CARTERET COUNTY, NC 
    September 14, 1998 
    Beginning at a point on the southerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway, said point being located S 83°17'38" E 2,152.76' from NCGS Monument "cull," said point being further referenced as the northeasterly corner of Tract 2. 
    Thence from said point of beginning so described along the southerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway S 80°49'51" E 269.89' to a point of curvature, thence continuing along said southerly right-of-way on a curve to the left with a radius of 1,629.17', an arc distance of 339.18', and a chord bearing of S 86°47'39" E 338.57' to a point at the mean high water line of Dills Creek, thence continuing along said mean high water line the following courses: 
Course Bearing Distance L-157 S 18°05'56" W 34.47' L-158 S 20°58'58" W 24.46' L-159 S 20°43'21" W 19.98' L-160 S 64°07'06" W 30.76' L-161 S 04°45'39" W 77.56' L-162 S 06°48'27" E 26.31' L-163 S 22°38'47" E 14.31' L-164 S 04°13'57" W 28.50' L-165 S 12°53'49" W 71.46' L-166 S 02°03'59" W 39.41' L-167 S 06°10'07" E 32.41' L-168 S 07°34'12" W 40.52' L-169 S 08°32'49" W 43.32' L-170 S 38°25'08" E 13.94' L-171 S 33°01'53" W 19.77' L-172 S 05°43'24" E 21.64' L-173 S 17°11'45" W 34.11' L-174 S 10°01'32" W 43.08' L-175 S 08°40'29" W 58.18' L-176 S 24°47'11" W 35.64' L-177 S 07°05'03" W 37.45' L-178 S 17°18'02" E 30.78' L-179 S 06°59'18" W 44.68' L-180 S 14°38'35" W 43.53' L-181 N 79°31'54" W 24.49' L-182 N 53°59'44" W 18.30' L-183 N 47°42'17" W 24.29' L-184 N 50°31'42" W 60.69' L-185 N 20°19'01" W 44.04' L-186 N 67°23'54" W 18.87' L-187 N 09°22'59" W 31.84' L-188 N 54°44'56" W 26.82' L-189 S 70°50'04" W 22.39' L-190 N 26°56'24" W 27.87' L-191 N 38°37'37" W 44.00' L-192 N 74°49'51" W 11.46' L-193 N 47°44'04" W 18.05' L-194 N 16°56'05" E 16.48' L-195 N 51°58'36" W 27.10' L-196 N 27°56'47" W 29.04' L-197 N 41°30'56" W 51.14' L-198 N 77°33'23" W 44.12' L-199 S 45°00'01" E 52.17' L-200 S 02°01'09" E 46.15' L-201 S 05°05'54" W 32.67' L-202 S 85°13'17" E 15.91' L-203 S 36°12'22" E 32.56' L-204 S 02°52'31" E 14.34' L-205 S 69°31'47" E 22.84' L-206 S 52°04'42" E 14.92' L-207 S 41°30'33" E 45.01' L-208 S 21°18'39" E 25.14' L-209 S 41°16'00" E 27.64' L-210 S 31°21'55" E 23.81' L-211 S 26°09'28" E 45.11' L-212 S 27°52'47" E 62.98' L-213 S 13°44'57" W 56.66' L-214 S 21°13'59" E 34.46' L-215 N 85°06'48" E 30.29' L-216 S 61°55'57" E 25.89' L-217 S 04°46'39" W 23.27' L-218 S 22°15'22" W 39.70' L-219 S 31°15'20" W 25.42' L-220 S 43°06'49" W 47.79' L-221 N 18°45'57" W 36.82' L-222 S 88°09'34" W 50.43' L-223 S 68°10'55" W 56.85' L-224 S 51°28'54" W 29.62' L-225 S 25°22'40" E 90.46' L-226 S 20°47'03" E 155.67' L-227 S 47°50'24" E 115.11' L-228 S 24°43'50" E 19.62' L-229 N 66°31'18" W 46.09' L-230 N 46°23'54" W 83.20' L-231 N 16°48'44" W 47.16' L-232 N 20°07'42" W 37.57' L-233 N 10°19'37" W 31.39' L-234 N 44°22'46" W 13.91' L-235 N 07°36'05" W 42.49' L-236 N 50°00'06" W 25.83' L-237 N 42°37'37" W 26.49' L-238 N 17°18'53" W 32.19' L-239 S 77°58'16" W 32.40' L-240 S 43°14'59" W 46.00' L-241 S 49°28'08" W 74.93' L-242 S 45°41'05" W 44.37' L-243 S 20°14'53" W 48.16' L-244 N 65°54'18" W 60.10' L-245 S 85°50'03" W 28.73' L-246 S 35°04'13" W 42.96' L-247 S 15°06'34" E 35.83' L-248 S 32°59'11" E 50.89' L-249 S 08°32'45" W 41.46' L-250 S 29°45'39" W 48.70' L-251 S 26°08'39" W 48.23' L-252 S 51°27'48" W 74.84' L-253 N 10°05'47" E 15.30' L-254 N 30°45'13" W 61.71' L-255 N 15°20'21" W 30.71' L-256 N 00°56'34" W 85.64' L-257 N 39°40'50" E 44.92' L-258 N 25°41'30" E 59.68' L-259 N 75°07'59" E 32.70' L-260 N 54°06'37" E 36.95' L-261 N 05°59'57" E 58.95' L-262 S 88°17'19" W 50.14' L-263 S 35°18'01" W 26.18' L-264 N 53°32'28" W 41.87' L-265 N 87°45'10" W 40.87' L-266 N 04°24'53" E 104.25' L-267 N 36°14'59" E 25.27' L-268 N 43°41'23" W 58.99' L-269 N 12°12'37" W 37.18' L-270 N 23°45'24" E 35.51' L-271 N 50°19'10" E 27.10' L-272 N 79°15'08" E 34.08' L-273 S 78°03'33" E 53.39' L-274 S 46°24'13" E 44.43' L-275 S 80°20'54" E 32.45' L-276 N 13°10'38" E 34.47' L-277 N 12°56'25" W 48.99' L-278 N 51°34'20" W 41.65' L-279 S 67°07'48" W 27.89' L-280 S 66°53'51" W 45.75' L-281 N 78°27'03" W 26.16' L-282 N 49°38'39" W 40.94' L-283 N 10°12'35" E 25.03' L-284 N 04°31'40" W 214.52' L-285 N 12°35'58" E 176.79' L-286 N 66°56'57" E 47.08' L-287 N 30°01'42" E 26.34' L-288 N 64°16'50" E 29.15' L-289 S 86°17'11" E 20.06' L-290 N 13°56'17" E 20.19' L-291 N 45°01'30" E 56.16' L-292 N 06°30'03" W 49.32' L-293 N 30°12'10" W 22.64' L-294 N 25°01'22" W 46.51' L-295 N 82°40'10" E 38.68' L-296 N 22°35'46" E 62.26' L-297 N 08°40'22" E 39.88' L-298 N 02°10'33" W 50.93' L-299 N 00°07'15" E 32.87' L-300 N 43°46'39" W 22.01'  
to a point on the eastern line of tract 2, thence through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC as recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office and along said eastern line N 33°13'30" E 70.79' to the point and place of beginning. 
    Said parcel containing 17.073 acres of land and being a portion of the property recorded in Deed Book, 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office. 
    LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY 
    TO BE ANNEXED INTO THE CITY OF 
    MOREHEAD FOR BLAIR POINTE, LLC 
    TRACT 7 
    MOREHEAD TOWNSHIP, 
    CARTERET COUNTY, NC 
    September 14, 1998 
    Beginning at a point on the northerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway, said point being located S 84°06'29" E 3,508.48' from NCGS Monument "cull," and being further referenced as the southeastern corner of Tract 5. 
    Thence from said point of beginning so described along the eastern line of Tract 5, N 11°30'59" 512.23' to a point on the southern line of Bobby W. Oglesby as recorded in Deed Book 516, Page 336 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office and the northeastern corner of Tract 5, thence along the southerly lines of Bobby W. Oglesby (Deed Book 568, Page 145) and Tommy P. Oglesby (Deed Book 568, Page 145) S 61°59'08" E 1,405.43' to a point on the southerly line of said Tommy P. Oglesby (Deed Book 568, Page 145), thence through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC as recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office S 13°01'04" W 487.93' to a point on the northern right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway, thence along said northern right-of-way of a curve to the left with a radius of 1,052.17' an arc distance 989.73', and a chord bearing of N 54°01'14" W 953.64' to the point of tangency, thence continuing along said northern right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway N 80°58'06" W 467.18' to the point and place of beginning. 
    Said parcel containing 11.447 acres of land and being a portion of the property recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office. Subject to any easements and restrictions of record. 
    LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY 
    TO BE ANNEXED INTO THE CITY OF 
    MOREHEAD FOR BLAIR POINTE, LLC 
    TRACT 8 
    MOREHEAD TOWNSHIP, 
    CARTERET COUNTY, NC 
    September 14, 1998 
    Beginning at a point on the southerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway, said point being located S 83°07'44" E 3,505.71' from NCGS Monument "cull," said point being further referenced as the northeaster[northeasterly] corner of Tract 3. 
    Thence from said point beginning so described along the southerly right-of-way of Blair Farms Parkway S 80°58'06" E 467.18' to a point of curvature, thence continuing along said southerly right-of-way on a curve to the right with a radius of 992.17', an arc distance of 388.77', and a chord bearing of S 69°44'35" E 386.29' to a point, thence through the lands of Blair Pointe, LLC as recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, thence S 11°07'36" W 213.74' to a point on the mean high water line of Dills Creek, thence continuing along said mean high water line of Dills Creek the following courses: 
Course Bearing Distance L-650 S 35°23'32" W 67.04' L-651 S 63°19'39" W 7.64' L-652 S 08°10'01" W 28.65' L-653 S 34°15'46" W 32.12' L-654 S 37°18'58" W 33.71' L-655 S 39°11'54" W 26.12' L-656 S 51°58'54" W 29.42' L-657 S 78°43'54" W 9.87' L-658 S 84°20'04" W 18.72' L-659 N 46°04'13" W 10.74' L-660 S 62°34'40" W 15.71' L-661 N 88°59'38" W 15.05' L-662 N 46°51'23" W 22.61' L-663 S 86°57'03" W 21.44' L-664 N 35°10'53" W 13.70' L-665 N 86°50'36" W 14.43' L-666 S 18°25'32" E 10.96' L-667 S 17°55'01" W 15.93' L-668 N 35°48'17" W 18.66' L-669 N 51°43'37" W 7.81' L-670 N 20°18'20" W 41.06' L-671 N 26°24'40" E 11.62' L-672 N 28°20'33" W 9.71' L-673 N 03°33'42" E 10.16' L-674 N 06°20'17" W 16.56' L-675 N 74°08'40" W 17.83' L-676 S 03°55'30" W 20.15' L-677 S 38°17'11" E 6.14' L-678 S 05°32'20" W 31.92' L-679 S 06°02'33" W 20.68' L-680 N 79°51'54" E 10.17' L-681 S 08°57'07" E 47.68' L-682 S 24°05'47" E 24.63' L-683 S 60°54'14" E 20.56' L-684 S 01°43'59" W 9.00' L-685 S 57°04'55" E 29.86' L-686 S 89°33'22" E 24.49' L-687 S 43°35'20" E 20.87' L-688 S 19°47'01" W 17.53' L-689 S 89°49'12" E 13.04' L-690 S 50°18'56" E 11.43' L-691 S 09°56'32" W 8.49' L-692 S 11°11'57" E 40.11' L-693 S 44°39'39" E 13.61' L-694 S 20°49'34" W 21.67' L-695 S 33°11'22" E 17.84' L-696 S 17°18'26" E 14.39' L-697 S 19°20'32" E 11.31' L-698 S 00°07'11" E 54.41' L-699 S 35°26'25" E 14.69' L-700 S 01°44'30" W 14.92' L-701 S 30°01'25" W 14.10' L-702 S 13°59'23" E 20.86' L-703 S 10°04'27" W 34.51' L-704 S 08°00'13" W 216.36' L-705 N 43°02'24" W 50.71' L-706 N 59°08'49" W 18.25' L-707 N 74°56'35" W 28.40' L-708 N 17°17'00" E 64.70' L-709 N 56°28'57" W 30.39' L-710 N 22°48'25" W 56.99' L-711 S 31°01'59" W 37.22' L-712 S 14°26'21" W 83.69' L-713 S 34°35'16" W 46.23' L-714 S 18°08'59" E 39.23' L-715 S 41°45'42" W 38.06' L-716 S 83°40'37" W 26.04' L-717 S 00°15'31" E 19.61' L-718 S 73°25'01" W 44.93' L-719 N 81°17'14" W 25.11' L-720 N 49°12'45" W 23.35' L-721 N 28°30'21" E 21.54' L-722 N 45°16'01" W 14.88' L-723 N 08°05'17" W 45.47' L-724 N 01°13'34" E 55.50' L-725 S 81°24'30" W 34.53' L-726 S 57°31'31" W 24.42' L-727 S 52°12'58" W 26.07' L-728 S 70°25'25" W 23.64' L-729 N 77°08'09" W 21.78' L-730 N 46°33'23" W 39.73' L-731 N 24°26'06" E 56.51' L-732 N 26°01'56" E 32.83' L-733 N 37°06'15" W 27.06' L-734 N 15°14'37" E 33.97' L-735 N 41°43'47" E 29.45' L-736 N 11°34'29" W 25.91' L-737 N 49°11'44" E 24.35' L-738 S 54°47'33" E 39.96' L-739 S 77°43'23" E 24.45' L-740 N 08°56'28" E 69.11' L-741 N 56°59'05" W 45.94' L-742 N 66°56'10" W 34.44' L-743 N 63°41'20" W 34.98' L-744 N 02°28'21" W 73.67' L-745 N 18°13'06" E 19.19' L-746 N 24°27'38" W 18.26' L-747 N 00°26'30" E 38.64' L-748 N 28°09'38" E 18.49' L-749 N 15°29'30" W 24.83' L-750 N 19°49'43" E 31.24' L-751 N 64°08'51" E 29.48' L-752 N 02°11'55" E 24.33' L-753 N 78°37'02" E 28.57' L-754 N 32°57'24" W 22.40' L-755 N 65°51'21" W 15.50' L-756 N 54°11'30" E 34.40' L-757 N 47°56'58" W 50.88' L-758 N 02°56'13" E 28.90' L-759 N 56°05'53" E 26.18' L-760 N 14°10'35" E 33.25' L-761 N 54°08'25" W 33.45' L-762 S 62°27'11" W 47.26' L-763 N 27°41'35" W 39.96' L-764 S 67°08'59" W 15.35' L-765 N 27°48'44" W 43.20' L-766 S 56°56'20" W 13.21' L-767 N 79°50'59" W 19.69' L-768 N 00°43'07" E 52.94' L-769 N 43°59'51" E 39.53'  
to a point on the eastern line of Tract 3, thence through the lands of Blair Point, LLC (Deed Book 788, Page 991) and along said eastern line N 22°39'22" W 286.24' to the point and place of beginning. 
    Said parcel containing 12.838 acres of land and being a portion of the property recorded in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office. Subject to any easements and restrictions of record. 
(Ord. No. 1998-42, § 1, 10-13-1998) 
[71]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of December, 1998. 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret Co. N.C. and being all of lots 11, 13, 14, and 15 Morehead Gardens No. 2 as recorded in Map Book 4, page 16 containing a total of [one]1 acre and more particularly described as follows: beginning at a point in the eastern right-of-way line or Calico Drive, said point being the northwestern corner of lot 12 Morehead Gardens No. 2; thence from said point of beginning and with the eastern right-of-way line of Calico Drive N9-15'E, 210.0 ft. to the northwestern corner of lot 15; thence with the northern lines of lots 15 and 14, S80-45'E, 313.40 ft. to a point in the western right-of-way line of Maple Lane; thence with said right-of-way, S10-45'W, 70.0 ft. the southeastern corner of lot 14; thence with the southern line of lot 14, N80-45'W, 155.80 ft. to the southwestern corner of lot 14; thence with the eastern line of lots 13 and 11, S10-45'W, 140.0 ft. to the southeastern corner of lot 11; thence with the southern line of lot 11, N80-45'W, 154 ft. to the point of beginning containing [one]1 acre, all bearings reference Map Book 4, page 16. 
(Ord. No. 1998-45, § 1, 12-8-1998) 
[72]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described non-contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 26th day of January, 1999. 
    LAND DESCRIPTION 
    TOWN OF MOREHEAD CITY 
    SATELLITE ANNEXATION 
    CARTERET COUNTY 
    INDUSTRIAL PARK 
    BEING a parcel of land in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being bounded on the north by Timberwood Mobile Home Park, Carl W. Gardner, Ronald A. McLamb, Malcolm Willis, Linda Bennett, and Carolina Power & Light Company, on the east and south by Ballou Enterprises, Inc., and on the west Charles Jones, M.L. Snipes, Jerry Crosby, Norma Smith and Jesse Gould and more particularly described as follows: 
    Commencing at a concrete monument, North Carolina Geodetic station "Marker" (E = 2,653,964.862 feet N = 368440-805 feet North Carolina Coordinate System, North American Datum of 1983); thence N 76-50-46 E 2,956.510 feet to a P.K. nail in the centerline of The Atlantic and East Carolina Railroad the point of beginning. Thence from said point of beginning along the western line of the Town of Morehead City tract as recorded in Deed Book803 page 700 N 18-35-34 E 744.360 feet to an existing iron pipe, the southwest corner of lot number one of the Carteret County Industrial Park Tract as recorded in Map Book29 pages 351 and 351A; thence along the western line of lot number one N 08-01-51 E 504.678 to an iron pipe, the southern corner of lot number two of the Carteret County Industrial Park Tract as recorded in Map Book29 pages 351 and 351A; thence along the southern line of said lot number two and the northern line of Jerry Crosby and Norma Smith N 72-52-18 W 412.561 feet to an existing iron pipe, the southeast corner of Jesse B. Gould tract; thence along the eastern line of Jesse B. Gould and the western line of lot number two of the Carteret County Industrial Park as recorded in Map Book29 pages 351 and 351A N 25-17-10 E 90.990 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along said line N 74-23-54 W 69.760 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along said line N 24-55-29 E 138.970 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along said line N 25-21-11 E 382.250 feet to an existing iron pipe, the northeast corner of Jesse B. Gould and the northwest corner of lot number two of the Carteret County Industrial Park tract as recorded in Map Book29 pages 351 and 351A; thence along the northern line of said lot number two S 60-14-36 E 73.490 feet; thence continuing along the northern line of lot number two S 62-23-49 E 133.180 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along the northern line of lot number two S 37-21-34 E 428.490 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along the northern line of lot number two and lot number three S 37-00-50 E-599.280 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence along the northeast line of lot number three and lot number four S 23-45-54 E 108.770 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence along the eastern line of lot number four S 15-27-13 E 61.920 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along the eastern line of lot number four S 10-47-29 E 54.590 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along the eastern line of lot number four S 09-26-10 E 153.560 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along the eastern line of lot number four S 31-13-08 E 100.450 feet to an existing iron pipe, the southwestern corner of the Malcolm Willis tract as recorded in Deed Book791 page 429; thence along the northern line of lot number five, the Malcolm Willis tract and the Ronald A. McLamb tract, as recorded in Deed Book761 page 888, S 88-39-44 E 191.500 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence along the northern line lot number five, lot number six, the Ronald A. McLamb tract, and the Linda P. Bennett tract, as recorded in book 604 page 155, N 68-09-29 E 327.990 feet to an existing iron pipe, the southeastern corner of the Linda P. Bennett tract; thence along the eastern line of the Linda P. Bennett tract and the western line of lot number seven N 10-52-00 E 349.480 feet to an existing iron pipe at the southwestern corner of the Carolina Power and Light Company tract and the northwestern corner of lot number seven; thence along the southern line of the Carolina Power and Light Company tract and the northern line of lot number seven S 79-08-00 E 1,261.01 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along said line S 79-07-58 B 74.870 feet to a point in the centerline of Beech Swamp Run; thence along the centerline of Beech Swamp Run the following courses: S 17-58-41 W 292.830 feet, S 31-14-05 W 18.850 feet, S 61-02-53 W 207.330 feet, S 48-18-23 W 145.360 feet, S 85-21-53 W 364.560 feet, S 69-41-43 W 356.820 feet, S 39-45-43 W 303.740 feet, S 51-14-13 W 141.93 feet, S 61-08-53 W 181.620 feet, S 81-18-42 W 105.780 feet, N 56-01-29 W 246.120 feet, N 59-08-08 W 77.180 feet, N 60-49-11 W 116.460 feet, S 62-07-23 W 36.960 feet, S 76-26-59 W 553.530 feet to an iron pipe at the southeast corner of lot number eleven of the Carteret County Industrial Park Tract as recorded in Map Book29 pages 351 and 351A; thence along the southern line of said lot N 64-46-56 W 356.134 feet to an iron pipe in the eastern right-of-way line of North Carolina Secondary Road 1153 (Arthur Farm Road); thence along the eastern right-of-way line of North Carolina Secondary Road 1153 (Arthur Farm Road) S 29-01-00 W 328.243 feet to a point in the centerline of the Atlantic & East Carolina Railroad; thence along the centerline of said railroad N 67-32-28 W 60.395 feet to a point; thence continuing along the centerline of said railroad N 67-32-28 W 353.502 feet to the point of beginning containing 75.04 acres according to a survey and map by McDavid Associates, Inc., dated October 29, 1998 entitled "Annexation Survey for the Town Of Morehead City-The Carteret County Industrial Park Tract". 
    The Carolina Power and Light Tract is included in the above-described 75.04 acres and is described as follows: 
    Beginning at the intersection of the eastern right-of-way line of North Carolina Secondary Road 1153 (Arthur Farm Road) and the southern right-of-way line of Business Drive; thence along the southern right-of-way line of Business Drive S-54-02-13 E 47.007 feet to an iron pipe; thence continuing along the southern right-of-way line of Business Drive S 64-31-48 E 193.018 feet to [an] iron pipe; thence continuing along the southern right-of-way line of Business Drive S 75-01-18 E 211.005 feet to an iron pipe, the northwest corner of lot number ten of the Carteret County Industrial Park tract as recorded in Map Book29 pages 351 and 351A; thence along the western line of said lot number ten S14-5513 E 599.490 feet to an iron pipe, the northeast corner of lot number eleven of the Carteret County Industrial Park tract as recorded in Map Book29, pages 351 and 351A; thence along the northern line of said lot N 67-30-22 W 295.900 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along the northern line of said lot number eleven N 64-46-34 W 202.180 feet to an existing iron pipe in the eastern right-of-way of North Carolina Secondary Road 1153 (Arthur Farm Road); thence along the eastern right-of-way line of North Carolina Secondary Road 1153 (Arthur Farm Road) N 15-11-48 E 371.373 feet to an iron pipe; thence continuing along said right-of-way N 25-12-20 E 162.612 feet to an iron pipe; thence N 35-12-02 E 48.393 feet to the point of beginning containing 6.45 acres. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 1, 1-26-1999) 
[73]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described non-contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 1999: 
    Beginning at an existing iron "control" located at the intersection of the centerline of NCSR 1153 (Arthur Farm Road) and the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70, and run N 65°50'30" W 30.03 feet to a point in the western right-of-way line of NCSR 1153 and the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70; thence continuing along and with the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70, N 65°50'30" W 119.91 feet to a set iron pipe, the point of beginning, thence from said point of beginning, along and with the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70 N 65°50'30" W 194.87 feet to an existing iron pipe "Control" in the eastern line of the property owned now or formerly by Lonnie P. Henderson, a corner; thence along and with the Lonnie P. Henderson eastern line, N 28°20'20" E 219.12 feet to an existing iron pipe, a corner; thence S 62°06'00" E 164.91 feet to a set iron pipe, a corner; thence S 20°12'20" W 208.25 feet to a set iron pipe located in the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70, the point of beginning, and being all of Lot 1, as appears on that map dated September 23, 1998, prepared by W.D. Daniels, Jr., R.L.S. entitled "Final Plan Division of Time Land Development, LLC, and recorded in Map Book 29, Page 461 of the Carteret County Registry. Being a division of Tract 1 of the "WALTER WHITLEY" property as recorded in Map Book 26, Page 137 of the Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07, § 1, 5-26-1999) 
[74]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described non-contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 1999. 
    Beginning at an iron pipe in the southern line of the Tommy P. Oglesby property as described in Deed Book 568, Page 145 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, said iron pipe being located N 74°14'55" E 5,833.86' from NCGS Monument "Curve". From the above described beginning, so located, running thence as follows: 
    With the southern line of said Oglesby property, S 61°59'08" E 576.66' to an iron pipe at the northwest corner of the Newport Shores Group property as described in Deed Book 565, Page 73 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office, thence with the western and southern line of the Newport Shores Group property S 13°56'55" W 51.55' to an iron pipe, N 61°59'08" W 52.07' to an iron pipe, S 28°00'25" W 100.0' to an iron pipe, S 13°56'55" W 410.36' to an iron pipe and S 76°03'05" E 240.57' to an iron pipe on the western right-of-way of NCSR 1177 (Country Club Road), thence with the western right-of-way of NCSR 1177 (Country Club Road), S 13°38'39" 77.50' to the point of curvature, thence with a curve an arc distance of 55.79' said curve being to the right having a radius of 30.00' and a chord bearing S 66°55'09" W 48.09' to the point of tangency on the northern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway, thence with the northern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway N 59°48'21" W 489.03' to the point of curvature, thence with the curved northern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway an arc distance of 336.21', said curve being to the right having a radius of 579.55' and a chord bearing N 43°11'11" W 331.52' to the Point of reverse curvature, thence with the curved northern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway an arc distance of 9.28' said curve being to the left having a radius of 1,052.17' and a chord bearing N 26°48'49" W 9.28' to an iron pipe, thence leaving said right-of-way N 13°01'04" E 487.93' to the point or beginning containing 7.748 acres and being a portion of the property described in Deed Book 788, Page 991 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office. 
    Beginning at an iron pipe on the southern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway, said iron pipe being located N 78°52'16" E 5,559.96' from NCGS Monument "Curve". From the above described beginning, so located, running thence as follows: 
    With the curved southern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway an arc distance of 371.02', said curve being to the left having a radius of 639.55' and a chord bearing S 43°11'11" E 365.84' to the point of tangency, thence with the southern right-of-way of Blair Farm Parkway, S 59°48'21" W 524.69' to the point of curvature, thence with a curve an arc distance of 38.46', said curve being to the right having a radius of 30.00' and a chord bearing S 23°04'51", E 35.88' to the point of tangency on the western right-of-way of NCSR 1177 (Country Club Road), thence with the western right-of-way of NCSR 1171 (Country Club Road) S 13°38'39" W 151.39', S 13°37'28" W 100.05', S 13°17'43" W 100.30', S 12°32'50" W 100.51', S 11°18'04" W 100.40', S 10°57'32" W 100.04' and S 11°03'10" W 61.98', thence leaving the right-of-way of NCSR 1177 (Country Club Road) N 78°56'50" W 721.54' to an iron pipe at the mean high water line of Dills Creek, thence with the mean high water line of Dills Creek, N 09°36'57" W 56.88', N 10°28'25" E 31.03', N 49°40'02" W 35.52', N 09°10'35" W 78.08', N 49°34'22" E 32.66', N 28°18'36" W 34.53', N 00°09'03" E 58.14', N 08°25'36" W 40.18', N 58°19'07" W 66.94', N 75°36'07" E 21.63', N 52°58'54" W 47.51', N 52°54'54" W 33.86', S 60°57'34" W 30.82', S 57°33'22" E 61.20', N 61°57'30" W 107.20', N 14°41'26" W 59.12', N 03°09'41" E 54.61', N 54°15'02" E 71.81', S 81°09'09" E 45.69', N 20°23'03" E 70.37', N 09°32'26" W 19.26', N 36°25'04" E 67.88', N 06°38'54" E 21.68', N 43°06'06" E 42.49', N 61°40'41" E 62.17', N 09°09'27" W 24.11', N 88°54'30" E 18.41', N 45°01'30" W 63.96' and N 18°49'11" E 190.64, thence leaving the mean high water line of Dills Creek N 48°27'16" E 115.34' to the point of beginning containing 19.376 acres. 
    Beginning at a point on the mean high water line of Dills Creek, said point being located S 88°24'33" E 3,455.22' from NCGS Monument "Curve". From the above described beginning, so located, running thence as follows: 
    With the mean high water line of Dills Creek, S 32°16'32" W 36.51', S 25°09'49" W 22.50', S 03°02'46" E 61.85', S 28°41'44" W 43.21', S 14°34'15" E 33.14', S 18°52'07" E 31.92', S 07°41'23" W 20.33', S 24°06'38" E 20.73', S 45°48'54" E 56.54', S 16°25'23" E 44.63', S 01°35'41" E 35.30', S 14°39'36" W 22.40', S 33°12'31" E 50.08', S 40°57'12" E 33.42', S 04°28'15" E 33.24', S 18°09'40" E 40.15', S 11°57'29" E 27.95', S 03°52'05" W 22.37', S 31°19'36" E 40.60', N 54°14'48" E 31.34', N 17°12'28" E 19.39', N 05°31'42" E 27.91', N 09°54'27" W 20.55', N 11°22'36" E 48.25', N 02°38'13" W 14.07', N 14°49'35" W 42.57', N 20°17'11" E 42.08', N 05°05'16" E 26.58', N 24°45'58" W 25.67', N 14°30'09" W 17.15', N 22°54'44" E 19.32', N 00°27'27" E 30.75', N 01°34'28" W 19.06', N 25°45'46" W 51.50', N 26°32'28" W 35.09', N 35°41'31" W 13.43', N 00°41'17" E 11.17', N 30°45'11" W 47.84', N 30°12'08" W 52.54', N 30°46'38" W 26.14', N 01°11'44" E 30.11', N 57°32'27" W 24.79', N 87°12'22" W 23.34' to the point of beginning containing 1.477 acres. 
    Beginning at a point on the mean high water line of Dills Creek, said point being located S 87°06'38" E 3,351.56' from NCGS Monument "Curve". From the above described beginning, so located, running thence as follows: 
    With the mean high water line of Dills Creek, S 12°14'59" W 83.02, S 12°01'06" W 80.25', S 18°23'42" E 44.23', S 26°56'05" E 38.50', S 41°11'18" E 49.96', N 11°23'39" E 36.73', N 04°01'14" W 95.64', N 04°41'51" W 88.49', N 17°51'46" W 29.00', N 28°40'12" W 29.98' to the point of beginning, containing 0.26 acre. 
    Beginning at a point on the mean high water line of Dills Creek, said point being located N 89°37'51" E 2,709.21' from NCGS Monument "Curve". From the above described beginning, so located, running thence as follows: 
    With the mean high water line of Dills Creek, N 26°29'23" E 43.37', N 87°35'59" E 37.71', S 71°42'34" E 43.83', S 02°10'44" W 50.57', N 76°57'03" W 51.27', N 75°14'46" W 48.37' to the point of beginning, containing 0.102 acre. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08, § 1, 5-25-1999) 
[75]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described non-contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 28th day of September, 1999. 
    Being, all of Lots 3, 4 and 5, Block E, in Calvin Heights Subdivision as shown on map of record in Map Book 5, Page 52, Carteret County Registry. 
    Being that same property conveyed to Grantor by deed recorded in Book 522, Page 83, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1999-25, § 1, 9-29-1999) 
[76]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described non-contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 28th day of September, 1999. 
    Beginning at a concrete marker on the secondary road, which point is the northernmost tip of the John T. Eborn 4.3 acre tract; thence south 2 degrees 30 minutes west, 100 feet along John T. Eborn's east line; thence south 86 degrees, 45 minutes west, 100 feet to a point; thence north 2 degrees 30 minutes east, 100 feet to the secondary road, thence along the secondary road north 86 degrees 45 minutes east, 100 feet to the point of beginning, same conveying a tract of land 100 feet square in the northernmost corner of the John T. Eborn 4.3 acre tract; being one of the tracts conveyed to Mann A. Pollock, Jr., and Wife, by deed recorded in Book 231, at page 449, Office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County, and being the same property as that conveyed to Albert P. Pollock and wife, Hilda Styron Pollock by deed now appearing of record in Book 258, at page 235, Carteret County Registry. 
    There is excepted here from that property described in Deed from Grantor to the Department of Transportation recorded June 2, 1995, and more fully described in Deed Book 757, page 147, Carteret County Registry. 
    There is excepted herefrom the right-of-way for County Club Road. 
(Ord. No. 1999-26, § 1, 9-29-1999) 
[77]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of November, 1999. 
    Beginning at a point at an existing iron rod located in the centerline of the right-of-way of the A & EC Railroad, said beginning point being N 60°52'40" W 924.98 feet from the intersection of the centerline of the railroad right-of-way with the centerline of Friendly Road and from said point of beginning N 60°53'37" W 348.41 feet to a point; thence N 22°14'24" E 100.71 feet to a point in the northern edge of the railroad right-of-way; thence continuing N 22°14'24" E 402.93 feet to a point; thence S 60°53'37" E 357.75 feet to an existing iron pin; thence N 23°17'50" E 6.55 feet to an existing iron pin; thence S 60°52'40" E 97.51 feet to an existing iron pin; thence N 29°07'20" E 106.0 feet to an existing iron pin; thence S 60°52'40" E 110.0 feet to an existing iron pin; thence continuing S 60°52'40" E 40.33 feet to an existing iron pin; thence S 29°07'20" W 412.57 feet to an existing iron pin located in the northern right-of-way of the proposed Bridges Street Extension; thence, along said northern right-of-way, N 60°52'40" W 216.57 feet to an existing iron pin; thence S 23°17'50" W 100.52 feet to an existing iron pin located in the northern edge of the railroad right-of-way; continuing S 23°17'50" W 100.52 feet to an existing iron rod in the centerline of the railroad right-of-way, being the point and place of beginning excepting, however, that property conveyed by Grantors to the North Carolina Department of Transportation by way of deed recorded in Book 761, at page 902 of the Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1999-28, § 1, 11-9-1999) 
[78]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of November, 1999. 
    Beginning at an iron pipe in the Carolina Power & Light Company (CP&L) power line easement at the extreme western corner of West Haven Village, Phase 2, as platted in Map Book 26, Page 136, Carteret County Registry. Run thence with the CP&L power line easement N 48°51'08" W 172.31 feet to a point; thence cornering and running S 41°08'52" W 70 feet to a point in the southwestern right-of-way line of the CP&L power line easement; thence N 48°51'08" W 75.32 feet with the power line easement to a point at the northeast corner of West Carteret High School campus (the property of the Carteret County Board of Education); thence N 48°51'08" W with the CP&L power line easement 88.93 feet to a point; thence N 48°58'49" W with the CP&L power line easement 221.48 feet to a point; thence N 48°49'30" W continuing with the power line easement 996.45 feet to a point marked by an existing concrete monument; thence cornering and running N 49°19'40" E 70.71 feet to a corner of the Jerry J. Willis (now or formerly) property. Thence with the Jerry J. Willis line N 49°19'40" E 1,303.17 feet to point in the marsh line of Newport River; thence in a generally southeastwardly direction with the marsh line the following courses and distances: S 39°44'14" E 17.63 feet, S 10°53'47" E 66.60 feet; S 53°12'41" W 50.80 feet, S 17°47'40" W 30.93 feet, S 9°29'33 E 17.73 feet, S 84°02'11" E 102.08 feet, S 13°52'17" W 62.80 feet, S 26°42'48" E 51.34 feet, S 02°24'46" W 83.37 feet, S 04°59'25" W 43.27 feet, S 49°27'50" W 49.97 feet, S 21°13'38" E 81.31 feet, S 05°52'45" E 46.68 feet, S 13°10'32" E 40.11 feet, S 58°21'13" E 25.05 feet, S 53°15'02" E 67.89 feet, S 32°46'11" E 73.07 feet, S 29°06'43" E 50.09 feet, S 63°30'34" E 58.31 feet, S 26°10'17" E 66.52 feet, S 37°50'03" E 35.23 feet, S 53°19'39" E 50.64 feet, S 42°37'08" E 53.14 feet, S 78°35'33" E 46.65 feet, N 77°21'46" E 49.62 feet, N 81°54'02" E 88.73 feet, S 23°52'19" E 80.89 feet, S 32°10'36" E feet, S 71°12'56" E 87.76 feet, S 17°58'49" E 65.93 feet, S 02°29'01" E 71.76 feet to a point at a corner of West Haven Village Phase III as platted in Map Book 28, Page 173, Carteret County Registry; thence cornering and running with the northwestern boundary line of West Haven Village Phases Three and Two S 41°09'52" W 879.40 feet to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1999-29, § 1, 11-9-1999) 
[79]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described non-contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of November, 1999. 
    Beginning at a point in the northern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70 West, said point being N 64°50'36" W 1,169.41 feet from the intersection of the centerline of State Road 1151 and the North right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70, and from this point of beginning for a first call of N 64°48'32" W 300 feet to a point; thence N 25°10'00" E 1,215.70 feet to a point; thence S 71°39'00" E 302.14 feet to a point; thence S 25°10'00" W 1,251.69 feet to the point and place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1999-34, § 1, 11-30-1999) 
[80]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of November, 1999. 
    NORTH CAROLINA 
    CARTERET COUNTY 
    MOREHEAD TOWNSHIP 
    Beginning at an existing iron pipe, said pipe being located S 02°29'30" E 15 feet from the northwestern corner of Lot 11 of Little Nine Subdivision as the same is shown in Map Book 18 at page 97 of the Carteret County Registry. And from said point of beginning S 87°50'30" W 33.098 feet to a point; thence S 01°51'20" E 365.66 feet to an existing iron pin; thence along a ditch N 82°47'00" W 308.35 feet to an existing iron pin; thence S 3°07'00" W 162.07 feet to an existing iron pin; thence N 86°53'00" W 104.1 feet to an existing iron pin; thence N 03°07'00" E 634.5 feet to an existing iron rod; thence S 71°15'15" 213.10 feet to an existing iron rod; thence N 03°07'00" E 188.65 feet to an existing iron pin; thence along the common line with Rosaland Ketner, now or formerly, S 71°15'15" E 514.28 feet to an existing iron pipe at the common boundary of Lot 10 of Little Nine Subdivision; thence S 02°29'30" E 92.91 feet to the point and place of beginning and being in all respects a 5.90-acre tract depicted on a survey by Powell Surveying Company P.A., for Acme Moving and Storage, Inc., dated January 22, 1999, in which survey is incorporated herein by reference. 
    Grantor hereby grants to grantee, his heirs, successors, or assigns, all easement for the use of the westernmost 60 feet of the property retained by Grantor which easement area runs from Highway 70 to Highway 24. The easement shall be perpetual arid non-exclusive. The easement will be for ingress and egress. Grantor does agree for itself, its successors or assigns to join any offer of dedication of the easement area should grantee, his heirs, successors or assigns elect to pave the easement area and offer it for dedication to the State of North Carolina or a municipality thereof. 
    To have and to hold said land, together with all privileges and appurtenances there unto belonging to him the said grantee and his heirs and assigns in fee simple forever. 
    Said Grantor covenants that she is seized of said land in fee and has the right to convey the same in fee simple; that the same is free and clear of all encumbrances and that she will warrant and defend the title herein conveyed against the lawful claims of all persons whomsoever. 
    In testimony whereof, Grantor has hereunto set her hand and seal the day and year first above written. 
    COLONIAL CAROLINA POTTERY, INC. 
TRACT 1: 
Beginning at an existing iron pin located in the northeast corner of that area designated as asphalt parking area on a map prepared by Larry C. Pittman, Registered Land Surveyor, for Acme Moving and Storage, Inc., dated July 27, 1998, and amended July 29, 1998, and further amended August 4, 1998, which map is incorporated herein by reference, said existing iron pin being located N 02°31'40" W 102.36 feet from an existing iron pin located at the junction of the eastern border of said asphalt parking area and the northern edge of the 51-foot access easement from the parking area to Little Nine Road. And from said point of beginning S 87°50'30" W 298.86 feet to an existing iron pin; thence N 00°49'55" SW 23.38 feet to in existing iron pin; thence N 82°47'00" W 37.36 feet to a set iron pin, thence N 01°51'20" W 365.66 feet to a set iron pin; thence N 87°50'30" E 330.98 feet to a set iron pin, thence along the western edge of the Little Nine Subdivision S 02°20'30" E 395.13 feet to the point and place of beginning and being 3.0 acres +/-. 
TRACT 2: 
Beginning at an iron pin in the northeast corner of Lot Number Thirteen (13) of Little Nine Subdivision as shown in map recorded in Map Book 19 at page 97 of The Carteret County Registry, said beginning point being S 06°38'30" W 100.00 feet from a concrete control monument at the northeast corner of Lot Number Twelve (12) of Little Nine Subdivision as shown in map recorded in Map Book 18 at page 97 of the Carteret County Registry, and from said point of beginning S 38°30'00" W 96.85 feet to an iron pipe; thence in a curve having a delta of 14°16'50" a radius of 622.285 feet, a length of 155.10, a chord of 154.7 feet and a chord bearing of S 00°29'55" E to a P.K. nail at the western end of the pavement of Little Nine Drive, thence S 82°43'46" W 228.23 feet to a P.K. nail in the edge of the pavement; thence N 02°36'45" W 209.35 feet to an iron pipe; thence S 83°21'30" E 252.04 feet to an iron pipe being the point and place of beginning and further being Lots 13 and 14 and a portion of Lots 15 and 16 of the Little Nine Subdivision, as the same is shown on a map recorded in Map Book 18 at page 97 of Carteret County Registry and as further shown on a survey prepared by Powell Surveying, Company, P.A. dated June 17, 1997, for David Horton, which survey is incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1999-35, § 1, 11-30-1999) 
[81]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of November, 1999. 
    Being all of Lot 91 Block EE, Mandy Farms Subdivision, Section III, as per survey thereof by Powell Surveying Company, dated June 29, 1981, and recorded in Map Book 18, Page 21, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 1999-36, § 1, 11-30-1999) 
[82]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2000. 
    Being all of Lot 3 and a portion of Lot 4 as shown on that plat entitled "SandCastle Motors" of record in Map Book 171, page 390, Carteret County Registry. 
    Beginning at a point which is located the following courses and distances from the intersection of the eastern right-of-way of NCSR 1601 (Little Nine Drive) and the southern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70, south 71 degrees 24 minutes 08 seconds east 299.00 feet, said point or place of beginning being also the northeasternmost corner of that Lot 3, Little Nine Subdivision as depicted on that map recorded in Map Book 18, page 97, Carteret County Registry. From said point or place of beginning running thence south 06 degrees 35 minutes 54 seconds west 299.98 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence north 71 degrees 24 minutes 39 seconds west 143.86 feet along the southern lines of Lot 3 and a portion of Lot 4 of said Little Nine Subdivision to a point; thence running north 06 degrees 38 minutes 30 seconds east 299.95 feet to a point in the southern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70; thence south 71 degrees 24 minutes 08 seconds east 143.63 feet to the point and place of beginning. Being .97 acres, more or less, in accordance with the "Survey for Ray E. McCotter" by Brad L. Suitt, PLS, dated August 17, 1999, which survey is incorporated herein by reference for a more perfect description of said tract or parcel of land. Also being that property conveyed to grantor herein by deed recorded in Book 869, page 478, Carteret County Registry. 
    This property is conveyed subject to those restrictive and protective covenants of record in Book 171, page 390, Carteret County Registry. 
    This conveyance is made subject to valid and enforceable restrictive covenants, easements and encumbrances of record. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 1, 4-25-2000) 
[83]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described non-contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2000. 
    Being all that property as per that map recorded in Map Book 29, at page 464, the same being entitled "Survey for Robert F. Youngblood and wife, Jeanette A. Youngblood" prepared by Baldwin and Associates, dated January 14, 1999, which map is incorporated herein by reference for a more particular description. Together with all riparian and littoral rights appurtenant thereto. (Containing 21.248 acres). 
(Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 5-9-2000) 
[84]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described non-contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2000. 
    Beginning at an iron pipe in the southern right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70 (178-foot right-of-way), said point lying S 71-05-00 E 259.60 feet from N.C.G.S. monument "MARKER" 1963; from said beginning point S 18-40-00 W 400 feet to an iron pipe; thence S 47-46-27 E 447.32 feet to an iron pipe (hereinafter "Point A"); thence, with the arc of a circular curve to the left, in a generally northerly direction, having radius of 1,196.00 feet an are [and a] distance of 396.07 feet, to a point which lies N 28-09-09 E 394.21 feet from Point A; thence N 18-40-00 E 189.97 feet to an iron pipe in the southern right-of-way margin of U. S. Highway 70; thence, with said southern right-of-way margin, N 71-20-00 W 475.00 feet to an iron pipe, the point or place of beginning. (Containing 5.27 acres). 
(Ord. No. 2000-23, § 1, 6-27-2000) 
[85]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described non-contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of August, 2000. 
    Beginning at an iron stake set 150.0' north of the centerline of N.C. Railroad, in Morehead Township, Carteret Co., N.C., said iron stake being the following courses and distances from where a line parallel and 50' from the centerline of N.C. Railroad intersects the northern right-of-way of Country Club Rd. (S.R. 1177) N56-30-29W, 321.61 to an iron pipe, thence N33-24-54E, 100.0 to the point of beginning. Thence from said point of beginning, N56-17-50W, 50.08 to an iron pipe on the western line of lot No. 2 two, "Wayne See" Subd, Map Book24 page 24, thence with the western line N33-47-40E, 149.40 to an iron pipe on the southern right-of-way of Bridges Street, thence with the right-of-way S57-13-35E, 204.75 to an iron pipe, thence S33-27-35W, 138.07 to an iron pipe, thence N56-29-15W, 155.54 to an iron pipe, thence S33-28-54W, 14.14 to the point and place of beginning. Containing .071 acres and being a portion of lot No. 2, "Wayne See" Subd Map Book24 page 24 Carteret Co. Registry N.C. 
(Ord. No. 2000-31, § 1, 8-8-2000) 
[86]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made a part of the Town of Morehead City as of the 31st day of August, 2000: 
    Being all of Lot No. Five (#5) in Block EE, Section Three (3) of the Mandy Farms Subdivision as the same appears of record in Map Book 18, page 21, Carteret County Registry. Approximately .52 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2000-35, § 1, 8-31-2000) 
[87]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 28th day of February, 2001. 
    Lying and being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at an existing iron rod located at the intersection of the eastern right-of-way of Industrial Drive and the northern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70; said point also being located N57-11-52E 58.62 feet from an existing P.K. nail located at the centerline intersection of Industrial Drive and the Westbound Lanes of U.S. Highway 70; thence from said beginning point and following the eastern margin of Industrial Drive N28-31-35E 229.84 feet to an existing iron rod; thence leaving said eastern right-of-way S64-33-00E 115.96 feet to an existing iron rod; thence S25-27-00W 229.84 feet to an existing iron rod in the northern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70, thence along said right-of-way N64-33-00W 116.26 feet to the point and place of beginning, containing 0.61 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
[88]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of March, 2001. 
    Beginning at an existing iron rod (EIR) in the Northern right-of-way (R/W) of the westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70, West of Morehead City, NC, where the same intersects the Eastern R/W of Taylor Road as it appears on Map Book 2, Page 137, Carteret County Registry. From said point of beginning running N27°45'21"E 179.02' along the Eastern R/W of Taylor Road to an EIR; continuing along said R/W N27°45'30"E 199.96' to an existing concrete monument (ECM) in the Southern R/W of Brooks Street as it appears on MB 2 PG 137; running S66°04'34"E 75.04' along and R/W to an EIR; leaving said R/W running S27°00'12"W 200.13' to an EIR; running S65°56'56" E 214.98' to an EIR; running S27°47'14"W 178.93' to an EIR along the Northern R/W of the Westbound lane of U.S. Highway 70; running with said R/W N65°58'00"W 289.96' to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 3-13-2001) 
[89]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, upon adoption. 
    Radio Island Property Description 
    Lying and being situated in Beaufort Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at an iron rod on the northern margin of Fort Macon Street (now withdrawn), said point also being in the mean high water line of Newport River or the Port Terminal Turning Basin, said beginning point also being located N76-25-54E 1,718.65 feet from the corner of a concrete bulkhead at NC Ports, the current Morehead City Limits Line, thence from said beginning point and following said mean high water line the following bearings and distances; N30-16-35E 60.35 feet; N12-02-16W 19.69 feet to the corner of a concrete bulkhead at the southwest corner of Lot 2 block A, as recorded in Map Book 1 Page 221 of the Carteret County Registry, thence along the southern line of Lot 2 S63-35-21E 133.35 feet to an iron rod in the western line of North Shore Drive, thence along said western margin N26-18-18E 150.14 feet to the northeast of Lot 3, thence along the northern line of Lot 3 N63-58-09W 152.09 feet to the corner of a concrete bulkhead at the northwest corner of Lot 3, said point also being in the mean high water line of Newport River, thence with the mean high water and along the northern lines of Lots 4 thru 8 the following bearings and distances; N01-21-29W 13.40 feet; N58-37-32W 48.97 feet; N32-08-59E 29.43 feet; N51-46-51E 99.75 feet; N58-24-47E 91.95 feet; N65-40-03E 119.45 feet; N52-39-11E 67.81 feet; N75-33-26E 107.33 feet; N83-12-54E 8.51 feet to a point at the northwest corner of the Annie Piner Land as recorded in deed 361 Page 159, thence leaving mean high water line and following the western line of the Piner Land S13-59-33E 202.29 feet to a point in the northern margin in North Shore Drive, thence with North Shore Drive S60-02-05E 108.47 feet to a point, thence leaving said Drive and along the western line of Lot 1 as recorded in Map Book 1 Page 261, N14-10-03W 267.81 feet to a nail in concrete at the mean high water line of Newport River, thence with said mean high water line and along the northern lines of Lots 1 thru 3 the following bearings and distances; N80-24-13E 46.88 feet; S79-16-39E 31.77 feet; N78-33-53E 49.98 feet; S55-35-46E 18.36 feet to a point at the northeast corner of Lot 3, thence with the eastern line of Lot 3 S15-27-22E 272.82 feet to a concrete monument on the northern margin of Inlet Drive, thence with said margin the following bearings and distances; S57-40-31W 82.12 feet; S57-38-28W 56.01 feet; S57-37-01W 256.84 feet; S26-27-57W 150.11 feet to an iron pipe; said pipe being at the northeast corner of Lot 5 Block B, thence leaving said Inlet Drive and following the northern line of Lot 5 N63-30-36W 99.96 feet to an iron rod at the northwest corner of said lot, thence with the western line of said Lot S26-17-35W 100.81 feet to an iron pipe in the northern margin of Fort Macon Street, thence with said northern margin N54-42-53W 101.46 feet to an iron pipe; said pipe being the southwest corner of Lot 1, thence continuing with said margin and crossing North Shore Drive N59-21-04W 49.48 feet to an iron pipe; said pipe being at the southeast corner of Lot 1 Block A, thence crossing said Fort Macon Street S26-37-17W 50.32 feet to an iron pipe in the southern margin of Fort Macon Street, thence with said southern margin the following bearings and distances; S57-30-58E 50.31 feet; S55-17-44E 201.17 feet; S48-27-06E 62.15 feet; S48-29-19E 449.64 feet to a point, thence crossing said Fort Macon Street N19-02-20E 54.22 feet to a point in the northern margin of said street, thence with said northern margin N48-41-57W 399.91 feet to a railroad spike in the southern right-of-way of Beaufort-Morehead Railroad as recorded in Deed Book 263 Page 191, thence following said southern right-of-way the following bearings and distances; N26-31-09E 266.41 feet; N55-43-51E 98.20 feet; N45-32-00W 7.66 feet; N57-16-52E 69.69 feet; S48-34-58E 104.02 feet; N57-17-11E 578.38 feet; S32-43-32E 19.98 feet; N57-17-02E 516.90 feet to an concrete monument at the northwest corner of CP & L as recorded in Deed Book 314 Page 244, thence with the western line of CP & L S02-01-44W 51.36 feet to a concrete monument at the southwest corner of CP & L, thence with the southern line S87-58-21E 69.88 feet to a concrete monument in the western margin of Marine Drive, thence with said margin S02-00-54W 1,649.79 feet to a concrete monument, thence crossing said margin N80-22-00E 101.88 feet to an iron pipe in the eastern margin of Marine Drive, thence along said eastern margin N02-04-17E 208.11 feet to an iron pipe at the northwest corner of the North Carolina State Ports. Property as recorded in Deed Book 650 Page 192, thence leaving said Marine Drive and following the northern line S62-41-31E 1,154.74 feet to a point, thence S01-18-29W 100.49 feet to a point in the mean high water line of Bulkhead Channel, thence along said mean high water line the following bearings and distances; S59-50-29W 37.39 feet; S45-18-08W 333.17 feet; S37-04-53W 151.11 feet; S33-12-46W 238.67 feet; S26-42-24W 120.25 feet; S18-09-21W 129.10 feet; S11-33-29W 118.49 feet; S04-03-24W 127.10 feet; S01-21-35E 188.67 feet; S05-04-34E 462.62 feet; S14-00-23E 307.12 feet; S13-06-38E 328.59 feet; S24-09-02E 143.09 feet; S41-35-34E 78.58 feet to an iron pipe at the northeast corner of the load-unload ramp, thence leaving the mean high water at Bulkhead Channel S77-40-55W 487.06 feet to an iron pipe in the mean high water line of Morehead Channel, thence with said mean high water line the following bearings and distances; N48-14-25W 140.79 feet; N68-50-20W 258.92 feet; N63-59-23W 175.47 feet; N58-44-36W 365.59 feet; N53-56-12W 150.36 feet; N47-05-57W 168.75 feet; N40-26-31W 105.32 feet; N37-41-21W 439.92 feet; N33-16-26W 272.43 feet; N30-52-28W 146.32 feet; N20-59-45W 170.99 feet; N24-21-10W 119.28 feet; N27-47-32W 54.44 feet; N22-31-23W 43.59 feet; N19-44-28W 45.44 feet; N13-45-08W 37.47 feet; N02-17-04W 10.48 feet; N26-34-13W 215.11 feet; N21-04-36W 4.82 feet; N22-40-34W 368.09 feet; N28-08-08W 202.34 feet; N27-58-56W 51.09 feet; N27-58-18W 94.29 feet; N28-26-57W 59.19 feet; N27-15-08W 64.07 feet; N45-21-22W 78.55 feet; N00-44-25W 730.08 feet to the corner of a concrete bulkhead at the northwest corner of the NC State Ports Authority Property as recorded in Deed Book 892 Page 80, thence continuing with mean high water line the followings and distances; S88-33-10E 12.63 feet; N28-12-08W 28.15 feet; N03-54-31E 128.44 feet; N28-20-45E 19.60 feet; N53-13-29E 20.60 feet; S33-29-06E 7.62 feet; S31-34-20W 11.92 feet; S74-15-33E 10.69 feet; N38-49-40E 45.92 feet; N19-07-33E 19.88 feet; N34-23-23E 41.94 feet; N38-40-56E 45.89 feet; N50-08-51E 23.04 feet; S86-20-42W 25.37 feet; S70-00-39W 11.33 feet; S33-26-49W 22.93 feet; S04-59-42E 18.86 feet; S63-54-40W 15.96 feet; S00-12-59W 11.99 feet; S56-04-50W 5.87 feet; N28-49-45W 9.00 feet; N12-05-34E 11.49 feet; N08-11-56W 38.78 feet; N35-22-56E 67.48 feet; N66-55-01E 58.04 feet; N61-33-41E 46.22 feet; N50-49-32E 52.57 feet; N40-45-43E 58.13 feet; N32-02-11E 50.60 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 190.06 acres. 
    Edgewater Property Description (Mansfield Community) 
    TRACT 1-All of that tract or parcel of land described in Book 274, at Page 385, Carteret County Registry, said deed being dated April 12, 1966, which is more particularly described as follows: Being west of the Town of Morehead City, beginning at a point in the center of the railroad tracks of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, which point is the southwest corner of the lands of Bennie Swinson; running thence North 27 degrees 46 minutes East 957 feet to an iron pipe in a ditch; running thence with the Southern line of the Tootle property, the following courses and distances: North 64 degrees 41 minutes West 168.7 feet; North 81 degrees 06 minutes West 284.5 feet; North 77 degrees 45 minutes West 550.6 feet; North 65 degrees 40 minutes West 551.5 feet to the Southwest corner of the Tootle property; running thence with the West line of the Tootle property North 18 degrees 34 minutes East 616 feet to an iron pipe in a ditch; running thence with the Southern line of the H. G. Willis property and a ditch North 66 degrees 10 minutes West 462.3 feet to the center of a dirt road; running thence South 36 degrees 56 minutes West with said road and a ditch, also the Henry Daughtry East line, 1,201.4 feet to the center of the railroad tracks of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, which point is also the Southeast corner of the Henry Daughtry property; running thence with the said railroad tracks South 60 degrees 28 minutes East 480 feet to the Southwest corner of that parcel of land described in Book 259, Page 140, Carteret County Registry; running thence with the West line of said tracks North 25 degrees 32 minutes East 432 feet to the Northwest corner thereof; running thence with the Northern line thereof South 60 degrees 28 minutes East 163 feet to the Northeast corner thereof; running thence with the East line thereof South 25 degrees 32 minutes West 432 feet to the center of the railroad tracks; running thence with the center of the tracks of said railroad South 60 degrees 28 minutes East 1,626.1 feet to the point of BEGINNING, containing approximately 38.8 acres in accordance with map entitled property of M. L. Mansfield, Jr., prepared by C. C. King, Registered Surveyor, Beaufort, North Carolina, and being the same property conveyed by J. C. Keeter, Sr., and wife Rebecca Ann Keeter, to George R. Ballon deed dated January 23, 1975, recorded in Book 371, Page 191, Carteret County Registry. 
    TRACT II-All of that tract or parcel of land described in Book 286, Page 546, Carteret County Registry, dated April 4, 1967, which is more particularly described as follows: In the Mansfield section of Morehead Township, beginning at a point in the centerline of the A&EC Railroad track, said point being on the east line of the W. P. Willis land; thence along the east line of the Willis land N. 23-30 E. 432 feet to an iron pipe adjoining the Willis land; thence along the Willis land S. 62-30 E. 163 feet to an iron pipe adjoining the Willis land; thence along the Willis land S. 23-30 W. 432 feet to a point in the first above mentioned railroad track centerline; thence along the centerline of said railroad track N. 62-30 W. 163 feet to the point of BEGINNING, being the same property conveyed to the First Citizens Bank & Trust Company by William Earl Wilson (unmarried, by deed dated December 14, 1965, and recorded in Book 271, Page 167, Carteret County Registry). The hereinabove described parcel of land contains 1.59 acres subject to the rights of the railroad right-of-way and a secondary road which affects 0.59 acres and is located 160 feet north of the aforementioned railroad tracks running parallel to the railroad track centerline. 
(Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 3-13-2001) 
[90]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2001. 
    Lying and being in Beaufort Township, Carteret County, N.C., being bounded on the north, east, and south by Morgan Creek, on the north and west by Eudy property and on the south and west by N.C. State Ports Authority property and being more fully described as follows: 
    Beginning at a point in the eastern R/W line of "Marine Drive," said point of beginning being the following courses and distances from an existing railroad spike in the centerline intersection of "Marine Drive" and "Radio Island Road" (N.C.S.R. 1175) S 01°00'00"W, 1,751.29' to an existing nail in the centerline of "Marine Drive"; thence S 64°00'00"E, 55.17' to the point of beginning. Thence from said point of beginning N 01°00'00"E, with the eastern R/W line of "Marine Drive," 33.10' to a point; thence S 64°00'00"E along the southern line of the Eudy property, 1,154.99' to a point; thence N 01°14'45"E along the eastern line of the Eudy property, 526.44' to a point atop a concrete bulkhead at the highwater mark of Morgan Creek; thence along said bulkhead adjacent to Morgan Creek the following courses and distances; N 39°11'41"E, 11.85'; thence S 51°27'15"E, 365.27'; thence S 19°43'56"E, 3.18'; thence S 00°28'41"E, 70.77'; thence S 29°41'46"W, 161.43'; thence S 39°26'26"W, 92.19'; thence N 47°59'07"W, 11.94'; thence S 41°38'31"W, 240.17'; thence cornering and leaving said bulkhead Due North with the eastern line of the N.C. State Ports Authority property, 115.76' to an existing iron pipe; thence N 64°00'00"W with the northern line of the N.C. State Ports Authority property, 1,154.83' to a point, the point of beginning containing 3.57 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 4-10-2001) 
[91]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2001. 
    All of that property as shown and recorded in Plat Book 28 at page 447, Carteret County Registry containing 4.497 acres, more or less, and entitled Belly S. Ballou and Melinda S. Ballou, dated March 10, 1993, by O.L. Lawrence, R.L.S., and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at the northeast corner of Lot Number 4, Friendly Road, Industrial Park as recorded in Map Book 26 at page 122, Carteret County Registry, said point being located in the right-of-way of Friendly Road and running thence North 50-20 West a distance of 262.45 feet to an iron pin; running thence North 37-19-03 West a distance of 150.0 feet to an iron pin; running thence North 30-02-17 East a distance of 380 feet to an iron pin; running thence South 60-52-40 East a distance of 363.0 feet to an iron pin; running thence South 64-27-20 West a distance of 79.69 feet to an iron pin, said iron pin being the northwest corner of Lot Number 9, Friendly Road, Industrial Park, as referenced above; running thence with the common boundary of said Lot Number 9, South 42-38 East a distance of 215.9 feet to an existing iron pin located in the right-of-way of Friendly Road; running thence with said right-of-way of Friendly Road South 53-50 West a distance of 81.31 feet; running thence with Friendly Road in the curve, the center line curve data being a D. angle of 25°-37', a tangent of 342.16 feet and a radius of 1,505.0 feet, the radius of the right-of-way curve as shown on the plat recorded in Map Book 28 at page 447 in South 48-15-33 West a distance of 298.20 feet to the point or place of beginning. The above described property encompasses all of Lots 5, 6, 7, and 8 of Friendly Road, Industrial Park as shown on Map Book 26 at page 122 and also contains property located north-northeast of the above described lots. The above property is subject to a ten (10) foot easement as shown on that plat recorded in Plat Book 28 at page 447. 
    Seller warrants that any easements shown on that plat of Friendly Road, Industrial Park along the northwest property lines of Lots 5, 6, 7 and 8 no longer exist and that said easements have been relocated to that twenty (20) foot easement shown on the above referenced plat. By executing this Deed, Seller removes from dedication any easements that may have burdened Lots 5, 6, 7 and 8 Friendly Road, Industrial Park, Map Book 26 at page 122, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 2001-0011, § 1, 5-8-2001) 
[92]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2001. 
TRACT 1-Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 3 Wayne See Subdivision (mp 24 pg 24 in the East line of Wayne Drive; THENCE along a curve to the left having a radius of 230.00 feet, an arc length of 36.72 feet, being subtended by a chord of North 06-47-32 W. for a distance of 36.68 feet to a DOT MON: THENCE along a curve to the right having a radius of 1,382.39 feet an arc length of 43.95 feet, being subtended by a chord of south 56-44-07 E for a distance of 43.95 feet to a POINT; THENCE South 69-11-26 W for a distance of 34.67 feet to an EIP; the point and place of beginning. Together with and subject to covenants, easements, and restrictions of record. Said property contains 0.01 acres more or less, all as shown on survey dated June 15, 1997, by James I. Phillips, III, N.C.R.L.S., to which survey reference is made for a more particular description of property. (This Tract 1 is referred to as Tract 2 in deed of trust recorded in Book 802, page 537). 
TRACT 2-Beginning at a point in the North line of Lot 3 Wayne See Subdivision (mp 24 page 24) and being located N. 69-11-26 E 154.81 feet from the northwest corner of said Lot 3; THENCE along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,482.39 feet and an arc length of 182.04 feet, being subtended by a chord of North 56-40-37 W for a distance of 181.92 feet to DOT MON: THENCE North 60-11-42 W for a distance of 41.44 feet to a POINT; THENCE North 34-34-29 E for a distance of 189.31 feet to an EIP; THENCE South 59-21-45 E for a distance of 328.33 feet to a RR SPIKE; THENCE South 00-51-44 E for a distance of 32.15 feet to an EX. NAIL; THENCE South 69-11-26 W for a distance of 216.57 feet to a POINT; the point and place of beginning. Together with and subject to covenants, easements, and restrictions of record. Said property contains 1.29 acres more or less all as shown on survey dated June 15, 1997, by James I. Phillips, III, N.C.R.L.S., to which survey reference is made for a more particular description of property. (This Tract 2 is identified as Tract 3 on deed of trust recorded in Book 801, page 537.) 
(Ord. No. 2001-0012, § 1, 5-8-2001) 
[93]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of July, 2001. 
    Beginning at the Southeast corner of that property owned by Robert L. Reynolds, Sr. and wife, Patricia L. Reynolds as conveyed in Deed Book 611, Page 297 recorded in Map Book 28, Page 111 Carteret County Registry, said point being further identified as being located in the Western right-of-way of Gloria Dawn Road. Thence from said POINT OF BEGINNING with the Southern boundary of the aforesaid property N 65-59-54 W 315.3 feet to a point in the centerline of a ditch; continuing thence with the centerline of said ditch S 41-01-30 W 146.89 feet to a point; running thence S 72-00-00 E 410.28 feet to a point in the centerline of Gloria Dawn Road; continuing thence with the centerline of Gloria Dawn Road N 23-04-40 E 43.56 feet to a point; thence N 02-16-20 W 60.25 feet to a point; thence N 65-59-54 W 22.31 feet to the point and place of beginning. 
    Less and excepting from the above described land that portion which would lie within the right-of-way of Gloria Dawn Road. Being all that property shown on survey for Robert L. Reynolds, Sr. and wife, Patricia L. Reynolds dated March 2, 1992, and prepared by W. D. Daniels, Jr. Land Surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-0028, § 1, 7-17-2001) 
[94]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of September, 2001. 
    Beginning at an iron re-bar in the eastern right-of-way of State Road 1176, said point being located North 06° 30' 10" East, 77.50 feet, from a P.K. Nail at the centerline intersection of State Road 1176 and State Road 1179 (Mayberry Loop Road-Southern end); thence with the eastern right-of-way line of State Road 1176, North 16° 08' 51" West, 366.50 feet, to a point at the southwestern corner of now or former Apple Park, South 65° 32' 45" East, 996.0 feet, to or near a wire fence; thence running with or near said fence, South 12° 15' 34" East, 347.12 feet, to the northeastern corner of Peapod Estates; thence with the northern line of Peapod Estates and Marvin Moore Subdivision North 65° 32' 45" West, 965.0 feet, to the point and place of beginning, containing 6.2 acres, all bearings magnetic 1964, declination 5° 30' West. 
(Ord. No. 2001-0031, § 1, 9-11-2001) 
[95]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of November, 2001. 
    Beginning at an iron pipe located at the intersection of the northern right-of-way line of Mayberry Loop Road (SR 1179) and the western right-of-way line of Crab Point Road (SR 1176). From said point of beginning run thence with the northern right-of-way line of Mayberry Loop Road the following four courses and distances: 1) North 64° 40' 24" West, 520.23 feet to an iron rod; 2) North 64° 53' 10" West, 351.01 feet to a stake; 3) North 66° 28' 04" West, 383.73 feet to a stake; and 4) North 66° 31' 03" West, 288.11 feet to an iron pipe; thence cornering and running North 17° 31' 36" East, 999.51 feet to an iron pipe; thence cornering and running South 67° 28' 57" East, 320.56 feet to an iron rod; thence cornering and running South 21° 21' 08" West, 81.0 feet to an iron pipe; thence cornering and running South 68° 17' 42" East, 545.10 feet to an iron rod located in the western right-of-way line of Crab Point Road; thence with the western right-of-way line of Crab Point Road in a curve to the left to a point which is located South 12° 38' 32" East, 237.68 feet from the previous point; thence continuing with the western right-of-way line of Crab Point Road South 16° 08' 51" East, 1,000.06 feet to the point and place of beginning, containing 25.98 acres more or less. Being the same property as shown in that survey entitled "Survey for Blair Pointe, LLC" dated April 23, 1999, amended June 15, 1999, prepared by James L. Powell, R.L.S. 
(Ord. No. 2001-0036, § 1, 11-13-2001) 
[96]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described noncontiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of November, 2001. 
    Beginning at an existing iron rod (EIR) in the northern right-of-way (R/W) of U.S. Highway 70, West of Morehead City, NC. Where the same intersects the Eastern R/W of Taylor Road as it appears on Map Book 2, Page 137, Carteret County Registry. From said point of beginning along the northern R/W of U.S. Highway 70, South 65° 58' 00" East, 289.96 feet to an EIR at the south western corner of the true point of beginning, from this point North 27° 47' 14" West, 178.95 feet to an EIR; South 65° 53' 35" East, 85.03 feet to a point; South 27° 47' 14" West, 178.95 feet to an EIR along the northern R/W of U.S. Highway 70; along said R/W North 65° 53' 35" West, 85.03 [feet] to the point of beginning (containing 0.34 + acres). 
(Ord. No. 2001-0037, § 1, 11-13-2001) 
[97]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of March, 2002. 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County: Beginning at an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70, said iron pipe being located North 64-50-00 West, with the northern right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70, 969.41 feet from a nail and cap at the intersection of the northern right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70 with the centerline of NCSR 1151 (Murdoch Drive); from said beginning point, with the northern right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70, North 64-50-00 West 200.00 feet to an iron pipe; thence North 25-10-00 East 1,251.69 feet to an iron pipe; thence South 71-39-00 East 201.42 feet to a nine-inch diameter gum tree, marked with chops; thence South 25-10-00 West 1,275.60 feet to an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way margin of U.S. Highway 70, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2002-06, § 1, 3-12-2002) 
[98]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2002. 
TRACT 1-Lying and being located in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being more particularly located as follows: 
    Beginning at a point being located the following from the centerline intersection of the A&NC Railroad and the Country Club Road (now closed). North 45 degrees 23 minutes 35 seconds East 51.10 feet, North 56 degrees 30 minutes 35 seconds West 371.44 feet to the point of beginning. THENCE North 56 degrees 31 minutes 35 seconds West for a distance of 179.67 feet to an EIP; THENCE North 33 degrees 28 minutes 55 seconds East for a distance of 248.75 feet to an EIR; THENCE South 56 degrees 31 minutes 35 seconds East for a distance of 179.67 feet to an EIR; THENCE South 33 degrees 28 minutes 55 seconds West for a distance of 248.75 feet to an EIR; Together with and subject to covenants, easements, and restrictions of record. Said property contains 1.03 acres more or less. 
TRACT 2-Lying and being located in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being more particularly located as follows: 
    Beginning at a point being located the following from the centerline intersection of the A&NC Railroad and the Country Club Road (now closed). North 45 degrees 23 minutes 35 seconds East 51.10 feet, North 56 degrees 30 minutes 35 seconds West 371.44 feet, North 56 degrees 31 minutes 35 seconds West 179.67 feet to the point of beginning. THENCE North 56 degrees 30 minutes 30 seconds West for a distance of 343.04 feet to a POINT; THENCE North 49 degrees 35 minutes 10 seconds East for a distance of 226.12 feet to a POINT; THENCE along a curve to the right having a radius of 904.93 feet and an arc length of 214.51 feet, being subtended by a chord of South 64 degrees 09 minutes 20 seconds East for a distance of 214.01 feet to a R/W MON (ETP); THENCE South 59 degrees 02 minutes 20 seconds East for a distance of 68.27 feet to an EIR; THENCE South 33 degrees 28 minutes 55 seconds West for a distance of 248.75 feet to an EIP; Together with and subject to covenants, easements, and restrictions of record. Said property contains 1.69 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, § 1, 4-9-2002) 
[99]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2002. 
    Lying and being located in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being more particularly located as follows: Beginning at a point in the North Line of NC 24, said point being located North 39 degrees 48 minutes 44 seconds 62.71 feet from the centerline intersection of NC 24 and Bryan Street; THENCE North 05 degrees 29 minutes 40 seconds East for a distance of 100.17 feet to an EIP; THENCE North 05 degrees 06 minutes 30 seconds East for a distance of 107.59 feet to an EIP; THENCE North 08 degrees 07 minutes 35 seconds East for a distance of 24.02 feet to an EIP; THENCE South 85 degrees 06 minutes 20 seconds East for a distance of 240.39 feet to a PNT; THENCE South 85 degrees 06 minutes 20 seconds East for a distance of 60.08 feet to an EIP; THENCE South 01 degrees 33 minutes 40 seconds West for a distance of 195.23 feet to an EIP; THENCE South 88 degrees 13 minutes 00 seconds West for a distance of 316.78 feet to an EIP; Together with and subject to covenants, easements, and restrictions of record. Said property contains 1.51 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1, 4-9-2002) 
[100]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of July, 2002. 
TRACT 1 (639618404087-NC State Port) 
    Beginning at the Northwest corner of Lot 5 Block B as recorded in Map Book 1 Page 221 as recorded in the Carteret County Registry, said point also being located N 79-42-11 E 1,985.33 feet from the corner of a concrete bulkhead at Port Terminal, thence from said beginning point and following the northern line of lot 5 S 63-30-36 E 99.96 feet to a point at the Northeast corner of said lot, said point also being in the western margin of Inlet Drive, thence along Inlet Drive S 26-27-10 W 116.23 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 5, said point also being at the right-of-way intersection of Inlet Drive and Fort Macon Street, thence along Fort Macon Street N 54-42-56 W 100.87 feet to the Southwest corner of Lot 5, thence leaving Fort Macon Street N 26-17-35 E 100.81 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 0.25 acres. 
TRACT 2 (639619507964-NC State Port) 
    Beginning at an existing concrete monument, said monument being located N 62-31-08 E 1,453.71 feet from the Northeast corner of Lot 5 Block B as recorded in Map Book 1 Page 221 of the Carteret County Registry, thence from said beginning point N 57-17-02 E 85.01 feet to a point in the Western margin of Marine Drive, thence along Marine Drive S 02-00-54 W 99.81 feet, thence leaving Marine Drive N 87-58-21 W 69.88 feet, thence N 02-01-44 E 51.36 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 0.12 acres. 
TRACT 3 (639618406652-NC State Port) 
    Beginning at a point in the Northern margin of North Shore Drive, said point being located the following bearings and distances from the Northeast corner of Lot 5 Block B as recorded in Map Book 1 Page 221 of the Carteret County Registry, N 26-27-57 E 150.11 feet; N 57-37-01 E 256.84 feet; N 57-38-28 E 56.01 feet; N 60-02-05 W 91.61 feet; thence from said beginning point and following the Northern margin of North Shore Drive N 60-02-05 W 108.47 feet, thence leaving said margin N 13-59-33 W 202.29 feet to a point in the mean high water line, thence along the mean high water line N 83-12-54 E 77.89 feet, thence leaving said mean high water line S 14-10-03 E 267.81 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 0.42 acres. 
TRACT 4 (639619529265/639619515976-NC State Port) 
    Beginning at a point in Northern margin of U.S. Highway 70, said point being located the following bearings and distances from the Northeast corner of Lot 5 Block B as recorded in Map Book 1 Page 221 of the Carteret Country Registry, N 22-00-07 E 1,595.16 feet: S 88-40-46E 250.03 feet; thence leaving said Northern margin N 01-00-00 W 731.12 feet to a point in the high water line of Newport River, thence along the high water line of Newport River and Lewis Thoroughfare the following bearings and distances: N 52-10-02 E 36.95 feet; N 72-08-09 E 56.90 feet; N 16-00-31 E 33.75 feet; N 50-35-35 E 60.40 feet; N 61-07-11 E 39.65 feet; N 34-02-37 E 68.39 feet; N 56-52-34 E 78.21 feet; N 44-57-41 E 55.34 feet; N 87-48-58 E 82.17 feet; N 65-53-00 E 51.04 feet; N 61-28-59 E 36.35 feet; N 83-40-35 E 113.23 feet; N 55-56-42 E 25.64 feet; N 87-52-05 E 133.63 feet; S 77-29-57 E 73.57 feet; S 59-03-29 E 80.96 feet; S 16-01-21 E 47.88 feet; S 65-51-00 E 54.13 feet; S 03-58-02 W 22.26 feet; S 28-45-48 E 191.98 feet; S 07-46-07 E 111.10 feet; S 12-33-30 E 35.46 feet; S 04-19-16 E 22.00 feet; S 49-58-17 E 27.03 feet; S 18-14-53 E 29.50 feet; S 02-28-53 E 33.72 feet; S 05-13-23 W 60.55 feet; S 11-00-06 W 57.54 feet, S 17-25-44 W 48.12 feet; S 09-27-04 W 68.21; S 34-22-42 W 54.02 feet; S 40-52-04 W 38.95 feet; S 30-32-57 W 46.43 feet; S 33-39-02 W 52.75 feet; S 19-35-02 W 48.42 feet; N 67-26-18 E 14.66 feet; N 36-27-26 E 30.61 feet; S 67-25-45 E 98.15 feet; S 83-23-08 E 61.37 feet; S 28-08-38 E 31.17 feet; N 78-18-43 E 47.47 feet; N 09-18-34 W 25.94 feet; S 66-47-58 E 50.99 feet; S 88-51-28 E 58.16 feet; S 67-02-50 E 23.53 feet; S 89-28-04 E 97.24 feet; S 75-58-38 E 97.05 S; S 69-39-06 E 35.56 feet; N 85-01-25 E 145.68 feet; S 05-31-34 E 49.60 feet to a point in the Northern margin of U.S. Highway 70, thence with said Northern margin the following bearings and distances; N 89-08-26 W 647.01 feet; N 89-08-26 W 409.90 feet; N 01-51-34 E 12.30 feet; N 88-40-46 W 582.62 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 23.77 acres. 
TRACT 5 (639619510998-State of NC) 
    Beginning at a concrete monument on the North right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70 between Morehead City and Beaufort, said monument being due North 202.03 feet from the centerline of the Beaufort-Morehead railroad mainline and North 89 degrees 00 minutes East 216.66 feet along the centerline of the Beaufort-Morehead railroad from the East end of the railroad trestle across Newport River; thence from said beginning point with the North right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70 North 89 degrees 00 minutes East 250.00 feet to a point, a new corner; thence along a new line North 01 degrees 00 minutes West 815 feet more or less to the high water mark of Newport River; thence in a Southwestwardly direction with the high water mark of Newport River approximately 1050 feet to the North right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70; thence with the North right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70 North 89 degrees 00 minutes East 75 feet more or less to a concrete monument, the point and place of BEGINNING, containing 5.2 acres, more or less, and being as shown on a map prepared by Loie J. Priddy, R.L.S., entitled, "Lands Exchanged Between North Carolina State Ports Authority and George R. Ballou, Carteret County, N.C." Being the same tract or parcel of land described in deed from North Carolina State Ports Authority to George R. Ballou and wife, Mildred Ballou, dated June 26, 1973, and recorded in Book 361, page 89, Carteret County Registry. For further description see map prepared by Loie J. Priddy, R.L.S. dated November 27, 1973, entitled "Property of George R. Ballou ET UX, Beaufort Township, Carteret County, N.C. 
TRACT 6 (639619710935-Town of Morehead City) 
    In Beaufort Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, BEGINNING on a point in the northern right-of-way boundary of U.S. Route 70, said point being described as lying North 140.00 feet as extended along the eastern property line from the southeastern corner of the property previously conveyed to Earl Taylor and wife, Marie Taylor, by deed from Sam W. Morgan as recorded in Book 2-A, page 326, in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County, said point being more particularly described as lying 50 feet North of and normal to the center line of the western bound lane of U.S. Route 70; thence, leaving said point of beginning and running North approximately 78.4 feet to the mean high tide line of the Newport River; thence running with the meander of the mean high tide line of the Newport River in a westerly direction, approximately 185 feet to a point, said point being more particularly described as lying N 07° 36' W, approximately 250 feet from the southwestern corner of the property previously conveyed to Earl Taylor and wife, Marie Taylor, by deed from Sam W. Morgan recorded in Book 2-A, page 326 in the office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County; thence leaving the mean high tide line of the Newport River and running S 07° 36" E, approximately 109 feet to a point in the northern right-of-way boundary of U.S. Route 70, said point being more particularly described as lying 50 feet North of and normal to the center line of the western bound lane of U.S. Route 70; thence running with said northern right-of-way boundary 50 feet from and parallel to the center line of the western bound land of U.S. Route 70, N 89° 22' E 167.15 feet to the point of BEGINNING and containing .41 acres more or less. This property was conveyed to Earl and Marie Taylor by the State of North Carolina on July 17, 1964 by way of that deed recorded in Book 258, page 560, Carteret County Registry. 
TRACT 7 (638500799727-Town of Morehead City) 
    Being all of that part of the eastern part of an island or tract of land above the highwater mark, which island is known as Sugarloaf Island (also called "Crab Island," "Crab Shoal" and "Morehead Island"). The property conveyed is bounded on the North by a slough or "cut" known as Morehead Channel, on the South by Bogue Sound, on the East by the confluence of Bogue Sound and Morehead Channel and on the West by the lands formerly owned by George R. Wallace and Grace Taylor Wallace and includes all riparian rights incident thereto and is more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at a point at the East end of Sugarloaf Island (also called "Crab Island," "Crab Shoal" and "Morehead Island"), said point being South 26° 25' East, 1,051 feet from the southeast intersection of Evans and South 4th Streets according to the official plan of Morehead City (Map Book 1, page 139, Carteret County Registry) and running thence along the highwater mark of Bogue Sound South 63° 30' West, 106 feet; North 78° 15' West, 195 feet; South 62° 30' West, 282 feet; South 50° 30' West, 225 feet; North 89° 35' West, 664 feet; South 74° 00 West, 250 feet; South 79° 00 West, 393 feet; South 61° 40' West, 378 feet; North 78° 00' West, 100 feet to the Wallace and Taylor southeast corner; thence with Wallace's and Taylor's East line crossing the island, North 6° 05' East, 667 feet to a point in the highwater mark of the slough known as Morehead Channel, which said point bears South 65° 35' West, 2,062 feet from the southeast intersections of Evans and South 4th Streets according to the official plan of Morehead City (Map Book 1, page 139); running thence with the highwater mark of the said slough, North 53° 30' East, 306 feet; North 20° 20' East, 195 feet; North 49° 45' East, 270 feet; South 89° 55' East, 476 feet; South 61° 30' East, 265 feet; South 72° 00' East, 1,011 feet and South 40° 00' East, 260 feet to the point of BEGINNING, containing 37 acres, more or less. 
TRACT 8 (638500697487-Town of Morehead City) 
    Being all of that part of the western part of an island or tract of land known as Sugarloaf Island (also called "Crab Island," "Crab Shoal" and "Morehead Island") which is above the highwater mark. The property conveyed is bounded on the North by a slough or "cut" known as Morehead Channel, bounded on the South by Bogue Sound, bounded on the West by the confluence of Bogue Sound and Morehead Channel and bounded on the East by lands owned by Stowe-Pharr Mills, Inc. (formerly Sugarloaf Properties) and include all riparian rights incident thereto, and is more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at a point at the highwater mark of Bogue Sound which is the southwest corner of the lands owned by Stowe-Pharr Mills, Inc. (formerly Sugarloaf Properties), thence North 78° 00' West, 549 feet with the highwater mark of Bogue Sound to a point, thence North 88° 30' West, 380 feet with the highwater mark of Bogue Sound to a point; thence North 52° 55' West, 565 feet with the highwater mark of Bogue Sound to a point; thence North 48° 10' East, 217 feet with the highwater mark of Bogue Sound and/or Morehead Channel to a point; thence South 84° 30' East, 261 feet with the highwater mark of Morehead Channel to a point; thence South 44° 20' East, 129 feet with the highwater mark of said channel to a point; thence North 75° 15' East, 464 feet with the highwater mark of Morehead Channel to a point; thence South 85° 30' East 218 feet with the highwater mark of said channel to a point; thence North 76° 00' East, 260 feet with the highwater mark of Morehead Channel to a point, said point being the northwest corner of the lands of Stowe-Pharr Mills, Inc. (formerly Sugarloaf Properties); thence South 6° 05' West, 667 feet with the Stowe-Pharr line to the beginning; containing 13.9 acres, according to that map made by Philip K. Ball, Surveyor, dated July 1953. The property conveyed herein is all of that land which is above the highwater mark of Sugarloaf Island (formerly "Crab Island," "Crab Shoal" or "Morehead Island") and which is located West of that portion of the island owned by Stowe-Pharr Mills, Inc. 
TRACT 9 (Town of Morehead City) 
    Beginning at the high water mark of the westernmost corner of the Wallace tract on Sugarloaf Island, at its point of intersection with the Morehead City corporate limits and continuing on a westerly direction following the existing Morehead City limit line to a point 500 feet from the shoreline of Sugarloaf Island, then going southwardly then eastwardly, remaining 500 feet from the shoreline paralleling the entire southern boundary of the Sugarloaf Island to a point of intersection with the existing City limits 500 feet west of the NC State Port Authority property. 
(Ord. No. 2002-25, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
[101]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of December, 2002. 
    Lying and being on the Morehead/Beaufort Causeway, Carteret County, North Carolina and being more particularly described as follows: All that certain lot of land lying, situate and being on the south side of U.S. Highway 70, between Morehead City and Beaufort, beginning at a computed point on the northeast corner of said property, said property being located the following courses and distances from the centerline intersection of NCSR 1205 and NCSR 1175, N 88° 53' 00" W 1,054.79' to an EP.K., thence S 01° 07' 00" W 17.58' to the point of beginning. From said point of beginning S 01° 07' 00" W 12.42' to an existing iron rod, thence S 01° 07' 00" W 133.82' to an existing iron rod, thence S 01° 07' 00" W 3.00' to a computed point, thence the following courses and distances along an existing bulkhead N 87° 17' 07" W 19.13' to a compacted point, thence N 87° 40' 54" W 95.05', to a computed point, thence N 11° 38' 59" W 30.97['] to a computed point, thence N 30° 27' 21" W 41.92' to a computed point, thence N 47° 32' 39" W 59.93' to a computed point, thence N 02° 44' 42" W 28.85' to a computed point, thence N 01° 05' 30" E 12.13' to a computed point, thence along the southern right-of-way of NCSR 1205, S 88° 58' 13" E 189.89' to the point of beginning containing 0.52 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2002-34, § 1, 12-10-2002) 
[102]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of March, 2003. 
    Being all of that tract of land lying in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at an Existing P.K. Nail in the centerline intersection of Gloria Dawn Road and Vashti Drive; thence South 30° 06' 57" West for a distance of 24.52 feet to an Existing P.K. Nail in the centerline intersection of Gloria Dawn Road and an Existing Drainage Ditch; thence North 21° 44' 26" West for a distance of 37.24 feet to a Computer Point (NPS); thence North 30° 03' 22" East for a distance of 185.04 feet to an EIP, the point of beginning; thence North 59° 58' 47" West for a distance of 110.05 feet to an ERRS; thence South 30° 02' 30" West for a distance of 98.50 feet to a Computer Point (NPS), in the centerline of an Existing Drainage Ditch; thence North 28° 29' 17" West for a distance of 284.32 feet to an EIR; thence North 34° 35' 15" West for a distance of 60.81 feet to an EMC; thence North 56° 48' 40" East for a distance 86.03 feet to an EIP; thence South 65° 02' 39" East for a distance of 370.16 feet to an EIP; hence South 30° 01' 38" West for a distance of 185.58 feet to an EIP; to the point of beginning; together with and subject to covenants, easements, and restrictions of record. Said property contains 1.60 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1, 3-11-2003) 
[103]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2003. 
    Lying and being located in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being more particularly located as follows: 
    Beginning at a set iron pipe in the North right-of-way of NC 24. Said point of beginning being located the following from the centerline intersection of NC 24 and Bryan Street; North 89° 51' 50" West for a distance of 212.048 feet to the point of beginning; thence South 74° 55' 30" West for a distance of 267.172 feet to a set iron rod; thence North 15° 19' 00" West for a distance of 321.032 feet to a set iron rod; thence North 77° 45' 38" East for a distance of 259.100 feet to an axle; thence South 16° 53' 08" East for a distance of 308.366 feet to a set iron rod; together with and subject to covenants, easements, and restrictions of record. Said property contains 1.90 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2003-09, § 1, 3-31-2003) 
[104]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2003. 
    Four (4) lots or parcels of land situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, lying on the north side of U.S. Highway 70, each of which fronts 50 feet on said highway and extends back therefrom between parallel side lines a distance of 300 feet, which are shown and designated as lot numbers 31, 32, 33, and 34, on Map "Showing Property of Braemer Company," made in September, 1955, by J.W. Traylor, which is recorded in Public Registry of Carteret County in Map Book 3, Page 130, to which map reference is hereby made for a greater certainty of description. Said property contains 1.27 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, § 1, 5-13-2003) 
[105]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2003. 
    Beginning at the centerline intersection of S.R. 1712 (Wagon Road) and S.R. 1715 (Old Gate Road) thence running South 51° 13' 01" East 52.01 feet to the point of place of beginning thence running South 03° 52' 00" West 282.25 feet to an existing iron pipe. Thence running North 75° 34' 09" West 101.72 feet to an existing iron pipe, thence running North 03° 52' 00" East 263.60 feet, to and existing iron pipe on the right-of-way of S.R. 1715 (Old Gate Road). Thence running with said right-of-way South 86° 08' 00" East 100.00 feet to an existing iron rod, being the point of place of beginning. Being all of Lot 18 Block "EE" Mandy Farms Subdivision Section 3, containing 0.63 acres in the Morehead Township of Carteret County, N.C. 
(Ord. No. 2003-22, § 1, 6-18-2003) 
[106]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of July, 2003. 
    Being all of Lot 16, Section 1, Morehead Gardens, a subdivision as shown by map or plat of record in Map Book3, page 129, Carteret County Registry. Said property contains 0.208 acres more of [or] less. 
(Ord. No. 2003-33, § 1, 7-8-2003) 
[107]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of August, 2003. 
    Being all of Lot 1A as shown that map entitled Recombination Survey for George Ballou and Abron George Ballou dated October 17, 2000 which map is recorded in Map Book29, page 849, Carteret County Registry. Said property contains 0.547 acres more of [or] less. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, § 1, 8-12-2003) 
[108]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of August, 2003. 
    Being all of Lots One (1) and Two (2), Block S, Section IV, Phase 2, Mandy Farms Subdivision, as recorded in Map Book17, page 5, Carteret County Registry. Said property contains 1.20 acres more of [or] less. 
(Ord. No. 2003-36, § 1, 8-12-2003) 
[109]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of December, 2003. 
    Beginning at a point, a set iron pipe located N 71-24-09 W 368.57 feet from the intersection of the south right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70 (Arendell Street) and the west right-of-way of Little Nine Drive; thence from said beginning point S 01-07-40 W 660.01 feet with the west line of Little Nine Subdivision (Map Book 18, Page 97) to a point, an existing iron pipe; thence with the north line of Lot Number 13 of the Little Nine Subdivision N 71-22-30 W 241.96 feet to a point, an existing iron rod in the northeast corner of the terminus of Turner's Dairy Road and the northwest corner of Lot Number 13; thence N 71-22-30 W 53.73 feet to a point, an existing iron rod in the northwest corner of the terminus of Turner's Dairy Road and the northeast corner of Lot Number 12; thence with the north lot line of Lot Number 12 N 71-22-30 W 218.96 feet to a point, an existing iron rod; thence with the Holler line (now or formerly) N 03-52-10 E 352.00 feet to a point, an existing iron pipe; thence continuing with the Holler line N 04-06-57 E 298.46 feet to a point, a set iron rod in the south right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70; thence with the said south right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70 S 71-23-30 E 480.64 feet to a point, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2003-43, § 1, 12-9-2003) 
[110]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2004. 
    Being a tract of land located in Morehead City, Carteret County, North Carolina beginning at a point, said point being S37° 34' 29" W 30.79 feet from an existing P.K. nail at the centerline intersection of Pond Drive and Miller Farm Road. From said point of beginning N37° 34' 29" E 863.54 feet to a point, thence S68° 05' 57" E 650.30 feet to a point on the south west corner of the Richard Wayne See property as recorded in DB 707 PG 898, thence S68° 12' 42" E 700.00 feet to a point at the southeast corner of said property, thence S68° 12' 42" E 26.15 feet to a point along the southern property line of the Richard Wayne See property. Thence S22° 09' 25" W 664.67 feet to a calculated point, thence S67° 50' 35" E 605.07 feet to a calculated point along the western right-of-way of Gloria Dawn Road, thence in a southerly direction S22° 09' 25" W 200.00 feet to a point along the northern right-of-way of Pond Drive, thence along the northern right of Pond Drive N67° 50' 35" W 1,509.90 feet to a point, thence along a curve, with a radius of 5,699.58 feet, a distance of 241.76 feet to a point, thence N65° 24' 46" W 459.90 feet back to the point of beginning. Said property being 32.12 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, § 1, 4-22-2004) 
[111]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2004. 
    Commencing at a North Carolina Geodetic Survey (N.C.G.S.) monument names Swinson having N.A.D. 83 coordinates of N=366,194.130 feet, E=2,667,750.920 feet running thence North 85 degrees 17 minutes 02 seconds West for a grid distance of 2,545.84 feet to another N.C.G.S. monument named West High having N.A.D. 83 coordinates of N=366,403.444 feet, E=2,665,213.747 feet thence South 76 degrees 34 minutes 34 seconds West for a grid distance of 800.96 feet to an existing iron pipe on the southern right-of-way of N.C.S.R. 1177 (Country Club Road, allowing a 60 foot right-of-way) having N.A.D. 83 coordinates of N=366,217.496 feet, E=2,664,434.667 feet, the point of beginning; thence leaving the aforementioned right-of-way and running South 00 degrees 04 minutes 48 seconds East for a horizontal ground distance of 189.91 feet to an existing angle iron on the northern right-of-way of the Atlantic & East Carolina Railroad (allowing a 100 foot right-of-way); thence running with the northern right-of-way line of the aforementioned railroad North 67 degrees 31 minutes 56 seconds West for a horizontal ground distance of 319.43 feet to a set iron pipe at the intersection of the aforementioned railroad right-of-way and the southern right-of-way of N.C.S.R. 1177; thence running with the southern right-of-way of N.C.S.R. 1177 a curve to the right having an arc of 269.75 feet and a radius of 1,689.09 feet said arc being subtended by a chord of 269.46 feet and a bearing of North 76 degrees 32 minutes 40 seconds East to a set iron pipe; thence continuing along the southern right-of-way of N.C.S.R. 1177 North 81 degrees 07 minutes 10 seconds East for a horizontal ground distance of 33.25 feet to the point of beginning. Said parcel contains 0.67 acres by coordinate computation. Said parcel is subject to all easements, rights of way and agreements of record prior to the date of this description. 
(Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1, 5-11-2004) 
[112]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2004. 
    All of Lot 18, Section 1, Morehead Gardens Subdivision, Morehead City Township, Carteret County, Morehead North Carolina as recorded in Deed Book 922 Page 332, and Map Book 3 Page 129, known as 3409 Elm Street and containing 0.23 aces. 
(Ord. No. 2004-24, § 1, 6-8-2004) 
[113]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of August, 2004. 
    Lying and being Morehead Township and beginning at a point which lies North 16 degrees 58 minutes 18 seconds East, 128.99 feet from a "P.K." nail found at the intersection of Gloria Dawn Rd. and Vashti Dr., said point being an iron pipe; thence North 59 degrees 30 minutes 39 seconds West, 110.06 feet to an iron pipe; thence North 30 degrees 2 minutes 30 seconds East, 32.43 feet to a railroad spike; thence South 59 degrees 58 minutes 47 seconds East, 110.05 feet to an iron pipe in the western right-of-way of Gloria Dawn Rd.; thence South 30 degrees 1 minutes 38 seconds West to an iron pipe, the point of beginning. Containing 3,618 square feet more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2004-28, § 1, 8-10-2004) 
[114]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. section 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of October, 2004. 
    Being all of Lot 5, Section 2, Block A, Country Club as recorded in Deed Book 1002 Page 123. In addition being the property beginning at a point otherwise known as the northeast corner of Lot 21, Section 2, Block A of Country Club Heights Subdivision as recorded in Deed Book 911 page 222. From said point of beginning the following bearings and distances, S04°24'30"W 163.09 feet to the southeast corner of said lot along the northern right-of-way of Oxford Drive; thence along a curve with a radius of 820.57 feet a distance of 77.02 feet; thence S85°39'00"W 47.90 feet to a point; thence S85°33'37"W 120.54 feet to an EIP at the southwest corner of Lot 22; thence N04°20'24"W 219.55 feet to an EIP on the northwest corner of Lot 22; thence N16°32'50"E 1,501.21 feet to a point that intersects with the northern right-of-way of White Drive; thence N16°30'20"E 536.18 feet to the mean high water mark of the Newport River; thence along the mean high water line the following bearings and distances: 
    S 77 19 08.843 E 22.36, S 37 35 36.428 E 15.5540, N 72 58 37.646 E 13.6198, S 27 11 52.790 E 15.1323, N 05 44 47.070 W 29.2742, N 31 52 49.510 E 9.6500, N 83 57 18.592 E 9.5203, S 15 31 37.279 E 39.3304, S 71 54 44.328 E 25.3676, S 22 06 05.889 E 10.7451 S 29 27 09.185 W 33.0977, N 78 33 01.377 E 29.3029, S 77 45 05.473 E 11.2908 S 01 04 13.289 E 28.5588, S 12 36 49.278 E 39.1058, S 03 08 18.491 W 68.6151 S 10 31 14.747 W 45.1118, S 13 12 13.969 W 21.9824, S 12 14 52.782 E 14.2173 S 26 05 17.388 W 30.4053, N 61 12 27.146 W 21.2587, N 37 58 12.833 W 62.3254 N 15 43 25.815 W 25.2325, N 24 51 31.887 W 16.6757, S 03 55 27.3630 E 46.8481 S 73 37 33.769 W 40.0397, S 06 53 06.327 E 13.5180, N 81 38 38.975 E 46.4231 S 45 56 07.567 E 52.7279, S 56 25 44.930 E 49.4174, S 84 17 02.535 E 13.6383 S 47 11 26.253 E 73.5431, S 27 10 57.037 E 14.6666, S 60 49 55.392 E 28.3267 N 64 26 52.913 E 11.5250, N 63 08 47.168 E 45.1809, N 52 35 20.962 E 28.0695 N 34 21 56.926 E 38.9832, N 21 18 22.551 E 57.2922, N 09 13 12.752 E 83.3290 N 10 03 15.140 E 51.9442, N 11 19 39.170 E 42.9472, N 40 54 09.776 E 70.6098 N 60 54 27.492 E 35.5991, N 82 37 39.013 E 40.8852, S 84 41 48.637 E 55.6925 S 33 03 35.996 E 59.0536, S 35 33 00.114 E 55.8837, S 25 55 55.463 E 13.2914 S 04 56 21.905 E 32.7925, S 09 59 34.766 E 23.1114, S 04 21 46.273 E 14.1597 S 14 42 27.417 W 33.8679, S 07 12 44.618 W 33.4242, S 33 58 32.181 W 19.5550 S 55 33 31.262 W 21.7987, S 41 39 35.427 E 12.8483, N 73 00 49.156 E 14.0379 N 32 25 51.812 E 38.5430, S 54 43 20.992 E 55.9708, S 15 22 20.696 W 5.8939 S 57 30 33.729 W 11.4516, S 71 16 52.516 E 47.4653, N 58 15 50.729 E 50.0836 N 02 52 15.212 E 22.2695, N 10 51 01.119 W 11.2428, N 58 31 32.492 E 22.2879 N 30 49 33.822 W 19.5148, N 43 28 47.149 E 20.9966, N 57 59 22.389 E 47.7343 N 56 08 44.743 E 34.6648, N 60 10 36.051 E 33.0899, N 58 55 53.628 E 30.4872 S 70 54 37.635 E 20.4887, N 33 10 43.340 E 27.4944, N 58 51 14.235 E 25.9230 N 58 46 38.157 E 26.8587, N 56 09 48.592 E 40.1992, N 35 17 21.633 E 92.0763 N 26 13 09.219 E 82.8492, N 16 55 45.872 E 86.1687, N 19 09 36.989 E 51.3232 S 57 40 56.424 E 20.5534, S 75 08 53.889 E 46.1991, S 52 40 15.521 E 33.0581 S 07 05 30.952 W 16.2254, S 58 10 03.303 E 27.4775, N 12 13 32.117 E 19.6449 N 57 13 37.068 W 24.2784, N 59 47 10.383 E 10.2195, S 72 19 48.722 E 14.0236 S 02 50 09.555 E 2.8820, N 86 02 13.806 E 25.4114, S 52 14 30.117 E 7.3997 S 26 30 34.377 W 16.7690, S 47 55 22.769 E 14.9940, N 04 36 52.860 W 17.7549 N 50 28 37.008 E 7.3346, S 73 13 39.017 E 42.3059, S 28 47 53.062 E 26.2979 N 59 37 01.444 E 16.7234, S 40 38 19.235 E 23.6807, S 65 12 50.699 E 33.5967 S 41 24 32.999 E 11.5179, S 41 56 42.077 W 11.0316, S 89 10 00.244 E 28.3761 S 31 30 48.162 E 15.2763, S 28 21 04.808 W 27.6757, S 52 01 32.837 E 107.3780 S 38 47 35.655 E 113.7362, S 35 40 22.608 W 42.1782, N 44 17 46.141 E 81.9051 S 30 07 43.125 E 21.6155, S 13 58 10.768 W 26.6950, S 04 25 20.539 E 33.8306 S 68 57 13.252 W 15.0361, S 32 08 16.293 W 25.4386, N 70 21 24.953 W 15.1241 S 18 40 08.725 E 19.4789, S 23 49 59.202 W 24.5506, S 19 14 06.891 W 26.3189 S 65 11 39.191 E 12.7574, S 33 26 50.213 W 159.5478, S 22 10 49.738 W 108.0449 S 21 14 41.973 W 14.1987, N 75 57 30.367 W 24.7813, N 66 55 09.820 W 22.1760 S 67 41 31.188 W 16.8625, N 78 43 33.862 W 9.7376, S 38 17 31.230 E 28.9718; 
    thence S35°50'00"W 704.89 feet to a point; thence S04°59'17"W 254.71 feet to a point; thence S47°38'01"E 293.33 feet; thence S83°30'36"E 321.07 feet; thence S19°54'20"E 205.16 feet; thence S70°05'40"W 106.02 feet; thence along a curve with a radius of 35.00 feet a distance of 37.14 feet; thence S09°18'00"W 419.86 feet to a point along the rear lot line of Lot 5 Section 2 Block A of Country Club Heights Subdivision; thence N80°42'00"W 1,717.97 feet back to the point of beginning. Total tract area being 76.042 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, § 1, 4-22-2004) 
[115]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of October, 2004. 
    Beginning at an existing iron rod in the northern right-of-way of U.S. Hwy. 70: said iron rod being located N58°33'15"W - 777.02'; N58° 39'08"W - 689.03' and N33°28'51"E - 44.71' from the center line intersection of Old Murdoch Road and U.S. Hwy. 70 westbound lane; thence running from said point of beginning along and with the northern right-of-way of U.S. Hwy. 70, N58°38'08"W - 242.02' to an existing iron rod; thence leaving said right-of-way and running along and with the eastern property of Pond Properties N31°24'07"E - 391.44' to an existing iron rod in the southern property line of the Linda Pollock Property; thence along and with said Pollock line S58°34'39"E - 242.56' to an existing iron rod in the western property line of Eastern Coastal Carolina Holding; thence running along and with said Eastern Coastal Carolina Holding line S31°28'51"W - 391.19' to the place and point of beginning. Above described tract contains 2.18 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2004-37, § 1, 10-12-2004) 
[116]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of October, 2004. 
    Description for Radio Island Development Company, LLC; being all of Lots 3 through 7 of "Breakwater Spit," a portion of Fort Macon Drive (undeveloped), all of Lot 1, "Thoroughfare Sub-Division," and other lands adjacent to the above referenced properties; lying and being on Radio Island, Carteret County, N.C. and being bounded on the west by Morgan Street and Morgan Creek, on the north by Old U.S. Highway 70 ("Old Causeway Road") on the east by "Thoroughfare Sub-Division" and Beaufort Harbor, on the south by "Breakwater Spit" Subdivision and Morgan Creek and being described as follows: 
    Beginning at a point, the intersection of the eastern right-of-way of Morgan Street and the southern right-of-way of Old U.S. Highway 70, thence from said point of beginning and with said right-of-way of Old U.S. 70 N89°00'00"E, 225.00' to an existing railroad spike in asphalt, the northeast corner of Lot 6, "Breakwater Spit"; thence continuing with said right-of-way N88°56'44"E, 145.17' to an existing iron pipe and iron stake at the northeast corner of Lot 1, "Thoroughfare Sub-Division"; thence with the eastern line of Lot 1, S00°00'00"E, 138.84' to a point in the edge of Beaufort Harbor; thence along the edge of Beaufort Harbor the following courses and distances: S89°00'00"W, 12.37'; N28°28'49"W, 24.80'; S71°36'56"W, 28.45' to an existing nail in a creosote post; S01°22'05"W, 49.14'; S15°34'38"E, 182.10'; S58°13'23"E, 40.28'; N74°32'54"E, 105.85'; N59°12'29"E, 83.37'; N66°43'47"E, 70.96'; S78°24'56"E, 41.14'; S36°10'35"E, 44.42'; S44°07'35"E, 25.77'; S37°22'43"E, 210.64'; S36°08'45"E, 348.61'; S17°14'01"E, 366.19'; S54°17'15"E, 41.65'; S22°09'34"E, 245.04'; S15°04'32"E, 152.64'; S06°46'38"E, 135.62' to an iron pipe set; S12°02'16"W, 165.95' to a point in the edge of Morgan Creek; thence along the edge of Morgan Creek the following courses and distances: N86°28'40"W, 174.04'; N60°35'41"W, 187.27'; N50°17'39"W, 247.04'; N42°27'17"W, 147.88' to an iron pipe set; N29°17'00"W, 272.07', N02°40'06"W, 55.18' to an iron pipe set; N00°57'22"W, 60.38'; N30°16'36"W, 184.53'; N12°12'28"W, 148.29'; N31°22'23"E, 128.20'; N30°26'21"W, 103.65'; N26°03'46"W, 198.76'; S80°17'47"W, 15.50'; N12°51'23"W, 272.34'; N66°18'03"W, 53.89' to a point, the southeast corner of Lot 6, "Breakwater Spit"; thence S89°00'00"W, 225.00' to an existing iron pipe, the southwest corner of Lot 3, "Breakwater Spit" in the eastern right-of-way of Morgan Street; thence with said right-of-way of Morgan Street N01°00'00"W, 68.30' to an existing iron pipe, the northwest corner of Lot 3, "Breakwater Spit"; thence continuing with said right-of-way of Morgan Street N89°00'00"W, 70.40' to the point of beginning, containing 20.14 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2004-38, § 1, 10-12-2004) 
[117]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2005. 
    Being a tract of land located in MOREHEAD CITY, CARTERET COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA. 
    Beginning at a point. Said point being N62°52'09"E 67.30 feet from an existing P.K. nail at the centerline intersection of Country Club Road and Country Club Court. From said point of beginning N86°50'56"E 105.50 feet to a point, thence N13°22'45"W 210.02 feet to a point on the southeast corner of the Gene McClung property as recorded in DB 911 PG 221, thence S89°45'31"W 100.9 feet. Thence S89°47'26"W 100.01 feet to a point along the southern property line. Thence S89°47'53"W 120.44 feet to a point. Thence S12°33'30"E 77.43 feet. Thence S76°39'56"W 60.17 feet. Thence S80°42'00"W 175.89 feet to a point along the southwestern property line. Thence N09°18'00"W 310.00 feet to a point along the southwestern property line. Thence to a point N09°18'00"W 109.86 feet. Thence along a curve with a radius of 35.00 feet. Thence N70°05'40"E 106.02 feet. Thence N19°54'20"W 205.16 feet. Thence S83°30'36"W 321.07 feet. Thence N47°38'01"W 293.33 feet. Thence N04°59'17"W 254.71 feet. Thence N35°50'00"E 704.89 feet to a point on the mean high water line of the Newport River, thence to a point along the northern property line and mean high water line of the Newport River with a tie line of N81°25'38"E 1,078.76 feet. Thence to a point on the eastern property line, Thence S16°45'07"E 117.50 to a point along the eastern property line. Thence S16°24'33"W 1,619.86 feet to a point along the eastern property line. Thence S16°24'33"W 165.68 to a point along the southeastern property line. Thence S75°40'43"W 12.47 feet to the point of beginning and containing 38.82 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2004-43,§ 1, 12-14-2004) 
[118]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2004. 
Parcel 1 
    In the Morehead Township: beginning at a point in the south line of the right-of-way of the Country Club Road, said point being the northwest corner of that lot conveyed by K.S. Swinson and wife, Bertha Guthrie Swinson, to Gerald R. Swinson and wife, Yvonne G. Swinson, by deed recorded in Book 214, page 249; thence South 6-15 East, along the west line of the said Gerald R. Swinson lot, 200 feet to a point; thence North 80-20 East, along the south line of said Gerald R. Swinson lot, 200 feet to a point; thence South 6-15 East, 177.21 feet to a point; thence continuing South 6-15 East, 591 feet to a point; thence South 80-32 East, 673.8 feet to a point; thence South 79-52 East, 679.72 feet to a point; thence South 22-32 West, 872.5 feet to a point; thence North 62-15 West, 1,470.01 feet to a point; thence South 27-45 West, 400 feet to a point; thence North 5-39 East, 245.8 feet to a point; thence North 6-34 West, 887.13 feet to a point; thence North 20-05 West, 266.78 feet to a point; thence South 75-30 East, 30 feet to a point; thence North 14-30 East, 41.35 feet to a point; thence North 86-12 East, 146.06 feet to a point; thence North 2-30 East, 191.9 feet to a point in the south line of the Country Club Road; and thence North 81-32 East, along the south line of the Country Club Road, 162.2 feet to the point of beginning; containing 34 acres. 
Parcel 2 
    Beginning at an iron pipe in the northern margin of the A and E.C. Railroad right-of-way; said iron pipe being located at the southeast corner of the T.A. Loving and Company property; from said point of beginning described above, running thence N27-45E a distance of 400.0 feet to an iron pipe being located at the northeast corner of the T.A. Loving and Company property; running thence S62-15E a distance of 328.0 feet to a stake in Ash Branch, the northwest corner of the Theodore Hall property; running thence S20-15W a distance of 404.0 feet to a pipe in the northern margin of the A. and E.C. Railroad right-of-way marking the southwest corner of the Theodore Hall property; running thence along the A. and E.C. Railroad right-of-way N62-15W a distance of 394.0 feet to the point or place of beginning, together with all right, title and interest of the Grantors in and to the right-of-way of the A. and E.C. Railroad lying south of the above described property. 
    Grantors also grant to Grantee whatever rights grantors may have in and to that 60 foot wide easement lying north of the above described property and beginning at the northwest corner of the T.A. Loving and Company property and running along the north line of the T.A. Loving and Company property and the north line of the above described property to the northwest corner of the Theodore Hall property; containing 1.243 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2004-08, § 1, 5-11-2004) 
[119]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of March, 2005. 
    Beginning at a P.K. nail in the centerline of South Harbor Drive, said point being located S83°41'49"E - 682.53' from the centerline intersections of South Harbor Drive and Harbor Drive (NCSR 1297); thence running from said point of beginning N04°35'02"W - 31.02' to an existing iron pipe in the northern right-of-way line of South Harbor Drive said iron pipe also being the southern property line of Lot 35, Spooner Creek Subdivision, Map Book 9, Page 61; thence running along and with said Lot 35 line. The following courses and distances; S83°51'21"E - 139.69' to an existing concrete monument N61°53'14"E - 69.26 to an existing concrete monument N61°46'48"E - 59.37' past an existing iron pipe on line to the eastern edge of a 0.80' concrete bulkhead on Spooners Creek; thence running with said bulkhead and Spooners Creek S41°24'07"E - 2.19' and S39°30'02"E - 9.00' to a point in the eastern edge of a concrete slab along Spooners Creek; thence running along and with said concrete slab and Spooners Creek S32°54'55"E - 114.22' to a point in the northern end of a 2' concrete bulkhead; thence running along the northern edge of said bulkhead N61°21'58"E - 1.10' to the eastern outside edge of said bulkhead and Spooners Creek; thence running with the outside edge of the concrete bulkhead and Spooners Creek. The following courses and distances; S28°38'02"E - 17.20'; S30°32'51"E - 7.22'; S27°48'05"E - 152.02'; S28°28'30"E - 7.87'; S28°15'13"E - 186.74'; S87°55'05"E - 174.54'; S87°11'46"E - 334.37'; S65° 37'37"E - 204.23'; S02°47'36"W - 24.78'; S00°31'18"E - 93.33'; thence continuing along with said outside edge of the concrete bulkhead and Bogue Sound the following courses and distances; S38°11'50"W - 24.68'; S67°02'10"W - 34.20'; N84°02'34"W - 343.39'; S62°17'02"W - 95.24'; N77°31'31"W - 15.98'; N66°32'27"W - 5.73'; N51°23'24"W - 52.19'; N76°13'56"W - 83.08'; S88°28'29"W - 36.02'; S77°27'17"W - 52.27'; N85°45'00"W - 148.05'; N73°08'41"W - 64.26'; N52°29'13"W - 103.05' to a P.K. nail; N65°38'30"W - 27.64' to a P.K. nail; N69°51'22"W - 141.65' to a P.K. nail; N70°41'02"W - 40.21' to a P.K. nail and N81°55'38"W - 129.20' to a P.K. nail in the eastern property line of Lot 11, Spooner Creek Harbor West, Map Book 8, Page 89; thence running with said eastern line of Lot 11 N06°22'27"E - 372.99' to an existing iron in the southern right-of-way of South Harbor Drive; thence running along and with said right-of-way S83°57'21"E - 89.32' to an existing iron pipe; thence leaving said right-of-way and running N04°35'02"W - 30.01' to the point and place of beginning; containing 9.54 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 1, 3-8-2005) 
[120]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2005. 
    Beginning at a nail in the centerline intersection of Garden Road and Old Gate Road. Thence S 00° 06' 20" S 30.43 feet to an iron pipe on the right-of-way of Old Gate Road. Thence S 84° 55' 00" W 99.94 feet to a existing iron on said right-of-way, being the point of place of beginning. Thence S 05° 05' 00" E 239.25 feet to a new iron rod. Thence S 89° 36' 36" W 100.34 feet to an existing iron pipe. Thence N 05° 05' 00" W 231.04 feet an iron pipe on the right-of-way of Old Gate Road. Thence N 84° 55' 00" E 100.00 feet to the point of place of beginning. Containing .54 acres in Morehead Township in Carteret County. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 6-14-2005) 
[121]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2005. 
    Beginning at a point marked by an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street Extension located the following three courses and distances from the intersection of the centerline of Bridges Street Extension and Friendly Road: (1) S 67-31-56 E 100.19 feet to a point (in the centerline of Bridges Street Extension), (2) N 22-28-04 E 50 feet to a point in the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street Extension, (3) with the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street Extension S 67-31-56 E 999.22 feet to the point or place of beginning. From said point of place of beginning run thence N 22-29-11 E 344.88 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe; cornering and running thence S 67-30-49 E 632.81 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe in the Longley Supply Company line (now or formerly); cornering and running thence S 23-30-30 W 363.40 feet to a point in the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street Extension; thence with the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street Extension in a curve to the left, if in a straight line N 62-25-26 W 153.27 feet to a point; thence continuing with the right-of-way line of Bridges Street Extension N 22-28-04 E 5.0 feet to a point; thence with the right-of-way line of Bridges Street Extension in a curve to the left; if in a straight line N 67-21-09 W 5.88 feet; thence continuing with the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street Extension N 67-31-56 W 467.78 feet to the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1, 6-14-2005) 
[122]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 28th day of February, 2005. 
    Beginning at a concrete monument in the southerly property line of U.S. Highway 70, which southerly property line of U.S. Highway 70 runs parallel with and is located a distance of 50 feet in a southerly direction from the center line of the east bound lane of said U.S. Highway 70, as shown on the plat of survey hereinafter referred to, said beginning point being reached by commencing at a concrete monument in the southerly property line of U.S. Highway 70, said concrete monument being located at the northwest corner of the D.B. Turner property, thence running in an easterly direction along and with the southerly property line of said U.S. Highway 70 a distance of 692.5 feet to a concrete monument located at the northeast corner of the B.O. Ketner land, the point and place of beginning, thence from said beginning point South 71°23'04" East a distance of 150.0 feet to a concrete monument, thence South 1°07'08" West a distance of 304.49 feet to a concrete monument, thence North 71°23'04" West a distance of 150.0 feet to a concrete monument, thence North 1°07'08" East a distance of 304.49 feet to a concrete monument, the point and place of beginning, said parcel containing 1.0 acre, more or less, all in accordance with that certain survey prepared by C.C. King, Registered Surveyor, Beaufort, North Carolina, labeled "Plot plan for Wildwood Fire Dept." and dated October 4, 1976. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, § 1, 2-8-2005) 
[123]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2005. 
TRACT 1: 
Beginning at an iron pipe located in the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70, which iron pipe is more particularly located as follows: Begin at a P.K. nail set at the intersection of the centerlines of Bridges Street Extension and U.S. Highway 70 (westbound lane); thence, North 68°55'35" West 546.97 feet to a point; thence North 71°49'50" West 276.87 feet to a P.K. nail set in the centerline of Highway 70 (westbound lane); thence North 18°10'10" East 44.26 feet to a iron rod in the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70, being the point and place of beginning; thence from said point and place of beginning, North 22°18'16" East 323.92 feet to an existing iron rod; thence, North 60°15'00" West 85.03 feet to an existing iron rod; thence, South 30°04'03" West 118.20 feet to an existing iron rod; thence South 31°55'13" West 120.31 feet to an existing iron rod; thence, South 69°06'39" East 93.77 feet to an existing iron rod; thence, South 13°20'53" West 103.63 feet to an existing iron rod in the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70; thence South 72°17'07" East 10.57 feet to an existing iron rod being the point and place of beginning. 
TRACT 2: 
Beginning at an iron pipe located at the northwest corner of that property described in Deed Book 320, Page 61, Carteret County Registry which iron pipe is more particularly located as follows: Begin at a P.K. nail set at the intersection of the centerlines of Bridges Street Extension and U.S. Highway 70 (westbound lane); thence, North 68°55'35" West 546.97 feet to a point; thence, North 71°49'50" West 276.87 feet to a P.K. nail set in the centerline of Highway 70 (westbound lane); thence, North 18°10'10" East 44.26 feet to a iron rod in the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70; thence, North 22°18'16" East 323.92 feet to an existing iron rod being the point and place of beginning; thence from said point and place of beginning, North 60°15'00" West 85.03 feet to an existing iron rod; thence, North 30°22'30" East 306.42 feet to an existing iron rod set in the boundary of the North Carolina Railroad Company property; thence, with the boundary of the North Carolina Railroad Company property South 59°31'09" East 103.00 feet to an existing iron rod; thence, leaving said boundary and running South 33°43'51" West 305.91 feet to the point and place of beginning, constituting .67 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1, 6-14-2005) 
[124]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of August, 2005. 
    Being all of Lot Six (6), Block "EE" of the Mandy Farms Subdivision, Section III, as per survey thereof by Powell Surveying Co., dated June 29, 1981, as recorded in Map Book 18, page 21, Carteret County Registry. This conveyance is made and accepted subject to those restrictive covenants recorded in Book 458, page 491, and Book 491, page 459, Carteret County Registry, and is further subject to such other easements, restrictions and rights-of-way as appear of record in the Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 2005-24, § 1, 8-9-2005) 
[125]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of September, 2005. 
    Beginning at an existing iron pipe on the northern right-of-way of Radio Island Drive, said iron pipe being the southwestern corner of Robert K. Brown Property as described in Deed Book 732, Page 841 of the Carteret County Register of Deeds Office. From the above described beginning, so located, running thence as follows: With the northern right-of-way of Radio Island Drive, S 55°44'00" W 559.54'; thence leaving the northern right-of-way of Radio Island Drive, N 17°23'30" W 298.28' to a point on the Newport River; thence with the Newport River, N 27°23'36" E 18.24', N 65°06'43" E 28.68', N 44°53'12" E 69.34', S 87°09'21" E 18.46', S 37°18'02" E 44.10', S 50°19'15" E 56.49', S 32°07'41" E 19.41', S 32°41'05" E 1.66', N 64°30'37" E 186.71', N 56°35'39" E 143.15' and N 52°08'40" E 0.94'; thence leaving the Newport River, S 34°16'00" E 141.36' to the point of beginning containing 2.372 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2005-27, § 1, 9-13-2005) 
[126]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of September, 2005. 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County, NC, and more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a concrete monument located S 64°34'00" E, 216.02' from the northeastern intersection of rights-of-way of U.S. Highway 70 and Industrial Drive; thence from said point of beginning N 25°27'00" E to and continuing with the eastern line of Industrial Park Subdivision as recorded in Map Book 15, Page 49, to the southeastern corner of Lot 9 of said subdivision; thence with the lines of Lot 9, N 64°33'00" W, 199.71' and N 41°39'24" E, 95.49' to the southern right-of-way of the North Carolina Railroad (200') thence with same S 60°46'00" W, 173.46' to the northeastern corner of Lot 9, aforesaid; thence continuing with the southern right-of-way line of the North Carolina Railroad, S 60°45'12" E, 1,555.23' to the northwestern corner of Flowers Development Corp.; thence with the western line of the Flowers tract S 25°27'00" W, 1,052.13' to a concrete monument in the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70; thence with said right-of-way line the following 5 (five) courses and distances: N 64°53'00" W, 299.51'; N 64°32'00" W, 60.00'; N 64°35'00", 299.98'; N 64°32'00" W, 280.00'; and N 64°33'00" W, 200.95' to the southeastern corner of the now or former Dennis Munden tract; thence with said tract the following 3 (three) courses and distances: N 25°24'00" E, 279.63'; N 64°39'00" W, 209.98'; and S 25°27'56" W, 277.02', to a point in the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70; thence with right-of-way line, N 65°09'08" W, 201.12' to the point and place of beginning; containing 38.37 acres by analytic geometry; all bearings reference Map Book 3, Page 130. 
(Ord. No. 2005-28, § 1, 9-13-2005) 
[127]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of October, 2005. 
    Beginning at the right-of-way of Bridges Street Extension North right-of-way at P.C. Station 31+27.27 and having a radius of 1,482.39 feet; thence running S 53°39'58" W 182.04 feet to an existing iron rod being the point of place of beginning; thence N 72°09'13" E 216.63 feet to a railroad spike in the centerline of Vashti Drive; thence running with said centerline S 02°09'15" W 158.47 feet to a nail in said road; thence N 87°58'22" W 30.00 feet to a right-of-way monument on the south side of Vashti Drive, being P.T. Station 15+15.00 and having a radius of 150.00 [feet]; thence S 16°16'50" E 111.32 feet to a new iron rod on said right-of-way; thence S 55°42'26" W 5.73 feet to the right-of-way of Bridges Street Extension; thence S 44°23'20" E 281.26 feet to the point of place of beginning. Being a part of Lot 3 Map Book 23 Page 103 and containing 0.55 acreage, in Morehead Township, Carteret County. 
(Ord. No. 2005-33, § 1, 10-11-2005) 
[128]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of January, 2006. 
    Being all of Lot #5, in the Friendly Subdivision, section I, as the same is identified in map of John W. Collier Registered Surveyor, dated October 15, 1976, of record in Map Book 14, Page 36, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-10-2006) 
[129]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of January, 2006. 
    Beginning at an iron stake in the eastern property line of Wayne See's 6.48 acre tract, said point also being in the western property line of Dever Rouse McNeil and said point also being N 22°29'38" E 372.43 feet from an iron stake in the southern right-of-way line of Pond Drive; thence running from said point of beginning along and with the southern right-of-way line of Mattie Street the following courses and distances: N 67°30'22" W 297.18 feet; thence N 69°52'53" W 63.29 feet (chord distance of a curve); thence running with said right-of-way N 72°15'24" W 157.75 [feet]; thence N 71°37'52" W 44.34 feet (chord distance of a curve); thence with a transition curve S 65°30'17" W 41.29 feet (chord distance of a curve) to a point in the eastern right-of-way of Ryan Drive; thence running with said right-of-way of Ryan Drive the following courses and distances: N 22°00'50" E 120.18 [feet]; thence N 22°00'50" E 335.78 [feet] to a point in the southern property line of Richard Wayne See, D/B/A; thence running with said See property line the following courses and distances: S 68°08'36" E 474.92 [feet] to an iron stake; thence S 59°45'36" E 179.98 feet to a concrete monument; thence running S 55°45'36" E 42.39 feet to a concrete monument in the northwest corner of the Dever Rouse McNeil property; thence running along and with said McNeil's western property line S 22°29'38" W 315.26 feet; thence S 22°29'38" W 60.00 [feet] to the place and point of beginning; containing 6.48 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 1-10-2006) 
[130]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 28th day of February, 2006. 
    Beginning at a nail in the centerline intersection of S.R. 1175 and S.R. 1205; thence S 87°08'24" E 466.31 feet to an iron pipe on the right-of-way of S.R. 1205, being the point of place of beginning; thence N 89°04'41" E 142.93 feet along said right-of-way to an existing iron pipe; thence S 03°31'37" W 116.04 feet to a nail in a wood seawall; thence N 88°56'09" W 136.07 feet to an existing iron pipe at the water edge; thence N 00°08'40" E 111.00 feet to the said right-of-way being the point of place of beginning. In Morehead Township in Carteret County containing 0.36 acre, and being lots 2, 3 and part of lot 4 in the Thoroughfare Subdivision. Map Book 1 Page 214 in the Carteret County Register. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 2-14-2006) 
[131]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of March, 2006. 
    Beginning at a point marked by an existing iron pin in the northern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70 and being a common corner with the southeast corner of the property of St. Marks Church, now or formerly, and from said point and place of beginning, N 05°35'15" W 206.59 feet to an existing iron pin; thence S 82°28'39" E 121.45 feet to an existing iron pin; thence S 00°22'07" E 224.74 feet to a pin in the northern boundary of Highway 70; thence along the northern boundary of Highway 70 N 70°59'54" W 107.59 to the point and place of beginning, then taking approximately 0.54 acres and being depicted on a survey by James I. Phillips Land Surveying, PA, bearing job number 03DATA/03090H0, dated August 21, 2003, which survey is incorporated herein by reference, and also being in all respects the identical property conveyed to grantor herein by deed recorded in Book 414 at Page 417, of the Carteret County Registry. For prior reference, See Book 998, Page 171 and Book 414, Page 417. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, § 1, 3-14-2006) 
[132]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of March, 2006. 
Tract 1: Tax Parcel Split #6395.00.69.5694 (12+/- Acres - Radio Island). Being located on Radio Island, Carteret County and consisting of twelve (12) acres, more or less, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point in the eastern right-of-way margin of Marine Drive, which point marks the northwest corner of that 0.80 acre tract of property conveyed by the parties hereto to Carolina Atlantic Seafood Enterprises, Inc. by deed dated October 30, 1997 and recorded in Deed Book 879, Page 364, Carteret County Registry. From said point and place of beginning, N 01.00 E along the eastern right-of-way of Marine Drive, 400 feet to a point; thence S 70.21.38 E 612.52 feet to a set iron rod; thence, N 52.23 E 200.95 feet to a magnetic nail located in the bulkhead wall along Moulton Creek; running thence the following courses and distances along the highwater mark of Moulton Creek, S 36.54 E 209.24 feet; S 58.20 E 58 feet; S 41.30 E 71 feet; S 49.15 E 48 feet and S 78.00 E 48 feet to a point in the common line with the Piners (n/f); thence S 01.06 W 530.93 feet to a point being the northeast corner of that 0.80 acre tract of property conveyed to Carolina Atlantic Seafood Enterprises, Inc. recorded in Deed Book 879, Page 364, Carteret County Registry; thence N 64.00 W with the north line of the 0.80 acre tract a distance of 1,154.87 feet to the point and place of beginning, together with all riparian and littoral rights incident and attached thereto. Being the same property as depicted on that survey prepared by Larry C. Pittman, RLS entitled "Sam Morgan Heirs" and dated May 12, 2003, reference to which is made for a more particular description. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1, 3-14-2006) 
[133]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2006. 
    EXHIBIT A 
    Lying and being in Beaufort Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, bounded on the north by the Newport River, on the south by Radio Island Drive, on the east by the property of JJMS, Inc. and on the west by the property of Jesse E. Lewis, Eta, and being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: Beginning at a point an existing concrete monument in the north right-of-way line of Radio Island Drive and the southwest corner of the HHMS, Inc. (now or formerly) property as described in Deed Book 856, Page 723, Carteret Registry; thence from said beginning point, running with the north right-of-way line of Radio Island Drive, S 55-39-20 W 179.91 feet to a point, an existing iron pipe, the southeast corner of the Jesse E. Lewis Etal (now or formerly) property as described in Deed Book 306, Page 347, Carteret Registry; thence running with the Lewis east line N 34-16-00 W 141.36 feet to a point in a bulkhead, the ordinary highwater mark of the Newport River; thence with the said bulkhead and the ordinary highwater mark the following courses and distances: N 52-08-40 E 27.02 feet; thence N 53-02-15 E 7.42 feet; thence N 69-52-34 E 2.72 feet; thence S 04-56-32 E 2.02 feet; thence N 53-05-25 E 15.36 feet; thence N 44-45-16 W 3.46 feet; thence N 52-50-48 E 129.35 feet to a point; thence leaving the bulkhead S 34-15-22 E 3.35 feet to a point, an existing iron stake; thence S 34-15-22 E 148 feet to a point, the point of beginning. Containing 0.605 acres. Being all of that property conveyed to Ronald K. Brown and Barbara J. Brown by Deeds recorded in Book 634, Page 492 and Book 732, Page 841 Carteret Registry. For further reference see survey entitled "Annexation Survey for Town of Morehead City" dated January 16, 2006, prepared by Baldwin and Associates. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, § 1, 4-12-2006) 
[134]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2006. 
    Beginning at an iron rod, said point being located S 06-38-30 W then 173.34 feet from an existing iron rod located at the northeast corner of Lot 7 and the northwest corner of Lot 6 on the southern right-of-way of High Street as recorded in MB 29, PG 826B in the Carteret County Registry, thence leaving said beginning point S 82-46-40 E 61.99 feet to an existing iron rod, thence S 03-07-20 W 156.39 feet to an existing iron rod, thence N 86-50-55 W 79.79 feet to an existing iron pipe, thence N 03-07-00 E 162.07 to a point, thence S 82-46-40 E 18.01 feet to an existing iron rod, the point and place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2006-16, § 1, 4-12-2006) 
[135]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2006. 
    Beginning at the northwest corner of Brooks Street and Taylor Boulevard, being the northeast corner of Lot 6 Block "C," thence S 27-46-00 W 200.00 feet to an existing iron stake on the west right-of-way of Taylor Boulevard. Being the point of place of beginning, thence S 27-46-00 W 177.64 feet to a new iron rod on the right-of-way of Highway U.S. 70, thence with said right-of-way N 65-40-42 W 83.37 feet to a new iron rod on said right-of-way, thence N 27-36-23 E 83.87 feet to the point of place of beginning. Containing 0.34 acres in the Morehead Township in Carteret County, North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 4-12-2006) 
[136]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2006. 
    Commencing at the northeastern most corner of the Hester Tract as shown on Map Book 30 Page 618 in the Carteret County Registry. Said point being on the mean high water line of Crab Point Bay and being the point of beginning; thence, from said point of beginning, leaving the shoreline along and with the boundary of Tract 2 as shown on the aforementioned record map, N 50-00-40 W a distance of 429.31 feet to a point; thence S 29-10-12 W, a distance of 304.41 feet to a point; thence S 14-30-23 E, a distance of 112.9 feet to a point on the mean high water line of Crab Point Bay; thence along and with the meander of the mean high water line an approximate 360 feet to the eastern boundary line of the Oglesby property as described in Deed Book 399, Page 90 of the Carteret County Registry; thence along and with said boundary line S 2-34-26 E a distance of 518.73 feet to a point; thence leaving said boundary line N 88-37-15 a distance of 293.67 feet to a point; thence S 5-55-37 E a distance of 164.16 feet to a point on the northern right-of-way of Oglesby Road, being North Carolina State Road 1180, a 60 foot public right-of-way; thence along and with said right-of-way N 73-24-16 W, a distance of 669.86 feet to a point; thence N 71-35-53 W, a distance of 156.89 feet to a point; thence leaving the aforementioned right-of-way N 5-43-48 W, a distance of 1,940.22 feet to a point on the mean high water line of Crab Point Bay; thence along and with the meander of the mean high water line an approximate 4,400 feet to the point of beginning. Containing 66.33 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2006-18, § 1, 4-12-2006) 
[137]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2006. 
    Beginning at a set iron rod located in the northern margin of SR 1180 (Dan Oglesby Road) said beginning point being the following courses and distances from the intersection of the eastern right-of-way of SR 1176 (Crab Point Road), with the northern right-of-way of SR 1180 (Dan Oglesby Road); S 60-46-00 E, 112.86 feet to a set iron pipe, the point of beginning. From this beginning point runs thence N 29-12-00 E, 225.18 feet to a set iron pipe; runs thence S 61-55-42 E, 171.53 feet to a set iron rod; runs thence S 29-12-00 W, 228.56 feet to a set iron rod located in the northern right-of-way of SR 1180; runs thence with the northern right-of-way of SR 1180 N 60-46-00 W, 171.50 feet to a set iron rod, the point or place of beginning. Being Lot 3 on that survey entitled, "Marvin Moore" by Collier Survey Company dated May 28, 1990. For prior reference, See Book 1008, Page 346. 
(Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1, 6-13-2006) 
[138]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of August, 2006. 
    Beginning at a nail in the center line of North 20th Street (S.R. 1176) which said nail is N 17-50-00 E, 8.36 feet from the intersection of the center line of North 20th Street with the center line of Blair Farm Parkway. From said point or place of beginning, run thence N 76-53-06 W, 690.55 feet to a point; thence S 05-06-06 W, 385.65 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe; thence S 77-21-00 E, 95.17 feet to a point at the northwest corner of 1st Avenue marked by an iron rod; thence with the western right-of-way line of 1st Avenue S 23-11-33 W, 235.61 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe at the northeast corner of Timothy L. Grimes (now or formerly); thence with the Grimes (now or formerly) north line N 66-23-47 W, 208.69 feet to a point marked by an iron pipe at the Grimes (now or formerly) northwest corner; thence with the Grimes (now or formerly) west line S 23-22-11 W, 208.66 feet to a northern right-of-way line of Middle Street; thence with a northern right-of-way line of Middle Street N 66-29-41 W, 191.40 feet to a point at the eastern right-of-way line 2nd Avenue; thence with the eastern right-of-way line of 2nd Avenue N 23-18-14 E, 426.39 feet to a point; thence N 66-22-38 W, 60.0 feet to a point in the western right-of-way line of 2nd Avenue; thence with the western right-of-way line of 2nd Avenue S 23-18-14 W, 426.46 feet to a point in the northern right-of-way line of Middle Street; thence with the northern right-of-way line of Middle Street N 66-26-10 W, 175.03 feet to a point in the line of Nancy Laughton Conner (now or formerly); thence with the Conner (now or formerly) line N 10-11-21 E, 438.63 feet to a point; thence continuing with the Conner (now or formerly) line N 53-41-36 W, 582.73 feet to a point (a set corner 4 feet southeast of a gum witness tree); thence continuing with the Conner (now or formerly) line N 51-19-31 E, 1,057.12 feet to a point marked by a concrete monument at the Edward Cecil Ballou (now or formerly) corner; thence with the line of Ballou (now or formerly) N 53-15-23 E, 870.53 feet to a point at a corner of the June S. Aliyetti (now or formerly) property (note that said point is 46.58 feet beyond a concrete monument in the boundary line); thence S 21-01-31 W, 821.34 feet with the line of Aliyetti (now or formerly); thence with the Aliyetti (now or formerly) south line S 65-09-16 E, 667.16 feet to a point at the center line of N. 20th Street; thence with the center line of N. 20th Street S 03-59-23 W, 209.01 feet; thence continuing with the center line of N. 20th Street S 05-31-24 W, 99.96 feet to a point in the center line; thence continuing with the center line of N. 20th Street S 09-46-41 W, 100.03 feet; thence continuing with the center line of N. 20th Street S 15-43-34 W, 106.01 feet to the point or place of the beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2006-53, § 1, 8-8-2006) 
[139]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of August, 2006. 
"Tract 2" 
    Beginning at a point, said point being located N 26° 41' 10" E, 509.75 feet from an existing nail located in the centerline intersection of Business Drive and Miller Farm Road; thence from said beginning point N 59° 52' 05" W, 347.58 feet to a point; thence N 30° 03' 36" E, 471.90 feet to a point; thence S 59° 52' 05" E, 271.10 feet to a point; thence S 23° 17' 56" E, 95.35 feet to a point; thence from said point S 30° 03' 36" W, 420.07 feet back to the point and place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2006-54, § 1, 8-8-2006) 
[140]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.1, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of August, 2006. 
"Tract 3" 
    Beginning at a point on the Northern right-of-way of Business Drive, said point being S 78° 08' 49" W, 719.23 feet from a nail in the center of Business Drive and Miller Farm Road; thence from said beginning point N 76° 18' 13" W, 251.47 feet to a point along the northern right-of-way of Business Drive; thence N 10° 53' 28" E, 70.71 feet to a point; thence N 45° 54' 42" E, 36.52 feet to a point; thence S 67° 27' 58" E, 70.86 feet to a point; thence N 10° 53' 28" E, 15.57 feet to a point; thence N 35° 54' 55" W, 69.09 feet to a point; thence N 18° 16' 57" E, 102.67 feet to a point; thence N 69° 34' 34" E, 40.10 feet to a point; thence N 14° 36' 46" W, 27.11 feet to a point; thence N 20° 22' 17" E, 88.47 feet to a point; thence N 64° 32' 08" E, 77.79 feet to a point; thence S 86° 22' 25" E. 33.80 feet to a point; thence S 38° 48' 19" E, 28.49 feet to a point; thence S 09° 35' 53" W, 22.52 feet to a point; thence S 76° 18' 13" W, 42.45 feet to a point; thence from said point S 10° 53' 28" W, 403.24 feet back to the point and place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2006-55, § 1, 8-8-2006) 
[141]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of January, 2007. 
TRACT I: 
Beginning at an iron stake, the southwest corner of Tract No. 3 as shown on the Joe Williams Estate map of record in Map Book 3, page 124, Carteret County Registry, and running thence N 50-30-00 W and with the James F. Styron property 207.06 East to an existing iron stake in a ditch; running thence 46-52-16 E and with the Pamela R. Mason East line a distance of 229.97 feet to a post; beginning thence N 36-35-40 E and with the Randolph Mason property line a distance of 71 feet to an existing concrete monument marking the southeast corner of the Constance W. Mason property; running thence N 36-35-40 E and with the said Constance W. Mason property East line a distance of 352.80 feet to an existing iron stake in the Newport River; running thence S 57-38-4 E and with the shore of the Newport Rivers a distance of 328.63 feet to a point marking the northwest corner of the lands of Milton Neil Sabiston, running thence S 45-51-04 W, a distance of 696.47 feet to a point in the north line of the James F. Styron property; running thence N 50-30-00 W a distance 50 feet to the point or place of beginning. 
TRACT II: 
This tract is a portion of the property conveyed in Deed Book 1026, page 233, Carteret County Registry. 
See also Book 157, page 223 and Book 823, Page 739. 
This tract is generally known as Lot 3 of the Joe Williams estate as shown in Map Book 3, page 124, Carteret County Registry. 
TRACT III: 
Beginning at a set iron stake in the northern right-of-way of S.R. 1177 (Country Club Road), said beginning point being located the following three courses and distances from a set cap and nail in the centerline of S.R. 1177 over a 48" corrugated steel pipe culvert approximately 0.15 miles from the intersection of the centerlines of S.R. 1177 and S.R. 1176: 
1.  South 65-40-00 East, a distance of 323.04 feet; 
2.  South 53-34-34 East, a distance of 269.80 feet; 
3.  North 28-31-00 East, a distance of 30.38 feet. 
Said beginning point also being the southeast corner of the Shirley Anderson property (Deed Book 600, page 199, Carteret County Registry). 
From the beginning so located North 28-31-00 East and along the east line of the Shirley Anderson property, a distance of 289.29 feet to a point; thence North 23-19-36 East and along the east line of the Angela W. Davis property (Deed Book 820, page 430, Carteret County Registry), a distance of 348.80 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence North 04-09-12 East, and continuing along said Davis east line, a distance of 101.07 feet to an existing iron pipe marking a corner common in the lands of said Angela W. Davis, Pamela R. Mason (Deed Book 800, page 912, Carteret County Registry) and Joseph A. Dubois (Deed Book 823, page 740, Carteret County Registry); thence South 54-07-41 East and along the south lines of the property of Joseph A. Dubois, Milton N. Sabiston (Deed Book 823, page 739) and Mary W. Hamann (Deed Book 157, page 225), a distance of 806.55 feet to a set iron stake located in the west line of South Shores Subdivision, Phase I; thence South 51-03-35 West and along the west line of South Shores Subdivision, Phases I and II, as shown in Map Book 27, page 117, and Map Book 28, page 22, a distance of 748.16 feet to an existing iron pipe in the northern right-of-way of S.R. 1177; thence North 54-34-29 West, and along the northern right-of-way S.R. 1177, a distance of 115.49 feet to a set iron stake; thence North 52-27-48 West and continuing along said right-of-way, a distance of 329.26 feet to a set iron stake, the point or place of beginning, containing 9.95 acres, more or less, as more particularly described on that plat entitled "Boundary Survey for James F. Styron, Lorraine S. Alligood, Elizabeth S. Salter and Richard W. Styron," dated March 1, 1999, prepared by W.D. Daniels, Jr., PLS, and recorded in Map Book 29, page 489, Carteret County Registry. 
This conveyance is subject to those thirty-foot access easements along the east and west boundaries of said property, said westernmost easement being more particularly described in Book 950, page 547, Carteret County Registry, and said easternmost easement being more particularly described in Book 605, page 343 and Book 1048, page 434, Carteret County Registry. 
And being property conveyed to the Alice Williams Styron by those deeds of record in Book 164, Page 29; and Book 441, Page 426, Carteret County Registry, which area comprises all of Tract 7 and part of Tract 6 of the Joe Williams Division as shown on that plat of record in Map Book 3, Page 124, Carteret County Registry, and being the same property conveyed to James Styron, et al, by Deed recorded in Book 694, page 435, and to Grantor herein by Deed recorded in Book 1161, page 107, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § 1, 1-9-2007) 
[142]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 28th day of February, 2007. 
    EXHIBIT "A" 
    Beginning at a point where the southeast corner of the property described adjoins the southwest corner of the property of Joseph & Celia Eudy (now or formerly) and said point being located N 0-29-42 E 23.15 feet from a railroad spike located in the centerline of the pavement of Inlet Drive (SR 1175) at or about where the centerline of the pavement intersects the centerline of a road to the south designated as U.S. Government Highway and from that point and place of beginning which is marked by an existing iron pin; thence S 55-40 W 468.87 feet along the northern right-of-way of SR 1175 to an existing concrete monument; thence N 34-20 W 151.27 feet to a point; thence N 44-48 E 40.69 feet to a point; thence N 80-19-20 E 129.41 feet to a point; thence S 28-34-20 E 15.96 feet to a point; thence N 71-05-25 E 93.85 feet to a point; thence N 29-39-35 E 39.47 feet to a point; thence N 7-33-20 E 21.43 feet to a point; thence N 27-37 E 43.50 feet to a point; thence N 12-18-50 E 33.78 feet to a point; thence N 77-52-05 W 30.53 feet to an existing tack; thence N 82-41-05 W 151.20 feet to a existing nail; thence S 86-44-50 W 110.18 feet; thence N 0-0-0 E 77.95 feet to a point; thence N 44-09-05 W 21.50 feet to an existing iron pin; thence N 0-0-0 E 30.00 feet to a point located in the south margin of old U.S. Highway 70 (SR 1205); thence along the southern right-of-way of SR 1205 N 89-00 E 350.00 feet to an iron pin; thence along common boundary of the property of Joseph & Celia Eudy (now or formerly) S 0-0-0 W 205.66 feet to the point and place of beginning. 
    Being further depicted on a survey of the property, which is recorded in Map Book 31, Page 127 of the Carteret County Registry, which survey is incorporated herein by reference. (This description does not include a rectangular tract captioned 0.01 acres and a trapezoidal tract labeled as 0.03 acres located on the western end of the property described herein.) 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 2-13-2007) 
[143]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2007. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    Beginning at a existing iron rod on the north side of Oglesby Road, said iron rod being located S78°40'47"E 339.74' from an existing tack, said existing tack being located S72°38'09"E 845.27 to existing gear in the centerline intersection of Crystal Lane and Oglesby Road; thence from the point of beginning N 03°22'02" W a distance of 738.10 feet; thence S 75°16'16" E a distance of 5.50 feet; thence N 5°53'20" W a distance of 14.89 feet; thence N 25°58'30" E a distance of 28.92 feet; thence N 0°14'58" E a distance of 8.04 feet; thence N 56°28'34" E a distance of 23.52 feet; thence N 58°42'49" E a distance of 13.98 feet; thence S 66°02'34" E a distance of 11.25 feet; thence N 89°43'32" E a distance of 23.17 feet; thence N 74°30'45" E a distance of 38.28 feet; thence N 70°53'55" E a distance of 18.49 feet; thence N 77°39'50" E a distance of 38.95 feet; thence S 86°51'33" E a distance of 45.65 feet; thence N 81°34'42" E a distance of 13.62 feet; thence S 28°54'44" E a distance of 14.70 feet; thence S 14°33'55" E a distance of 19.62 feet; thence S 15°45'48" E a distance of 49.20 feet; thence S 16°44'04" E a distance of 39.94 feet; thence N 77°08'16" E a distance of 3.86 feet; thence N 15°19'34" W a distance of 44.95 feet; thence N 11°26'36" W a distance of 32.07 feet; thence N 13°50'51" E a distance of 15.03 feet; thence N 14°40'16" E a distance of 12.35 feet; thence N 69°51'25" E a distance of 6.61 feet; thence N 31°51'35" E a distance of 20.74 feet; thence N 33°36'05" E a distance of 25.11 feet; thence N 51°57'50" E a distance of 18.75 feet; thence S 62°40'57" E a distance of 8.92 feet; thence S 87°37'08" E a distance of 23.78 feet; thence N 72°07'46" E a distance of 22.83 feet; thence N 52°40'48" E a distance of 22.52 feet;thence N 67°59'54" E a distance of 39.87 feet; thence N 66°55'25" E a distance of 36.19 feet; thence N 88°51'55" E a distance of 15.55 feet; thence S 70°03'56" E a distance of 21.58 feet; thence S 82°20'17" E a distance of 35.67 feet; thence N 77°04'47" E a distance of 17.77 feet; thence N 84°36'15" E a distance of 13.47 feet; thence N 12°53'13" E a distance of 31.16 feet; thence N 25°31'24" E a distance of 18.35 feet; thence S 61°24'18" E a distance of 29.97 feet; thence S 2°46'43" W a distance of 23.76 feet; thence S 11°21'48" W a distance of 27.40 feet; thence S 3°38'35" W a distance of 20.66 feet; thence S 1°14'28" W a distance of 40.49 feet; thence S 2°22'49" E a distance of 29.42 feet; thence S 3°23'13" W a distance of 27.18 feet; thence S 9°39'57" W a distance of 40.23 feet; thence S 6°13'31" W a distance of 46.42 feet; thence S 0°30'59" E a distance of 40.84 feet; thence S 2°53'36" E a distance of 46.57 feet; thence S 5°25'29" E a distance of 41.78 feet; thence S 12°21'32" E a distance of 45.55 feet; thence S 13°12'14" W a distance of 24.64 feet; thence S 25°11'23" E a distance of 58.42 feet; thence S 6°28'49" W a distance of 6.73 feet; thence S 31°39'02" E a distance of 14.04 feet; thence S 41°31'37" E a distance of 5.93 S 27°17'41" E a distance of 25.53 feet; thence S 2°40'51" E a distance of 25.66 feet; thence S 20°28'25" W a distance of 37.83 feet; thence S 76°48'51" W a distance of 34.99 feet; thence S 40°41'07" W a distance of 16.27 feet; thence S 61°14'41" W a distance of 5.91 feet; thence S 72°52'32" W a distance of 6.37 feet; thence S 69°13'15" W a distance of 7.99 feet; thence S 23°04'21" W a distance of 12.46 feet; thence N 66°16'39" W a distance of 6.40 feet; thence S 78°33'44" W a distance of 13.62 feet; thence S 31°20'20" W a distance of 33.16 feet; thence S 9°28'59" W a distance of 30.00 feet; thence S 42°38'08" W a distance of 25.52 feet; thence S 38°44'09" W a distance of 48.16 feet; thence S 47°29'35" W a distance of 20.66 feet; thence S 63°09'42" W a distance of 19.88 feet; thence S 82°10'38" W a distance of 37.79 feet; thence N 83°50'03" W a distance of 9.08 feet; thence S 77°13'36" W a distance of 14.11 feet; thence N 56°48'13" W a distance of 6.05 feet; thence N 50°02'00" W a distance of 15.53 feet; thence N 61°21'19" W a distance of 11.45 feet; thence N 18°46'15" E a distance of 26.43 feet; thence N 57°28'54" W a distance of 6.05 feet; thence S 85°58'47" W a distance of 16.75 feet; thence N 23°00'06" W a distance of 17.00 feet; thence N 2°46'06" W a distance of 4.72 feet; thence N 28°02'06" W a distance of 16.04 feet; thence N 8°14'56" W a distance of 10.10 feet; thence N 15°01'57" W a distance of 44.91 feet; thence N 78°25'41" W a distance of 4.81 feet; thence S 23°45'09" W a distance of 7.54 feet; thence S 6°31'02" E a distance of 29.40 feet; thence S 34°25'15" E a distance of 8.46 feet; thence S 8°43'15" E a distance of 51.86 feet; thence S 21°04'55" W a distance of 6.95 feet; thence S 12°11'46" E a distance of 6.76 feet; thence S 44°04'10" W a distance of 17.76 feet; thence S 62°18'53" E a distance of 3.20 feet; thence S 85°48'41" E a distance of 25.67 feet; thence S 22°16'04" W a distance of 7.46 feet; thence S 16°13'19" E a distance of 6.52 feet; thence S 36°25'28" W a distance of 4.89 feet; thence S 58°11'11" W a distance of 52.12 feet; thence S 57°03'27" W a distance of 50.22 feet; thence S 54°01'46" W a distance of 45.53 feet; thence S 63°29'58" W a distance of 19.88 feet; thence S 69°52'25" W a distance of 34.03 feet; thence S 58°15'16" W a distance of 21.29 feet; thence S 73°57'39" W a distance of 30.74 feet; thence S 84°22'55" W a distance of 22.44 feet; thence N 82°26'25" W a distance of 7.47 feet; thence N 30°56'20" W a distance of 4.35 feet; thence S 76°15'10" W a distance of 5.19 feet; thence N 00°53'00" E a distance of 7.08 feet to the point of beginning. 
    The above described parcel contains 9.604 acres (418,357.01 sq. ft.). 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 4-10-2007) 
[144]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2007. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    Beginning at a set iron rod being located S 81°53'36" E 132.22 feet from a set P.K. nail in the intersection of the centerlines of Bridges Street Extension and Country Club Road and from said point and place of beginning N 02°08'45" E 132.54 feet to a set iron rod in the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road having a radius of 612.38 feet a chord distance of 22.84 feet on a [sic] 48°12'39" E to a set iron rod; thence S 73°29'23" E 83.72 feet to a set iron rod; thence N 06°00'37" E 88.28 feet to a set iron rod of the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road; thence along the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road in a curve having a radius of 512.91 feet and a chord distance of 114.67 feet on a chord bearing N 67°00'37" E to a set iron rod; thence S 06°00'37" W 312.81 feet to an existing iron pin; thence N 73°29'24" W 192.24 feet to the point and place of beginning. 
    Being in all respects the same property depicted on a survey for David Horton by James I. Phillips Land Surveying, P.A. mapped on October 28, 2004, and bearing job number 04DATA/O4277HO, also being a portion of the property conveyed to the Grantor's predecessor in title by way of Deeds recorded in Book 283 at Page 310, Book 448 at Page 226 and Book 449 at Page 334 of the Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 1, 5-7-2007) 
[145]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2007. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    Beginning at a point, said point being the south east property corner of the Thomas S. Bennett property as recorded in Deed Book 654 Page 223; and the south west property corner of the Elmer J. Lewis property as recorded in Deed Book 815 Page 22. Said beginning also being located along the northern right-of-way of Bridges Street and being located N 64°25'14" W 342.94 feet from an existing sanitary sewer man hole located on or near southeast corner of property; thence S 02°08'05" E 16.02 feet from existing sanitary sewer manhole on said Bennet property to the point of beginning; thence from the said point of beginning being a existing iron pipe, N 19°42'45" E 179.67 feet to an existing concrete monument; thence N 19°42'45" E 18.50 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence along the southern property lines of Camellia Court Apartments and the southern property line of Clearwater Apartments S 61°15'15" E 435.27 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence S 13°45'35"W 48.17 feet to a point; thence S 12°15'00" W 150.75 feet to an existing iron pipe located along the northern right-of-way of Bridges Street; thence along said right-of-way N 61°30'00" W 459.84 feet back to the point and place of beginning. Said property being 1.97+/- acres. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22, § 1, 5-7-2007) 
[146]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2007. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    Beginning at a nail in the centerline intersection of Friendly Road and the centerline of Atlantic and East Carolina Railroad, thence N 40°24'02" W 283.07 feet to an existing concrete monument; thence N 28°55'25" E 100.10 feet to a new iron rod on the north right-of-way of Bridges Street Extension, being the point of place of beginning; thence along the said right-of-way N 61°13'05" W 459.85 feet to a new iron road; thence N 29°07'00" E 412.48 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence S 61°06'56" E 187.23 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence S 37°12'53" E 296.74 feet to an existing iron pipe; 6thence [thence] S 28°56'42" W 51.75 feet to a large pine tree; thence S 51°53'29" E 259.32 feet to a new iron rod on the right-of-way of Friendly Road; thence along said right-of-way S 36°06'08" W 32.50 feet to a new iron rod; thence S 33°44'02" W 93.79 feet to a new iron rod; thence S 73°28'28" W 101.13 feet to place of beginning. Containing 5.15 acres in the Township of Morehead City, North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 2007-25, § 1, 5-7-2007) 
[147]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 12th day of June, 2007. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    Beginning at a North Carolina Geodetic Survey monument (Swinson-1984); thence N 84°12'51" W 459.91 feet to a new iron rod in the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road, being the point of place of beginning; thence S 14°30'00" W 200.00 feet with Morehead Primary School line to a new iron rod; thence 75°30'00" W 100.00 feet to a fence post; thence N 14°30'00" W 200.00 feet to a new iron rod on the southern right-of-way of said road; thence with the southern right-of-way of said road, S 75°30'00" E 100.00 feet to the point of place of beginning, containing 0.46 acres in the Township of Morehead City in North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 2007-26, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
[148]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of August, 2007. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    Lying and being located in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being lot 13, Mrs. HH Scott Subdivision Map Book 9 Page 18 and more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a set iron pipe in the south line of Country Club Road SR 1177 (60' NW). Said point being located South 27 degrees 58 minutes 52 seconds East for a distance of 329.98 feet from an existing iron pipe in the South right-of-way of Country Club Road SR 1177 and Snowy Egret Drive SR and being the northernmost corner of lot 44 Brooke Woods Subdivision Map Book 28, Page 515; thence from said point of beginning South 28 degrees 27 minutes 42 seconds East for a distance of 215.64 feet to a point located within an oak tree; thence South 53 degrees 41 minutes 32 seconds West for a distance of 1,667.22 feet to an existing concrete monument; thence North 53 degrees 46 minutes 58 seconds West for a distance of 211.69 feet to a set iron pipe; thence North 53 degrees 18 minutes 41 seconds East for a distance of 1,760.26 feet to a set iron pipe. See the survey prepared for S.F. Ballou during the month of December 2006 by James I. Phillips PLS. Said property contains 8.2 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2007-32, § 1, 8-14-2007) 
[149]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of October, 2007. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County, N.C., and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at an iron pipe in the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street Extension, said pipe being located S 76°31'22" W, 1,432.53 feet from the centerline intersection of Bridges Street and Penny Lane; thence from said beginning point and with the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street Extension N 70°54'44" W, 235.65 feet to an iron pipe at the corner of the now or former Longley Supply Co.; thence with the line of the same N 10°49'54" E, 169.17 feet to an iron pipe; thence N 85°55'05" E, 20.13 feet to an iron pipe at the southwestern corner of Colony in the Pines; thence N 86°33'16" E, 264.87 feet to a computed point at the corner of the current Corporate City Limits; thence with the City Limits S 19°45'10" W, 276.86 feet to the point and place of beginning; containing 1.28 acres; all bearings referenced to Map Book10C, Page 86. 
(Ord. No. 2007-41, § 1, 10-9-2007) 
[150]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of January, 2008. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County, N.C., and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at an iron pipe in the eastern right-of-way line of Friendly Road, said pipe being located N 33°49'20" E, 402.69 feet from the centerline intersection of Friendly Road and Bridges Street Extension; thence from said beginning point and with the eastern right-of-way line of Friendly Road, following a circular curve to the right having a radius of 900.81 feet and an arc length of 214.59 feet, a chord bearing and distance of N 38°15'53" E, 214.08 feet to a point; thence S 67°26'35" E, 244.77 feet to a point; thence S 22°33'35" W, 117.15 feet to a point in the southern line of Flowers Development Corporation; thence with said line N 67°26'25" W, 423.51 feet to the point and place of beginning, containing 1.77 acres, all bearing reference N.C. Grid (NAD '83). 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 1-8-2008) 
[151]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of March, 2008. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County, N.C., and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning in the centerline of the North Carolina Railroad main track at a large culvert located S 61°20' E along the railroad centerline 1,095.74 feet, from the centerline extension of State Road 1153; thence from said point of beginning N 47°31'10" E, 165.18 feet to a point; then N 46°31'30" E, 75.92 feet to a point; thence N 67°39'50" E, 175.0 to a point; thence N 52°27' E, 103.63 feet to a point; thence N 32°33' E, 130.62 feet to a point; thence N 87°37'30" E, 105.0 feet to a point; thence N 67°26'40" E, 180.62 feet to a point; thence N 57°32'00" E, 141.93 feet to a point; thence N 46°03'30" E, 303.74 feet to a point; thence N 75°59'30" E, 356.82 feet to a point; thence S 88°20'20" E 364.56 feet to a point; thence N 54°36'10" E, 145.36 feet to a point; thence N 67°20'40" E, 207.33 feet to a point; thence S 23°13' W, 146.13 feet to a point; thence S 36°02' E, 167.78 feet to a point; thence S 29°34'50" W, 100.90 feet to a point; thence S 58°57'15" W, 154.40 feet to a point; thence S 36°35'50" W, 279.61 feet to a point; thence S 09°38'40" E, 56.27 feet to a point; thence S 39°40'00" W, 1,147.43 feet to a point in the centerline of the main track of the North Carolina Railroad; thence with the centerline N 61°20' W, 1,243.56 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 34(&pm;) acres all bearings referenced to Deed Book 409, Page 209. 
Note- There is excepted from this description the Arthur Farm Cemetery (approximately 1/3 acre) as shown on the map of the Arthur Farm and recorded in the Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1, 3-4-2008) 
[152]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of March, 2008. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County, N.C., and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a concrete monument in the southern right-of-way line of Eaton Drive, said monument being located S 85°45'00" E 254.0 feet from an iron pipe at the intersection of the southern right-of-way line of Eaton Drive and the eastern right-of-way line [of] 35th Street; thence from said point of beginning and with the southern right-of-way line of Eaton Drive S 85°45'00" E 147.50 feet to the western right-of-way line of Asby Street (formerly Calico Drive); thence with said right-of-way S 09°15'00" W, 150.57 feet to an iron pipe; thence N 85°45'00" W, 134.37 feet to a concrete monument at the southeast corner of lot 33; thence N 04°15'00" E, 150.0 feet to the point and place of beginning, containing 0.49 acres, all bearings reference Map Book3, page 129, being all of lots 34 and 35 Morehead Gardens. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10, § 1, 3-4-2008) 
[153]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2008. 
    Exhibit A 
    Beginning at a point, a 1/2" existing iron pipe said point being located N 75° 51' 22" W. A horizontal ground distance of 8,015.47 [feet] from North Carolina Geodetic Survey, Monument V112, said point of beginning also being located N 20° 33' 36" W, a distance of 489.70 feet from a set parker-kaelon nail at intersection of Hodges Street and Blair Avenue; thence N 41° 12' 45" E, a distance of 79.83 [feet] from an existing parker-kaelon nail at the intersection of Hodges Street and N.C. HWY 24; thence from said point of beginning S 80° 39' 37" W a distance of 18.00 feet to a set iron rod; thence S 78° 19' 58" W a distance of 283.25 feet to a set iron rod; thence N 14° 42' 02" E a distance of 256.78 feet to a 1" existing iron rod; thence S 85° 12' 34" E a distance of 225.91 feet to an EIP; thence S 01° 39' 07" E a distance of 169.38 [feet] to the point and place of beginning. 
    The above described parcel contains 1.230 +/- acres (53,600.567 +/- square feet). Legal description above is for same parcels of land as referenced in Map Book 1, Page 265 for Lots 7, 8, 9 and 10. 
(Ord. No. 2008-25, § 1, 6-10-2008) 
[154]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of October, 2008. 
    Exhibit A 
    Lying and being in Morehead Township and commencing at a point located where the extended centerline of NCSR 1151 intersects the southern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70; thence along the said southern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70 S 71°20'21" E a distance of 50.25 feet to an existing iron pipe, the point of beginning; thence from this point of beginning S 71°20'21" E a distance of 422.05 feet; thence S 3°39'23" W a distance of 304.48 feet; thence S 3°07'27" W a distance of 295.68 feet; thence N 71°19'39" W a distance of 645.16 feet; thence along an arc 396.37 feet to the left, having a radius of 1,106.00 feet, the chord of which is N 28°09'24" E for a distance of 394.26 feet; thence N 18°40'22" E a distance of 189.99 feet and the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2007-54, § 1, 12-11-2007) 
[155]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of September, 2008. 
    Exhibit A 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina; located at the northeastern intersection of State Road 1153 (Arthur Farm Road) and the North Carolina Railroad being more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at a point in the centerline of the main rail of the North Carolina Railroad said point located S 61°0'E, 30.21 feet, from a nail at the intersection of the centerline of the main rail of North Carolina Railroad and centerline of State Road 1153 extended; thence from said point of beginning and with the Eastern R/W of State Road 1153, N 36°37'08" E, 241.49 feet, to a point; thence N 32°16'41" E, 86.77 feet, to the southwestern corner of the now or former J.G. and O., Inc., property; thence with the southern lines of the J.G. and O., Inc., property and two tracts owned by Carteret County the following six (6) courses and distances: S 58°29'09" E, 357.33 feet; N 82°44'46" E, 563.53 feet; N 68°25'11" E, 36.96 feet; S 54°31'23" E, 116.46 feet; S 52°50'19" E, 77.18 feet; S 49°43'41" E, 246.12 feet to a point in the northwestern line of a thirty-four (34) acre tract now or formerly owned by Ballou Enterprises; thence with said line the following five (5) courses and distances: S 32°33'00" W, 130.62 feet; S 52°27'00" W, 103.50 feet; S 67°37'52" W, 170.96 feet; S 46°31'30" W, 75.92 feet; S 47°31'10" W, 165.18 feet; to the center of a large metal culvert and the centerline of the main rail of North Carolina Railroad; thence with the centerline of said rail, N 61°20'00" W, 1,065.28 feet, to the point and place of beginning; containing 12.9 acres +/- and subject to the right-of-way of North Carolina Railroad on the southwest and a wetland conservation easement on the southeast and any power line easements of record; this description is for annexation purposes only; all bearings reference magnetic 1943 declination 4°00' west. 
(Ord. No. 2008-44, § 1, 9-9-2008) 
[156]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of September, 2008. 
Exhibit A 
Tract 1 
    Beginning at an existing iron road, said point being located S 82°46'40" E, 61.99 feet from an existing iron rod said point being the southwest corner of Horton Commercial Park Lot 6; thence S 82°46'40" E, 15.00 feet to a set iron stake; thence S 03°27'01" E, 156.00 feet to an existing iron rod; thence S 03°27'01" W, 240.67 feet to an 'X' scribe cut on top of a 24" reinforced concrete pipe; thence S 88°08'00" W, 193.16 feet to an existing iron rod; thence N 03°07'25" E, 258.19 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence S 86°49'52" E, 179.75 feet to an existing iron rod; thence N 03°07'20" E, 157.06 feet to the point of beginning. 
    The above described parcel being part of Tract 1 on Map for Recombination for Sunshine Properties recorded in Map Book 32 Page 132 in the Carteret County Register of Deeds. The above described parcel contains 1.16 acres +/- (50,382.93 SF +/-). 
Tract 2 
    Beginning at a point a solid iron stake, said point being located S 82°46'40" E a distance of 76.99 feet from an existing iron rod being the southwest corner of Horton Commercial Park Lot 6; thence S 82°46'40" E a distance of 213.75 feet to a solid iron stake; thence S 82°42'10" E a distance of 37.45 feet to an existing iron rod; thence S 00°39'38" E a distance of 23.42 feet to an existing concrete monument; thence S 00°41'31" E a distance of 154.53 feet to an existing iron rod; thence S 00°49'55" E a distance of 160.58 feet to an existing Parker-Kaelon nail; thence S 61°13'30" W a distance of 103.23 feet to a solid iron stake; thence S 88°08'00" W a distance of 381.95 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence N 03°07'25" E a distance of 30.11 feet to a solid iron stake; thence N 88°08'00" E a distance of 193.16 feet to a "X" chisel mark on the top of a 24" RCP; thence N 03°27'01" E a distance of 396.62 feet to the point of beginning. 
    The above described parcel being Tract 2 on Map for Recombination for Sunshine Properties recorded in Map Book 32 Page 132 in the Carteret County Register of Deeds. The above described parcel contains +/- 2.55 acres (+/- 111,061.80 sq. ft.). 
(Ord. No. 2008-45, § 1, 9-9-2008) 
[157]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of September, 2008. 
    Exhibit A 
    Beginning at a set iron rod in the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Hwy. 70, where the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Hwy. 70 intersects the western right-of-way line of Industrial Drive; thence from this point of beginning, running along and with the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Hwy. 70 N 64°33'00" W, 200.00 feet to an existing iron rod; thence N 25°27'00" E, 279.72 feet to an iron pipe; thence S 64°33'00" E, 200.00 feet to an existing iron pipe in the western right-of-way of Industrial Drive; thence along said right-of-way S 25°27'00" W, 279.72 feet to the point and place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2008-46, § 1, 9-9-2008) 
[158]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of November, 2008. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    Beginning at an existing iron rod, said point being the northeast corner of Country Club Heights Lot 3, and located S 89°47'55"W @ 100.02' from the northeast corner of Lot 2; thence S 61°00'10"W @ 122.54' to a point; thence N 12°33'57"W @ 60.48' to a point; thence N 89°49'23"E 120.34' to the point and place of beginning. 
    Property is formerly part of Country Club Heights Lot 3. Reference Map Book 14 Page 50 at the Carteret County Register of Deeds. 
(Ord. No. 2008-51, § 1, 11-4-2008) 
[159]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2009. 
    Exhibit "A" 
    Being located on Radio Island, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being all of Lots 17 through 21 of "Breakwater Spit and Addition" as recorded in Map Book 4, Page 7 of the Carteret County Register Of Deeds; bounded on the west by Morgan Street, on the south by CHM&S Partnership property (Lot 22 and a portion of Lot 23, "Breakwater Spit And Addition"), on the north by the Joseph D. Eudy property (Lots 8 through 13, "Breakwater Spit," Map Book 1, Page 237 of the Carteret County Register Of Deeds), and on the east by Morgan Creek and being more fully described as follows: 
    Beginning at an existing concrete monument in the eastern right-of-way of Morgan Street, said point of beginning being the northwest corner of Lot 17 and being located S01-00-00E, 300.00' from an existing iron pipe in said eastern right-of-way of Morgan Street, said iron pipe being the northwest corner of Lot 8 and the southwest corner of Lot 3 of "Breakwater Spit": Thence from said point of beginning and with the north line of Lot 17, N89-00-00E, 100.00' to an existing iron pipe in said line; thence continuing N89-00-00E, 25.00' to a point in Morgan Creek, the northeast corner of Lot 17; thence with the east line of Lots 17 through 21, S01-00-00E, 250.00' to an existing iron stake, the southeast corner of Lot 21; thence with the south line of Lot 21, S89-00-00W, 125.00' to an existing iron stake in the eastern right-of-way of Morgan Street, the southwest corner of Lot 21; thence with said eastern right-of-way of Morgan Street and the west line of Lots 21 through 17, 250.00' to an existing concrete monument, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, 5-12-2009) 
[160]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2010. 
    Lying and being in Morehead Township, Town of Morehead City, County of Carteret, State of North Carolina and more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at an existing iron pipe located at the southeast corner of the property, now or formerly, owned by Bayers Enterprise Inc. pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 844, Page 642 in the Carteret County public registry (hereinafter referenced as "Registry"), said existing iron pipe being located S 58º46'43" E 2,775.47 feet (ground distance) from N.G.S. monument stamped "BENNETT 1968" having NAD 83(2001) grid coordinates of Northing = 370995.741 and Easting = 2648842.937; thence with the easterly and northerly lines of the Bayers Enterprise Inc. property the following three (3) courses and distances: (1) N 10º54'26" E 227.21 feet to an existing iron pipe; (2) N 26º48'54" W 133.54 feet to the center of a cherry tree; and (3) N 86º37'00" W 66.23 feet to an existing iron pipe located at the northeast corner of the property, now or formerly, owned by Mary McCabe Davis pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 484, Page 435 in the Registry; thence with the northerly line of the Mary McCabe Davis property, N 84º16'07" W 188.27 feet to a point located on the east line of the property, now or formerly, owned by William Z. McCabe etux Winifred pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 575, Page 72 in the Registry; thence with the easterly and northerly lines of the William Z. McCabe etux Winifred property the following two (2) courses and distances: (1) N 3º44'36" W 14.00 feet to an existing iron pipe and (2) N 60º00'54" W 50.40 feet to a point located at the northeast corner of the property, now or formerly, owned by Stephen D. Harr etux Susan pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 864, Page 681 and a point located 3.90 feet from an existing iron pipe located on the east line of the property of Stephen D. Harr etux Susan; thence with the northerly lines of the Stephen D. Harretux Susan property the following two (2) courses and distances: (1) N 60º00'54" W 95.32 feet to a point and (2) N 29º36'56" W 12.48 feet to an existing iron pipe located at the southeast corner of the property, now or formerly, owned by Old Live Oak LLC pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 958, Page 113 in the Registry; thence with the easterly lines of the Old Live Oak LLC property the following three (3) courses and distances: (1) N 1º01'37" E 274.40 feet to an existing iron pipe; (2) N 19º26'04" W 230.58 feet to an existing iron pipe; and (3) N 5º03'41" E 75.21 feet to an existing iron pipe located at the southeast corner of the property, now or formerly, owned by Willard C. Garner etux Judy pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 1209, Page 194 in the Registry; thence N 9º41'05" E 181.55 feet with the easterly line of the Willard C. Garner etux Judy property to an existing iron pipe; thence N 36º58'22" W 100.52 feet with the easterly lines of the Willard C. Garner etux Judy property and the property, now or formerly, owned by Judy M. Garner etvir Willard pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 937, Page 161 in the Registry to the center of a rotted wood post; thence N 2º44'12" W 17.61 feet with the easterly line of the Judy M. Garner etvir Willard property to an existing iron pipe located at the southeast corner of the property, now or formerly, owned by Judy M. Garner etvir Willard pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 557, Page 354 in the Registry; thence N 4º49'00" W 190.14 feet with the easterly line of the Judy M. Garner etvir Willard property to an existing iron pipe located in the southern edge of the Hull Swamp Canal, said existing iron pipe also being located at the easterly corner of the property, now or formerly, owned by Corman Properties of NC LLC pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 986, Page 50 in the Registry and located at the southeast corner of the property, now or formerly, owned by Samuel Garner Clayton, Trustee; thence N 3º23'35" E 218.30 feet with the easterly line of the Samuel Garner Clayton, Trustee property to a point located in the Hull Swamp Canal on the southerly line of the property, now or formerly, owned by Susan Louise Clark pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 1128, Page 255 in the Registry, said point located 11.07 feet southeast from an existing iron rod; thence with the southerly lines of the Susan Louise Clark property, in the Hull Swamp Canal, the following six (6) courses and distances: (1) S 78º19'31" E 177.26 feet to a point; (2) N 46º48'24" E 130.77 feet to a point; (3) N 36º25'31" E 122.34 feet to a point; (4) N 75º58'39" E 122.62 feet to a point; (5) N 81º25'29" E 141.72 feet to a point; and (6) N 13º10'12" E 69.62 feet to a point located in the centerline of a ditch on the westerly line of the property, now or formerly, owned by Stephen Albert Murdoch pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 107, Page 378 in the Registry; thence with the westerly lines of the Stephen Albert Murdoch property, in the centerline of a ditch, the following six (6) courses and distances: (1) S 38º28'24" E 180.72 feet to a point; (2) S 27º38'20" E 218.87 feet to a point; (3) S 39º30'42" W 60.00 feet to a point; (4) S 30º56'54" E 370.34 feet to a point; (5) S 24º20'26" E 285.64 feet to a point; and (6) S 30º49'16" E 57.70 feet to a point located at the westerly corner of the property, now or formerly, owned by Stephen Albert Murdoch pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 590, Page 454 in the Registry; thence continuing with the westerly lines of the Stephen Albert Murdoch property, in the centerline of a ditch, the following four (4) courses and distances: (1) S 26º32'52" E 89.96 feet to a point; (2) S 36º15'57" E 220.57 feet to a point; (3) S 15º50'12" E 135.17 feet to a point; and (4) S 69º13'47" E 43.69 feet to a point located at the southwest corner of the property, now or formerly, owned by Preston E. Murdoch etux pursuant to instrument recorded in Deed Book 880, Page 384 in the Registry; thence continuing S 52º06'51" E 220.10 feet with the southerly line of the Preston E. Murdoch etux property, in the centerline of a ditch, to a point on the westerly right-of-way line of S.R. 1150 (Wildwood Road, a 60 foot wide public right-of-way); thence with the westerly right-of-way line of S.R. 1150 the following three (3) courses and distances: (1) S 60º11'48" W 163.98 feet to a point; (2) with the arc of a circular curve concave to the southeast, having a radius of 455.00 feet, an arc distance of 353.99 feet, a delta angle of 44º34'33" and a chord bearing and distance of S 37º54'31" W 345.13 feet to a point; and (3) S 15º37'14" W 235.49 feet to a point on the northerly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70 (a 178 foot wide public right-of-way); thence with the northerly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70 the following three (3) courses and distances: (1) S 62º11'55" W 96.23 feet to a point; (2) N 71º13'24" W 462.47 feet to a point; and (3) with the arc of a circular curve concave to the north, having a radius of 2,010.00 feet, an arc distance of 115.82 feet, a delta angle of 3º18'05" and a chord bearing and distance of N 69º34'21" W 115.80 feet to an existing iron pipe, the point and place of beginning: containing 42.76 acres, more or less, as shown on that Annexation Survey for the Town of Morehead City, prepared by EDR Engineering, dated September 30, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 2009-46, § 1, 11-10-2009) 
[161]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of January, 2010. 
    In Morehead Township, Carteret County, N.C. and being 7.25 acres, a composite of PINs 635612979008 and 636609060810 and described in Deed Book 1160, Page 426, and Deed Book 679, Page 51, and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at an iron pipe at the intersection of the northern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 70, and the western right-of-way line of Willis Road as shown in Map Book 29, Page 859; thence from said beginning point and with the northern right-of-way line of Highway 70, N 73°48'00" W, 4.46 feet to the beginning of a circular curve to the right; thence with said curve and the northern right-of-way line of Highway 70, said curve having a radius of 2,767.63 feet and a delta angle of 9°15'00" for an arc length of 446.81 feet to a concrete monument at the southeastern corner of the now or former ITAC 192, LLC tract; thence with the eastern line of said tract N 25°27'00" E, 1,052.11 feet to an iron pipe in the southern right-of-way line of the North Carolina Railroad 200-foot right-of-way (100 feet southwesterly from the centerline of the main rail of said railroad); thence with said railroad right-of-way S 60°44'00" E, 192.27 feet to an iron pipe in the western right-of-way line of Willis Road; thence with said right-of-way line S 09°51'31" W, 303.51 feet to a concrete monument in the western line of lots shown in Map Book 29, Page 859, thence with said line S 25°05'43" W, 431.64 feet to a concrete monument; thence S 79°42'37" E, 96.56 feet to a point in the western right-of-way line of Willis Road; thence with said right-of-way line S 10°17'23" W, 293.91 feet to the point and place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 1-25-2010) 
[162]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 28th day of February, 2010. 
    Beginning at a nail in the centerline of Gloria Dawn Road and Wayne Drive thence S 57°50'29" E, 318.48 feet to an existing iron rod. Beginning at the point and place of beginning; thence N 37°00'17" E, 242.12 feet to an existing iron rod; thence S 57°16'40" E, 101.25 feet to an existing iron rod; thence S 38°54'20" E, 62.5 feet to an existing iron rod; thence S 55°51'20" E, 26.20 feet to an existing iron rod; thence S 49°35'10" W, 242.19 feet to an existing rod on the northern right-of-way of Wayne Drive; thence along said right-of-way N 52°44'30" W, 135.00 feet to the point of place of beginning. Being in the Town of Morehead City, North Carolina. Being Lot 1 of Map book 28 Page 416, Register of Deeds of Carteret County N.C. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-9-2010) 
[163]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2010. 
    Being a parcel of land in Morehead City Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being bounded on the north by the lands of Willis E. Tutt, on the east by Jacqueline Dennis, on the south by St. Mark AMEZ Church and on the west by lands of Marvin Jones and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Commencing at a concrete monument, North Carolina Geodetic Station "Willis," having coordinates (x = 2659997.9966 feet y = 366441.607 feet, North Carolina Coordinate System, North American Datum of 1927) and running thence N 21°54'24" E 86.08 feet to a point; thence N 03°21'50" E 114.94 feet to a point; thence N 03°27'49" E 422.32 feet to a point; the point of beginning; thence from said beginning point N 03°27'49" E 196.28 feet to a point; thence S 13°32'03" E 205.25 feet to a point; thence N 86°32'00" W 60.00 feet to a point to the point of beginning containing 0.14 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2010-20, § 1, 6-8-2010) 
[164]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2010. 
    Being a parcel of land in Morehead City Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being bounded on the north by the lands of Glad Tidings PHC, on the east by the lands of Glad Tidings PHC, on the south by the northern right-of-way of Bridges Street and on the west by the right-of-way of Taylor Street and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Commencing at an existing concrete monument in the property line of Glad Tidings Pentecostal Holiness Church having North Carolina State Plane Coordinates of N=365833.155 and E=2666091.037; thence N 86°47'16" W 875.77 feet to an iron pipe; the point of beginning, thence from said beginning point S 10°32'52" W 14.91 feet to a point in the northern right-of-way line of Bridges Street; thence with said right-of-way N 67°31'57" W 100.00 feet to a point in the eastern right-of-way line of Taylor Street; thence along said right-of-way N 07°00'55" W 17.01 feet to a point; thence S 67°24'58" E 105.29 feet to a point to the point of beginning containing 0.03 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 6-8-2010) 
[165]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2010. 
    Being a parcel of land in Morehead City Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being bounded on the north by the lands of Clarence Monroe, on the east by Treatment Plant Road and The Town of Morehead City, on the south by Calico Creek and on the west by the lands of Minnetta M. Rodgers and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Commencing at a concrete monument, North Carolina Geodetic Station "Glenn," having coordinates (x = 2671864.240 feet y = 362322.240 feet, North Carolina Coordinate System, North American Datum of 1927) and running thence N 63°08'09" E 6,864.26 feet to a point in the northern line of Calico Creek and the existing Town of Morehead City Corporate Limit line; the point of beginning; thence from said beginning point N 24°02'10" E 372.41 feet to a point; thence N 24°02'10" E 113.44 feet to a point; thence N 82°45'33" W 298.15 feet to a point; thence N 07°43'35" E 75.25 feet to a point; thence N 07°15'37" E 75.00 feet to a point; thence N 07°15'37" E 75.00 feet to a point; thence S 82°43'49" E 367.99 feet to a point; thence S 07°12'42" W 75.59 feet to a point; thence S 07°14'13" W 74.86 feet to a point; thence S 07°45'06" W 74.83 feet to a point; thence S 82°34'48" E 20.31 feet to a point in the existing Town of Morehead City Corporate Limit line; thence along said line S 24°02'10" W 502.56 feet to a point; thence N 71°57'59" W 86.91 feet to a point to the point of beginning containing 2.88 acres, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 2010-22, § 1, 6-8-2010) 
[166]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-58.2, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2010. 
    Being a parcel of land in Morehead City Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being bounded on the north by the lands of Charles H. Hale, on the east by Jeffrey Smith, on the south by Tootle Road and on the west by the lands of Brandon Rippy and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at a point, said point being the southwestern corner of Lot 4 Ashley Place as recorded in Map Book 22 Page 27 in the northern right-of-way line of Tootle Road; thence from said beginning point along the northern right-of-way line N 78°28'54" W 101.53 feet to a point; thence continuing along said right-of-way N 78°28'54" W 101.53 feet to a point, the southwestern corner of Lot 2 Ashley Place as recorded in Map Book 22 Page 27; thence along the eastern line of Lot 2 N 11°31'06" E 200.00 feet to a point; thence S 78°28'54" E 101.53 feet to a point; thence S 78°28'54" E 101.53 feet to a point; thence S 11°31'06" W 200.00 feet to a point to the point of beginning containing 0.93 acres, more or less. Being all of Lots 3 and 4 of Ashley Place as recorded in Map Book 22 Page 27. 
(Ord. No. 2010-23, § 1, 6-8-2010) 
[167]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2010. 
    Beginning at the northwestern most property corner of Deed Book 990, Page 176, said point being located in the southern right-of-way line of Mayberry Loop Road, NCSR #1178, said point of beginning also being the northeastern most property corner of Deed Book 862, Page 515; thence from said point of beginning, along with the southern right-of-way line of Mayberry Loop Road S 78°52'00" E 209.88 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence continuing along aforesaid right-of-way S 78°52'00" E 334.35 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence S 03°43'21" W 80.32 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence S 87°38'14" E 102.55 feet to an existing iron pipe located in a small drainage ditch; thence along with said ditch S 19°14'30" W 319.87 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence N 68°40'32" W 317.34 feet to an existing axle, said corner being the northwestern most property corner of Deed Book 932, Page 186; thence S 16°18'40" W 571.99 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence N 71°53'58" W 150.12 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence N 72°11'05" W 210.04 feet to a nonmonumented point; thence S16°54'41" W 182.47 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence N 61°37'30" W 209.80 feet to an existing iron pipe, said point being the southwestern most property corner of Deed Book 1208, Page 1411; thence N 61°38'41" W 100.00 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence S 26°01'26" W 193.75 feet to an existing iron pipe located in the northern right-of-way line of Mayberry Loop Road, this being the southern most part of Mayberry Loop Road located along this property; thence N 53°57'39" W 37.08 feet to an existing iron pipe in aforesaid right-of-way; thence N 27°06'17" E 456.07 feet to an existing iron located in the middle of a small drainage ditch; thence S 70°13'08" E 46.48 feet to an existing iron pipe in same ditch; thence N 21°41'36" E 162.88 feet to an existing iron pipe in same ditch; thence N 21°39'00" E 104.72 feet to an existing iron pipe in same ditch; thence N 21°35'47" E 147.50 feet to an existing iron pipe in same ditch; thence N 21°27'51" E 62.72 feet to an existing iron pipe in same ditch; thence leaving said ditch, S 78°14'38" E 249.33 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence N 11°20'20" E 214.93 feet to an existing iron pipe, the point of beginning, said parcel containing 619,091 +/- sq. ft., 14.21 +/- acres. 
(Ord. No. 2010-24, § 1, 6-8-2010) 
[168]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2010. 
    Beginning at the intersection of the southern most right-of-way line of Bridges Street and the southern most right-of-way line of Vashti Drive, formerly Country Club Road, said beginning point having NC grid (nad 83) coordinates of N=111,624.978 meters, E=812,130.081 meters, said point of beginning being located from NCGS Station Monument Swinson, N=111,616.194 meters, E=813,132.133 meters N 85°17'02" W 2,546.05 feet to NCGS Station Monument Westhigh N=111,679.993 meters, E=812,358.775 meters, S 76°28'26" W 771.77 feet to the point of beginning; thence from said point of beginning along with the southern right-of-way line of Bridges Street with a curve to the left; said curve having a radius of 1,382.39 feet, a length of curve of 28.24 feet, a chord bearing and distance of S 49°33'59" E 28.24 feet to an existing right-of-way monument; thence S 48°58'52" E 38.20 feet to a new iron pipe set; thence S 4°16'56" E 47.82 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence N 73°43'04" E 39.97 feet to a new iron pipe set; thence S 48°58'52" E 83.11 feet to a new iron pipe set; thence with a curve to the left, said curve having a radius of 1,482.39 feet, a length of curve of 97.79 feet, a chord bearing and distance of S 50°32'16" E 97.78 feet to a new iron pipe set; thence S 22°28'04" W 48.46 feet to a new iron pipe set in the northern right-of-way line of Atlantic and North Carolina Railroad right-of-way; thence along with aforesaid right-of-way N 67°31'56" W 260.76 feet to a new iron pipe set; thence N 00°04'48" W 135.77 feet to an existing iron pipe located in the southern right-of-way line of Vashti Drive; thence along with said right-of-way line, N79°15'38" E 29.38 feet to the point of beginning; said parcel continuing 26,112 +/- sq. ft., 0.60 +/- acres. 
(Ord. No. 2010-25, § 1, 6-8-2010) 
[169]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of July, 2011. 
    In the Town of Morehead City, Morehead Township, Carteret County, N.C. and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at an iron pipe in the southeastern right-of-way line of Friendly Road in the corporate limit line existing prior to this annexation, said pipe being located the following four (4) courses and distances from the centerline intersection of Friendly Road and Bridges Street Extension: N 66-16'-45" E, 113.27 ft.; N 21-23'-26" W, 97.03 ft.; N 31-23'-09" E, 278.82 ft.; N 41-39'-25" E, 213.26 ft. (chord) to said point of beginning; thence from said point of beginning and with the southeastern right-of-way line of Friendly Road with a circular curve having a radius of 2,995.78 ft. a chord bearing and distance of N 45-29'-58" E, 188.49 ft. to an iron pipe; thence S 42-32'-07" E, 125.49 ft. to an iron rod; thence S 53-30'-22" E, 82.74 ft. to an iron rod; thence S 67-30'-06" E, 489.97 ft. to an iron rod; thence S 22-29'-22" W, 301.18 ft. to an iron rod in the corporate limits existing prior to this annexation; thence with said corporate limit line the following five (5) courses and distances: N 67-30'-49" W, 395.19 ft. to an iron pipe; N 22-29'-11" E, 117.50 ft. to an iron pipe; N 67-30'-49" W, 71.11 ft. to an iron pipe; N 06-42'-31" W, 94.32 ft. to an iron pipe; N 67-08'-22" W, 245.37 ft. to the point and place of beginning, containing 3.89 acres, all bearings reference Map Book 29, Page 884. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 4-12-2011) 
[170]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2011. 
    Beginning at a point, said point being located the following courses and distances from North Carolina geodetic monument "Bennett" nad [and] 83/2001 having coordinates of Northing=370995.74 and Easting=2648842.94, thence S 63°21'16" E, a grid distance of 5,645.12 to an existing iron rod located at the northwest corner of Tract 4A per Map Book 31, Page 981, located in the Carteret County register of deeds office; thence S 71°20'27" E, a ground distance of 340.50 to an existing iron rod, said point being the point and place of beginning, and the north/northeast corner of Tract 4A and northwest corner of Tract 1A per Map Book 31, Page 981, located in the Carteret County register of deeds; thence from the said point of beginning, S 71°20'27" E, a distance of 100.00 feet to an existing iron rod; thence S 18°46'09" W, a distance of 227.27 feet to a set iron rod, said point being the southeast corner of Tract 1A and the northeast corner of Tract 4A per Map Book 31, Page 981, located in the Carteret County register of deeds; thence S 18°46'09" W, a distance of 216.41 feet to an existing iron rod, said point being the southeast corner of Tract 4A; thence N 47°43'52" W, a distance of 108.92 feet to an existing iron pipe, said pipe being located on a bend in the southern property line of Tract 4A; thence leaving the southern boundary line of Tract 4A, N 18°45'13" E, a distance of 172.44 feet to a set Parker Kaelon nail, said point also being the southwest corner of Tract 1A per Map Book 31, Page 981, located in the Carteret County register of deeds; thence N 18°45'13" E, a distance of 227.61 feet to an existing iron rod, the point of beginning. 
    The above described annexation area = 0.96+/- acres (42,161.321+/- S.F.). 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 5-10-2011) 
[171]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of July, 2011. 
    Beginning at a tack in the intersection of U.S. Highway 70 and the centerline of Little Nine Drive extended running S 08°48'43" E, a distance of 94.67', to the point and place of beginning; thence S 71°24'08" E, a distance of 155.37'; thence S 06°38'30" W, a distance of 178.88'; thence N 71°24'08" W, a distance of 155.37'; thence N 06°38'30" E, a distance of 178.88'; which is the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 1, 7-12-2011) 
[172]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of October, 2011. 
    Annexation of a portion of Lot 1, being 11.99 acres and being more particularly described as follows: 
    Commencing from an existing nail in the southerly right-of-way line of Business Drive (80' public R/W), said nail being the northeast corner of the Larry Styron Property, a corner with the NC Ports Authority property; thence along the Styron/Ports Authority line S29°54'31"W a distance of 571.45 ft to a rebar set in said line, the point and place of beginning; thence the following courses and distances: 
1.  Continuing along the Styron/Ports Authority line S29°54'31"W a distance of 513.92 ft to the Railroad R/W, 
2.  Thence along said Railroad R/W N87°32'57"W a distance of 1,041.24 ft to an existing iron pipe, 
3.  Thence along the Styron/Carolina Concrete line N33°28'40"E a distance of 519.16 ft to a rebar set; 
    Thence along a new line with Styron, S67°32'57"E a distance of 1,008.65 ft to the rebar set, the point and place of beginning, containing 11.99 acres, more or less, as shown on an Annexation Map for Larry Styron by Gary W. Keyes Land Surveying dated 08/30/11. 
(Ord. No. 2011-23, § 1, 10-11-2011) 
[173]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of November, 2012. 
    Beginning at an iron pipe in the eastern line of that 15 foot right-of-way known as Mizell Drive, said pipe being located S 21° 37' 46" W, 507.83 feet from an existing iron pipe at the southeast intersection of Mizell Drive and Mayberry Loop Road (SR 1178), and from this point and place of beginning, leaving Mizell Drive and running with the southern property line of that parcel now or formerly owned by Rose A. and Edward P. Clark for a first call of S 69° 28' 55" E, 164.35 feet to an iron rod located at or near the center of a ditch; thence running along and with the centerline of the ditch and western property line of that parcel now or formerly owned by the Town of Morehead City S 21° 23' 13" W, 162.87 feet to a set iron pipe; thence N 69° 28' 55" W, 46.38 feet to an iron pipe marking the north east corner of that parcel now or formerly owned by Ballou & Sons, Inc.; thence running with the Ballou and Sons, Inc., northern property line and continuing N 69° 28' 55" W, 117.39 feet to a point in the eastern line of Mizell Drive; thence running along and with the eastern line of Mizell Drive N 21° 14' 40" E, 58.72 feet to an iron pipe; thence continuing with the eastern line of Mizell Drive, N 21° 08' 50" E, 104.14 to the point and place of beginning. There is also conveyed those easement rights granted by that Deed of Record in Book 659, page 325, Carteret County Registry. This property is subject to that Road Maintenance Agreement recorded in Book 839, page 347, Carteret County Registry. This is the same property as conveyed to the Grantor by deed recorded in Deed Book 1106, Page 325 Carteret County Registry. The above description was created from that unrecorded survey map dated 6-13-2012 and entitled "Boundary Survey For The Town of Morehead City" prepared and certified by James I. Phillips Land Surveying, PA. 
(Ord. No. 2012-44, § 1, 11-13-2012) 
[174]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2013. 
    Being a parcel of land known as Lot 7, Block EE of Mandy Farms Section III as recorded in Map Book18, page 21, located on the south side of Old Gate Road, near the Town of Morehead City, Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, referenced by North Carolina parcel identifier number 637611557469000 and more particularly described below: 
    Commencing at a point at the centerline intersection of Garden Road and Old Gate Road running south 86°27'39" west for a distance of 893.38' to point at the centerline intersection of North Forty Road (formerly Old Cart Road per Map Book18, page 21) and Old Gate Road; thence south 87°10'26" east for a distance of 392.97' to a point on the south right-of-way of Old Gate Road, the northwest corner of the subject property and the point of beginning; thence running with the south right-of-way of Old Gate Road, allowing a 60' right-of-way, north 84°55'00" east for a distance of 100.00' to a point on the south right-of-way of Old Gate Road, the northeast corner of the subject property; thence leaving the aforementioned right-of-way and running south 05°05'00" east for a distance of 218.68' to a point in the common boundary of now or formerly Carolina Power and Light Company and being the southeast corner of the subject property; thence running with the common line of now or formerly Carolina Power and Light Company south 86°00'00" west for a distance of 100.02' to a point in the aforementioned common boundary line being the southwest corner of the subject property; thence leaving the aforementioned common line and running north 05°05'00" west for a distance of 216.79' to a point on the right-of-way of Old Gate Road, the point of beginning. Said property contains 0.50 acres by coordinate computation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
[175]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of January, 2014. 
    Lying and being in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina: 
    Beginning at a point in the Western right-of-way margin of Friendly Road, which point is the Easternmost corner of Lot 8 and the Southernmost corner of Lot 6, Friendly Subdivision, in accordance with Map Book 14, Page 36, Carteret County Registry; and from said beginning point so described runs thence South 34-34-30 West, 128.0 feet with the Western margin of Friendly Road to the Southernmost corner of said Lot 8; runs thence South 50-08-20 West, 59.74 feet along and with the Western right-of-way margin of Friendly Road to a point; runs thence North 45-28 West, 166.49 feet to a point; runs thence North 22-03-40 East, 64.30 feet to a point in the Westernmost corner of said Lot 8, Friendly Subdivision; runs thence North 21-44-30 East, 85.00 feet along and with the Northwestern boundary line of the said Lot 8, to the Northernmost corner of Lot 8, Friendly Subdivision; thence along and with the common boundary line between Lot 8 and Lot 6, Friendly. 
    Subdivision; South 58-20-58 East, 213.35 feet to the point of beginning. Courses and distances used herein are taken from that Survey dated April 17, 1997, and entitled, "Joseph T. Trevathan and Mae R. Trevathan" prepared by John W. Collier, RLS. 
    Being the same parcel conveyed to Joseph Thomas Trevathan and Mae Ruth Trevathan from Joseph Thomas Trevathan and Mae Ruth Trevathan, by virtue of a Deed dated 4/23/1997, recorded 4/23/1997, in Deed Book 796, Page 257, County of Carteret, State of North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 1-14-2014) 
[176]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of September, 2014: 
    Beginning at a point in the centerline of the Country Club Road, which point is S 75-30 E, 300 feet along the centerline of Country Club Road from the northwest corner of the Swinson Tract; runs thence S 75-30 E along the centerline of Country Club Road, 100 Feet to a point; thence S 14-30 W, 230 feet to a point; thence N 75-30 W, 100 feet to a point; thence N 14-30 E, 230 feet to the centerline of Country Club Road, the Point of Beginning. Reference may be had to a map by Philip K. Ball of the K.S. Swinson Farm, made in January 1936, it being a part of the land conveyed to Bertha Guthrie Swinson by Deed recorded in Book 66, Page 511, Carteret County Registry, and being the same conveyed to James B. Swinson by Deed recorded in Book 219, Page 683, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 2014-30, § 1, 9-9-2014) 
[177]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of October, 2014. 
Williams Family Properties, LLC per deed book 1179 page 274: 
Beginning at an iron pipe found at the centerline intersection of the northern right-of-way of Hwy 70 & the eastern right-of-way of Industrial Drive, thence along the northern right-of-way of Hwy 70 S64-33-00 E 116.10' to an iron pipe found, on the northern right-of-way of Hwy 70, the point and place of beginning. Thence leaving said right-of-way N 25-29-53 E length: 229.83 to an iron pipe found thence N 25-02-13 E length: 50.00 to an iron pipe found thence S 64-28-09 E length: 100.00 to an iron pipe found thence S 25-27-11 W length: 279.69 to an iron pipe found on ther [the] northern right-of-way of Hwy 70 thence along said Hwy 70 N 64-33-00 W length: 99.82' to an iron pipe found, the point and place of beginning containing: Area: 27,904 sq. ft. 0.64 acres. 
Williams Family Properties, LLC per deed book 1179 page 274: 
Beginning at an iron pipe found at the centerline intersection of the northern right-of-way of Hwy 70 & the eastern right-of-way of Industrial Drive, thence along the northern right-of-way of Hwy 70 S64-33-00 E 116.10' to an iron pipe found, on the northern right-of-way of Hwy 70, thence N 25-29-53 E length: 229.83 to an iron pipe found, the point and place of beginning. Thence N 64-30-05 W length: 115.99 to an iron pipe found on the eastern right-of-way of Industrial Drive, thence with the eastern right-of-way of Industrial Drive N 25-01-43 E length: 50.07 to an iron pipe found, thence leaving said right-of-way S 64-28-09 E length: 116.00 to an iron pipe found, thence S 25-02-13 W length: 50.00 to the point and place of beginning containing: Area: 5,804 sq. ft. 0.13 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2014-33, § 1, 10-20-2014) 
[178]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of May, 2015. 
Exhibit "A" 
Lying and being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an existing iron pipe located in the western right-of-way of Friendly Road, said point also being located S53-49-04W 811.68 feet from an existing Parker Ka Ion nail located at the centerline intersection of Friendly Road and Gordon Court, thence from said beginning point and following the western right-of-way of Friendly Road with a curve to the left having a radius of 1535.00 feet and a length of 60.17 feet a chord bearing and distance of S41-27-26W 60.17 feet to an existing iron pipe, thence leaving said right-of-way and following the northern lines of Carolina Telephone and Telegraph, Friendly Properties, LLC, and ITAC 109, LLC., the following bearings and distances; NS0-20-35W 266.77 feet to a set iron rod; N36-25-18W 6.59 feet to an existing concrete monument; S28-54-13W 38.24 feet to an existing iron pipe; N37-13-22W 296.51 feet to an existing iron pipe; N61-04-21W 187.34 feet to an existing iron pipe; N61-10-22W 40.24 feet to an existing iron pipe; N61-02-05W 109.98 feet to an existing iron pipe; S28-53-27W 105.84 feet to an existing iron pipe; N61-07-28W 97.52 feet to an existing iron pipe located in a 30 foot overhead electric easement, thence leaving said northern lines and following said overhead electric easement the following bearings and distances; N23-58-25E 143.11 feet to an existing iron pipe; N23-06-50E 381.97 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence leaving said overhead electric easement and following the Stephanie Sledge southern line the following bearings and distances; S60-51-06E 590.28 feet to an existing iron pipe, S60-14-46E 59.95 feet to an existing iron pipe; thence leaving said southern line and following the western and southern line of New Life Assembly of God the following bearings and distances; S29-56-19W 379.39 feet to an existing iron pipe; S37-23-08E 150.19 feet to an existing iron pipe bent; S50-15-22E 262.06 feet to an existing iron pipe the point and place of beginning containing 7.00 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 5-12-2015) 
[179]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of June, 2015. 
Exhibit "A" 
Mandy Farms Section 3, Lot 17, Block EE beginning at a PK nail found at the centerline intersection of Old Gate Road & the PT (point of tangency or end curve) in Old Gate Road, thence S 24.5255 W 32.26 to an iron pipe found on the southern right-of-way of Old Gate Road, being the point and place of beginning, thence continuing with said right-of-way being a curve with the following data: Curve Length: 11.57, Radius: 983.31, Delta: 0-40-27, Tangent: 5.78 Chord: 11.57 Course: S 86-41-26 E to an iron pipe found, thence continuing with Old Gate Road southern right-of-way S 86-08-00 E 122.43 to an iron pipe found, thence leaving the southern right-of-way of Old Gate Roads 03-52-00 W 263.60 to an iron pipe found, thence N 75-34-10 W 78.65 to an iron pipe found, thence N 89-46-30 W 39.28 to an iron pipe found, thence N 00-06-30 W 252.17 to an iron pipe found on the southern right-of-way of Old Gate Road, being the point and place of beginning. 
Containing an area of 31,841 sq. ft. or 0.73 acres by coordinates. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, 6-9-2015) 
[180]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of November, 2015. 
Exhibit "A" 
Beginning at an existing iron pipe on the northern right-of-way of Elm Street and running with the Western right-of-way of Maple Lane N10 45'00"E 1000.40 feet to a new iron pipe on said right-of-way. Being the point of place of beginning thence running N80 45'00"W 159.40 to a new iron pipe. Thence running N10 00'00"E 245.00 feet to a new iron pipe. Thence running N75 38'10"E 179.52 feet to a point. Thence running S10 45'00"W 317.00 feet to the point of place of beginning. Being all of lots 23.24, and 25 of Morehead Gardens Subdivision recorded in Map Book 4 Page 16 in the Register of Deeds Office in Carteret County North Carolina. Containing 1.03 acres in the town of Morehead City North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 2015-34, § 1, 11-10-2015) 
[181]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 8th day of December, 2015. 
Exhibit "A" 
Beginning at a mag nail in the center line intersection of Gordon Court and the center line of Friendly Road. Running N60 15'02"E 122.72, feet to an existing iron pipe on the eastern right-of-way of Friendly Road. Being the point of place of beginning. Thence running N33 13'00"E 100.00 feet to a new iron pipe on said right-of-way. Thence running with said right-of-way N22 47'55"E 89.98 feet to an existing iron pipe. Thence running S71 27'20"E 205.56 feet to an existing iron pipe. Thence running S22 22'40"W 121.00 feet to an existing iron pipe. Thence running S35 20'51"W 136.99 feet to an existing iron pipe. Thence running N52 27'24"W 200.82 feet to the point of place of beginning. Being all of lots 9 and 7 of Friendly Subdivision recorded in Map Book 33 Page 218 in the Register of Deeds Office in Carteret County North Carolina. Containing 1.04 acres in the town of Morehead City North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 2015-40, § 1, 12-8-2015) 
[182]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30th day of April, 2016. 
Exhibit "A" 
Lying and being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being more particularly described as follows; 
Beginning at an existing iron rod located in the northern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70 and the southwest corner of Lot 10 Block C of Wildwood Homesites as recorded in map book 2 page 137 of the Carteret County Registry, said point also being located the following bearings and distances from an existing mag nail located in the eastern right-of-way of Old Murdoch Road; S22-43-58E 60.55 feet; S70-42-52E 122.90 feet; thence from said beginning point and leaving said U.S. Highway 70 right-of-way N24-50-15E 182.60 feet to an existing axle at the northwest corner of Lot 10, thence along the northern line of Lots 10 thru 12 S70-51-02E 246.22 feet to an existing iron rod at the northeast corner of lot 12, thence following the eastern line of Lot 12 S23-44-31W 182.88 feet to a point at the southeast corner of Lot 12 and the northern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70, thence along said right-of-way N70-42-52W 249.68 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 1.04 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
[183]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of October, 2016. 
Exhibit "A" 
Lying and being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being more particularly described as follows; 
Beginning at an existing iron pipe in the northern right-of-way of N.C. Highway 24, said point also being at the southwest corner of that property owned by Jacqueline Bell as recorded in deed book 1007 page 250 of the Carteret County Registry, said beginning point also being located N82-23-08W 305.48 feet from the centerline intersection of N.C. Highway 24 and Hodges Street, thence from said beginning point and following said right-of-way S88-15-32W 189.04 feet to an existing iron pipe, thence leaving said right-of-way and following the eastern and northern lines of H & M Farms, LLC as recoded in deed book 1290 page 73 the following bearings and distances; N01-33-38E 30.50 feet, S88-15-32W 21.50 feet to an existing iron pipe in the eastern line of the property owned by CP Alabama, LLC as recorded in deed book 1454 page 227, thence along said eastern line N01-33-38E 165.62 feet to an existing iron pipe, thence leaving said eastern line S89-20-43E 211.40 feet to an existing iron pipe at the southwest corner of the property owned by KAL Enterprises, LLC as recorded in deed book 1395 page 362, said point also being the northwest corner of that property owned by Larry Darnell as recorded in deed book 627 page 467, thence following the western line of the Darnell and Bell properties S01-55-22W 187.34 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 0.91 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2016-27, § 1, 10-11-2016) 
[184]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of October, 2016. 
Exhibit "A" 
Lying and being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina and being more particularly described as follows; 
Beginning at an existing iron pipe at the southwest corner of that property owned by Wadsworth Properties, Inc., as recorded in deed book 1311 page 144 of the Carteret County Registry, said beginning point also being located S14-21-45W 232.04 feet from an existing iron pipe at the northwest corner of said Wadsworth property, said point also being in the southern right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70, thence from said beginning point and following the property line of Lot 2 Tripp Betty Peter MHC as recorded in map book 33 page 316 the following bearing and distances; S14-21-45W 123.07 feet; N80-31-06W 333.22 feet to an existing iron rod in the eastern line of USPG Portfolio Five, LLC as recorded in deed book 1443 page 410, thence along said eastern line N06-09-06E 172.92 feet an existing iron rod, thence leaving said eastern line S72-28-18E 357.23 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 1.16 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2016-28, § 1, 10-11-2016) 
[185]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 30 th day of September, 2017. 
Exhibit "A" 
Lying and being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an existing iron rod located in the northern property line of Lot 8A James Jones as recorded in map book 32 page 471, said point also being in the southern right-of-way of Business Drive, said beginning point being further located S65-24-46E 466.82 feet and S24-35-14W 30.00 feet from an existing PK nail located at the intersection of Business Drive and Miller Farm Road, thence from said beginning point and following the southern right-of-way of Business Drive along a curve to the left having a radius of 5759.58 feet and a length of 207.82 feet, a chord bearing and distance of S66-26-47E 207.81 feet to an existing iron rod, thence leaving said right-of-way and following the eastern line of Lot 8B, S21-58-13W 270.16 feet to a point, thence following the southern lines of Lots 7 and 6B S58-02-39E 279.55 feet to a point, thence leaving said southern line, S06-42-42W 324.34 feet to an existing concrete monument in the northern line of the N.C. State Ports Authority property, thence along said northern and eastern line of said property the following bearing and distances; N64-50-49W 551.70 feet; N19-24-14E 607.69 feet to a point in the southern right-of-way of Business Drive and northwest corner of Lot 8A, thence along said right-of-way S65-24-46E 9.67 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 5.20 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-29, § 1, 9-12-2017) 
[186]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31 st day of January, 2018. 
Exhibit "A" 
Beginning on an existing concrete monument, the POINT OF BEGINNING, at the southwest corner of Lot 6, Webb's Park West subdivision as recorded in Map Book 23, Page 62, said existing concrete monument being located S 58°- 42'- 22" W 2505.89 feet from NC Grid Monument "River" (PID: AE5142) and N 17°-25'-06" W 1129.60 feet from NC Grid Monument "Smith"(PID: AE5141); thence running from said POINT OF BEGINNING along the southern line of said Webb's Park West subdivision N 60°-31'-05" E 157.10 feet to an existing iron stake in the southern line of Lot 5, Webb's Park West subdivision, thence continuing along the southern line of Webb's Park West subdivision N 60°-15' E 686.13 feet to an existing iron stake at the southeast corner of Lot 1 of said Webb's Park West subdivision and the southwest corner of Lot 14 of Webb's Park subdivision as recorded in Map Book 5, Page 36; thence along the southern line of said Webb's Park subdivision (Map Book 5, Page 36) N 60°-15' E 524 feet to an existing concrete monument at the southeast corner of Lot 11, Webb's Park subdivision (Map Book 5, Page 36); thence along the eastern line of said Lot 11, Webb's Park subdivision, N 40°-41' W 149.6 feet to the northeast corner of said Lot 11 and in the eastern right-of-way of River Drive (now known as Dogwood Lane) as shown on Map Book 5, Page 36; thence along the eastern right-of-way of River Drive (now known as Dogwood Lane) N 40°-41' W to a stake as shown on Map Book 5, Page 36; thence continuing with the eastern right-of-way of River Drive (now known as Dogwood Lane) N 33°-37' W to the intersection of River Drive (Dogwood Lane) as shown on Map Book 5, Page 36 and the southern right-of-way of River Drive as shown on Map Book 5, Page 44; thence along the southern right-of-way of River Drive as shown on Map Book 5, Page 44 and Map Book 3, Page 138 in a northeasterly direction to the northwest corner of Lot 8, Block "B" as shown on Map Book 3, Page 138; thence running along the western line of Lot 8 and as shown on Deed Book 1130, Page 358 and Map Book 3, Page 138 S 36°-45' E 170 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 6, Block "B" as shown on Map Book 3, Page 138; thence along the western lines of Lot 6 and Lot 5 (Deed Book 1250, Page 470), Block "B", Map Book 3, Page 138, S 09°-00' E 140 feet to an existing concrete monument at the southwest corner of Lot 5, Block "B", (Map Book 3, Page 138), also being the northwest corner of "New Tract Two" as shown on Map Book 31, Page 869 (Deed Book 283, Page 539, Parcel #2), this is also the northwest corner of Lot 4, Block "B" as shown on Map Book 3, Page 138; thence along the western line of "New Tract Two" (Map Book 31, Page 869) S 09°-00'-29" E 133.54 feet to an existing iron stake at the southwest corner of "New Tract Two" and the northwest corner of "New Tract One" as shown on Deed Book 1514, Page 218 and Map Book 31, Page 869; thence along the western line of "New Tract One" S 09°-00'-29" E 76.67 feet to a point in the western line of said "New Tract One"; thence continuing with the western line of "New Tract One" S 17°-00'-00" E 150.00 feet to an existing iron stake at the southwest corner of "New Tract One" (Map Book 31, Page 869) and in the northern right-of-way of Country Club Road (SR 1177); thence crossing the 60' right-of-way of Country Club Road (SR 1177) perpendicularly to the right-of-way of Country Club Road to a point in the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road and in the northern property line of Lot 2, Country Club East subdivision as shown on Map Book 18, Page 28; thence S 42°-26' W along the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road to the point of intersection with the eastern right-of-way of Chip Shot Drive (Map Book 18, Page 28); thence continuing with the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road and across Chip Shot Drive S 41°-02'-20" W 60.08 feet and S 39°-28'-10" W 120.02 feet to an existing concrete monument in the northwestern corner of Lot 3, Country Club East subdivision (Map Book 18, Page 28); thence leaving the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road (SR 1177) and running along the western boundary of Country Club East subdivision (Map Book 18, Page 28) S 02°-26' W 1195.02 feet to an existing concrete monument; thence S 64°-09' W 50.0 feet to an existing iron pipe in the western line on Lot 14, Country Club East subdivision as shown on Map Book 18, Page 28 and being the northeast corner of Lot 14, Block "D", Forest Hills subdivision as shown on Map Book 4, Page 50; thence running along the northwestern property lines of Lots 14, 13, 12, 11 and 10, Block "D", Forest Hills subdivision (Map Book 4, Page 50) S 63°13' W 617.1 feet to a point in the northern line of Lot 10, Block "D", Forest Hills subdivision; thence along the northern line of Lots 10, 9 and 7, Block "D", Forest Hills subdivision (Map Book 4, Page 50) N 82°-39' W 315.6 feet to a point in the northern line of Lot 7, Block "D" (Map Book 4, Page 50); thence along the northern line of Lots 7, 6 and 3, Block "D", Forest Hills subdivision (Map Book 4, Page 50) S 76°-26' W 275.00 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 1 and 2, Block "D", Forest Hills subdivision (Map Book 4, Page 50); thence along the northeast property line of said Lot land 2 N 58°-34' W 200.0 feet to the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road (SR 1177); thence along the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road and along the northwestern lines of Lots 1 and 2, Block "D" (Map Book 4, Page 50) crossing Forest Hills Ave. and along the northwestern line of Lot 1, Block "E", Forest Hills subdivision (Map Book 4, Page 50) S 46°-26' W 360.0 feet to a point at the western corner of Lot 1, Block "E" (Map Book 4, Page 50) and being in the southern right-of-way of Country Club Road; thence crossing the 60' right-of-way of Country Club Road (SR 1177) approximately perpendicular to Country Club Road to an existing iron stake in the northern right-of-way of Country Club Road and being the southeast corner of the Elmer J. Lewis tract described in Deed Book 1295, Page 283; thence with the said Elmer J. Lewis northeast line N 61°-05'-21" W 113.54 feet to an existing iron stake; thence continuing with the said Elmer J. Lewis tract northern line S 61°-50'-46" W 25.63 feet to an existing iron pipe at the northwest corner of the Elmer J. Lewis tract described in Deed Book 1295, Page 283 and also being the northern corner of the Elmer J. Lewis tract described in Deed Book 496, Page 497; thence with the Elmer J. Lewis tract described in Deed Book 496, Page 497 S 72°-08'-00" W 165 feet to an existing iron pipe at the western corner of the said Elmer J. Lewis tract, also being the common corner between Lot 1 and Lot 2, Block "F", Map Book 3, Page 138; thence along the western line of Lot 2, Block "F", Map Book 3, Page 138 currently owned by Howard Dudley (Deed Book 458, Page 390) S 34°-00' W 125 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 2, Block "F" (Map Book 3, Page 138); thence S 65°-45' E 200 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 2, Block "F" (Map Book 1, Page 138) and in the northern right-of-way of Country Club Road (SR 1177); thence along the northern right-of-way of Country Club Road in a southerly direction to the northeast corner of Lot 1, Block "A" of the Miller Harrell subdivision shown on Map Book 3, Page 107; thence along the northeast line of said Lot 1 N 64°-00' W to the northernmost corner of said Lot 1; thence along the northern lines of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11, Block "A" (Map Book 3, Page 107) S 64°-00' W 1250 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 11, Block "A", as shown on Map Book 3, Page 107, also being in the eastern line of Lot 12B as shown on Map Book 31, Page 227; thence along the eastern line of said Lot 12B N 19°-16'-28" W 30.21 feet to an iron stake at the northeast corner of Lot 12B (Map Book 31, Page 227); thence along the north line of said Lot 12B S 63°-56'-19" W 94.60 feet to an iron stake at the northwest corner of said Lot 12B; thence along the west line of said Lot 12B S 10°-27'-18" E 31.15 feet to an existing iron stake in the western line of Lot 12B, also being the northeast corner of Lot 13, Block "A" (Map Book 3, Page 107); thence along the northern lines of Lot 13 and Lot 14, Block "A" (Map Book 3, Page 107) S 64°-00' W 378 feet to an existing iron stake at the northwest corner of said Lot 14, Block "A" (Map Book 3, Page 107), also being the northeast corner of Lot 15, Block "A" (Map Book 2, Page 107) and the southeast corner of Tract II as described in Deed Book 790, Page 705; thence with the eastern line of Tract II (Deed Book 790, Page 705) N 11°-26'-35" W 30.99 feet to an existing iron stake at the northeast corner of Tract II (Deed Book 790, Page 705); thence along the northern line of Tract II (Deed Book 790, Page 705) S 64°-06'-32" W to a point perpendicular to the southeast corner of Lot 1, Block "G" (Amelia McDonald property) as described in Deed Book 778, Page 17 and Map Book 3, Page 138; thence in a northwesterly direction to the southeast corner of the Amelia McDonald property described in Deed Book 778, Page 17 and being Lot 1, Block "G" (Map Book 3, Page 138); thence along the northern lines of Lot 1, Block "G" (Map Book 3, Page 138), Amelia McDonald property, N 26°-15' W 88 feet; thence S 68°-45' W 123 feet; thence S 86°-15' W 150 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block "G" (Map Book 3, Page 138) and being the northeast corner of Lot 2, Block "G" (Map Book 3, Page 138); thence along the northern line of Lot 2, Block "G" (Map Book 3, Page 138) N 54°-00' W 260 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 2, Block "G"; thence with the western line of said Lot 2 in a southerly direction along a curve 85 feet; thence continuing with the western line of said Lot 2 in a southerly direction 260 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 2, Block "G" (Map Book 3, Page 138) and being in the northern right-of-way of Country Club Road (SR 1177); thence along the northern right-of-way of Country Club Road in a westerly direction to the southeast corner of Lot 1, Block "A", Country Club Heights No. 2 as recorded in Deed Book 589, Page 200 and Map Book 14, Page 50; thence with the eastern property line of Lot 1, Block "A" (Map Book 14, Page 50) and following the same courses and distances described in the boundary line agreement recorded in Deed Book 1284, Page 36 N 16°-39'-52" W 265.02 feet, N 17°-53'-32" E 136.75 feet, N 26°-27'-14" E 238.71 feet, N 13°-22'-19" E 246.69 feet, N 15°-35'-48" E 108.02 feet, N 10°-07'-33" E 87.10 feet, N 19°-08'-58" E 509.09 feet, N 16°-25'-17" E 435.30 feet to a concrete monument on the common line between Morehead City Country Club, Inc. and MGM, Inc. (Deed Book 1561, Page 219); thence continuing with the MGM, Inc. property N 16°-25'-17" E 116.69 feet to the high water mark of Newport River and being the northeast corner of the MGM, Inc. property described in Deed Book 1561, Page 219, also being the southeast corner of the remainder of a tract owned by Gene S. McClung and Naoma E. McClung described in Deed Book 911, Page 221; thence with the eastern line of the McClung tract (Deed Book 911, Page 221) across the marsh to the shoreline of Newport River N 16°-47'-48" E approximately 865 feet more or less; thence with the edge of the marsh and shoreline of Newport River and in a straight line as described in Deed Book 142, Page 51 N 65°-15' E to a point in the marsh, also being a corner described in Deed Book 1572, Page 452; thence across the marsh S 22°-15' E 452 feet more or less to a point at the high water mark of Newport River and being the northwest corner of Tract #2 (Morehead City Country Club property) described in Deed Book 1572, Page 452; thence along the waters of Newport River N 49°-47' E 104.75 feet to the high water line of Newport River and being the northeast corner of Tract #2 (Deed Book 1572, Page 452), also being the northwest corner of Lot 7, Webb's Park West subdivision as recorded in Map Book 23, Page 62; thence along the west lines of Lot 7 and Lot 6, Webb's Park West subdivision (Map Book 23, Page 62) S 21°-24'-55" E 460.91 feet to an existing concrete monument, the POINT OF BEGINNING. Containing 167 Acres more or less including road right-of-ways. All bearings and distances shown hereon are taken from or computed from existing deeds and plats of record and not from an actual field survey at this time and are not referenced to a single datum. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-37, § 1, 1-10-2018) 
[187]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31st day of March, 2018. 
Exhibit "A" 
Lying and being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at North right-of-way of Oglesby Road and the East right-of-way of Lantern Way running S72 37'23"E 151.05 feet to an existing iron pipe being the point of place of beginning. Thence running N05 55'37"W 180.38 feet to an existing iron rod. Thence running S88 37'15"E 297.72 feet to an iron pipe. Thence running S03 22'44"E 265.83 feet to an existing iron rod on the North right-of-way of Oglesby Road. Thence running with said right-of-way N72 27'49'W 309.04 feet to the point of place of beginning. Containing 1.49 acres in the Morehead township in Carteret County North Carolina 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-001, § 1, 3-13-2018) 
[188]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31 st day of August, 2018. 
Exhibit "A" 
Lying and being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being more particularly described as follows; 
Beginning at an existing iron rod located at the northeastern corner of Lot 6A as recorded in map book 30 page 171 of the Carteret County Registry, said point also being in the southern right-of-way of Business Drive, thence from said beginning point and following the southern right-of-way of Business Drive S67-53-45E 123.00 feet to a point, thence leaving said right-of-way the following bearings and distances; S22-04-02W 186.22 feet to a point, thence N67-53-45W 123.00 feet to a point, thence N22-04-02E 186.22 feet to a point in the southern right-of-way of Business Drive and the point and place of beginning containing 0.5258 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-12, § 1, 8-14-2018) 
[189]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 31 st day of August, 2018. 
Exhibit "A" 
Lying and being situated in Morehead Township, Carteret County, North Carolina, and being more particularly described as follows; 
Beginning at a point at or near the southeast corner of the terminus of Sylvia Lane, said point being further located N10-31-51E 1556.51 feet from the southwest corner of the Willis Mobile Home Park #1 and being in the Northern right-of-way of Bridges Street as recorded in deed book 876 page 585 of the Carteret County Registry, thence from said beginning point and an extension of the southern right-of-way of Sylvia Lane S78-50-00E 25.00 feet to a point, thence N10-32-00E 448.83 feet to the northern edge of an overhead electric easement, thence with said northern easement S80-32-31E 242.50 feet, thence leaving said northern easement S12-05-30W 739.04 feet to a point in the City limits of Morehead City, thence with said City limits line S73-07-22W 278.62 feet to a point in the eastern line of Lot 20 of Bridges Professional Center as recorded in map book 29 page 198, thence with said eastern line N10-31-51E 413.93 feet to the point and place of beginning containing 4.46 acres. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-13, § 1, 8-14-2018) 
[190]  By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. 160A-31, as amended, the following described contiguous territory is hereby annexed and made part of the Town of Morehead City, as of the 28 th day of February, 2019. 
Exhibit "A" 
All of that certain tract or parcel of land lying and being in the Town of Morehead City, Carteret County, North Carolina and being bounded on the South by the northern right-of-way of Bridges Street, on the West and North by Carteret County / Swinson Park, and on the East by Four Sisters-00, LLC Tract #2, Map Book 33 Page 590, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point at a set iron pin located in the northern right-of-way of Bridges Street in the Town of Morehead City said beginning point being located the following courses and distances from NCGS Monument V-112 having NC Grid Coordinates NAD 1983 (2011) North 363944.80 Feet and East 2669412.97 Feet, North 51° 56' 22" West 638.24 Feet to an existing iron pin in the northern right-of-way of Bridges Street having NC Grid Coordinates NAD 1983 (2011) North 364338.24 Feet and East 2668910.48 Feet and along and with the northern right-of-way of Bridges Street North 67°.32' 15" West 531.00 Feet to the point of beginning. Thence from said Point of Beginning along and with the northern right-of-way of Bridges Street North 67° 32' 15" West 219.00 Feet to an existing iron pin; thence cornering, along and with the property line of Swinson Park, North 22° 28' 32" East 299.91 Feet to an existing iron pin; thence, continuing along and with the property line of Swinson Park South 67° 30' 47" East 430.41 Feet to a set iron pin in the eastern most property line of Medical Park Partners LLC tract (Tract #1); thence, along and with the property line of Tract #1 South 22° 28' 32" West 124.27 Feet to a set iron pin; thence, North 67° 30' 47" West 211.41 Feet to a set iron pin; thence, South 22° 28' 32" West 175.55 Feet to the point of beginning, containing 2.11 acres more or less. 
Being all of the Medical Park Partners, LLC tract as shown on that map titled "ANNEXATION REQUEST 4358 BRIDGES ST MEDICAL PARK PARTNERS, LLC INTO THE TOWN OF MOREHEAD CITY" dated November 12, 2018 by Robert Chiles Engineering. Also, being all of Tract #1 recorded in Deed Book 1599, Page 314 and revised plat recorded in Map Book 33, Page 590, Carteret County Registry. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01, § 1, 2-12-2019) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix sets out ordinances extending corporate limits that were previously included in unofficial Section 2.1.1 of the Charter through Ordinance No. 2014-30, adopted September 9, 2014, as well as subsequently adopted annexation ordinances. 
State Law reference- Extension of corporate limits, G.S. 160A-29 et seq. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1973 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1973 Code, as updated through August 28, 1986, which are included herein. Sections of the 1973 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1973 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 2-1 2-2 2-2 2-3 2-3 2-4 2-9 2-5 2-10 2-6 2-11 2-7 2-12 2-8 2-15 2-9 2-40 2-1 2-41 2-1 2-42 2-1 2-43 2-1 21/22-9 8-312 21/2-1 8-307 21/2-2 8-308 21/2-3 8-308 21/2-4 8-308 21/2-5 8-309 21/2-6 8-308 21/2-7 8-310 21/2-8 8-311 21/2-11 8-313 21/2-12 8-314 21/2-13 8-315 21/2-14 8-316 3-1 4-1 3-4 4-2 3-5 4-4 3-6 4-5 4-1 6-1 4-8 6-2 4-9 6-3 4-10 6-4 4-11 6-5 4-12 6-5 4-15 6-5 4-16 6-6 4-17 6-7 4-21 6-8 4-22 6-9 4-23 6-10 4-44 6-45 4-45 6-46 4-47 6-47 4-51 6-48 41/2-12 20-16 5-1 10-1 5-2 10-2 5-3 10-3 5-4 10-4 5-5 10-5 5-6 10-6 5-7 10-7 5-8 10-8 5-10 10-10 5-11 10-11 5-12 10-12 7-1 2-39 7-2 2-40 7-3 2-41 7-4 2-42 8-6 14-33 8-7 14-34 8-8 14-35 8-9 14-36 8-11 14-37 8-12 14-37 8-40 14-22 8-41 14-23 8-42 14-23 8-43 14-23 8-44 14-23 8-46 14-25 8-47 14-26 8-50 14-27 8-52 14-28 8-53 14-29 8-57 14-30 8-58 14-30 8-59 14-30 8-60 14-30 8-61 14-30 8-65 14-31 8-66 14-32 8-67 14-32 10-1 16-1 10-4 32-11 10-6 32-5 10-7 16-2 10-8 16-3 10-9 16-4 10-10 16-5 10-11 16-6 10-12 16-7 10-13 4-3 10-15 32-12 12-20 8-19 12-21 8-20 12-22 8-21 12-23 8-22 12-24 8-23 12-25 8-24 13-5.1 20-2 13-5 20-1 13-7 20-3 13-8 20-4 13-15 20-7 13-16 20-8 13-17 20-9 13-18 20-9 13-19 20-9 13-20 20-9 1-21 20-9 13-22 20-10 13-24 20-12 13-27 28-169 13-28 20-6 13-29 28-170 13-30 28-171 13-31 28-172 13-32 28-174 13-33 28-175 13-34.1 28-177 13-34 28-176 13-35 28-178 13-37 20-13 13-39 20-14 13-40 28-179 13-41 20-15 16-1 18-1 16-2 18-2 16-3 18-3 16-4 18-4 16-6 18-5 16-7 18-8 161/2-1 30-11 161/2-2 30-12 17-1 28-1 17-2 28-2 17-3 28-3 17-20 28-31 17-21 28-32 17-22 28-33 17-23 28-34 17-24 28-35 17-25 28-36 17-26 28-37 17-27 28-38 17-28 28-39 17-29 28-40 17-30 28-41 17-41 28-73 17-42 28-71 17-43 28-72 17-71 28-74 17-72 28-74 17-73 28-74 17-74 28-74 17-75 28-74 17-76 28-74 19-1 1-2 - 30-1 19-3 30-2 19-4 30-3 19-5 30-4 19-6 30-5 19-19 30-6 19-20 30-7 19-21 30-8 19-24 30-9 19-29 30-10 19-40 30-43 19-41 30-44 19-51 30-62 19-52 30-62 19-53 30-62 19-54 30-63 19-57 30-64 19-58 30-65 19-59 30-66 19-61 30-67 19-62 30-68 19-63 30-69 19-64 30-70 19-68 30-71 19-80 30-104 19-81 30-105 19-82 30-106 19-83 30-107 19-84 30-108 19-85 30-109 19-86 30-110 19-87 30-111 19-88 30-112 19-89 30-113 19-90 30-114 19-91 30-115 19-92 30-129 19-93 30-116 19-94 30-117 19-95 30-118 19-96 30-119 19-98 30-120 19-99 30-121 19-100.1 30-123 19-100 30-122 19-101 30-124 19-103 30-125 19-104 30-126 19-105 30-103 19-106 30-127 19-107 30-128 19-108 30-123 - 30-129 19-125 30-204 19-127 30-205 19-130 30-206 19-131 30-207 19-141 30-238 19-142 30-239 19-143 30-240 19-144.1 30-242 19-144 30-241 19-145 30-243 19-147 30-244 19-148 30-245 19-149 30-246 19-150 30-247 19-151 30-248 19-152 30-249 19-153 30-250 19-156 30-251 19-158 30-252 19-159 30-253 19-160 30-254 19-161 30-255 19-162 30-256 21-1 32-1 21-2 32-2 21-3.1 32-4 21-3 32-3 21-4 32-6 21-5 32-6 21-6 32-6 21-7 32-6 21-8 32-6 21-9 32-6 21-10 32-7 21-11 32-8 21-13 32-9 21-20 32-43 21-24 32-44 21-25 32-45 21-26 32-46 21-27 32-47 22-1 1-2 - 8-267 22-2 8-269 22-3 8-270 22-4 8-271 22-5 8-272 22-6 8-273 22-7 8-274 22-8 8-275 22-9 8-268 22-10 8-276 22-11 8-277 22-12 8-278  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1993 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1993 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1993 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1993 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 2-1 2-1 2-2 2-2 2-3 2-3 2-4 2-4 2-5 2-5 2-6 2-6 2-7 2-7 2-8 2-8 2-10 2-9 2-11 2-10 2-31 2-39 2-32 2-40 2-33 2-41 2-34 2-42 2-36 2-43 2-375 2-62 2-376 2-63 2-377 2-64 2-378 2-65 2-379 2-66 2-380 2-67 2-381 2-68 2-391 2-81 2-392 2-82 3-1 4-1 3-3 4-2 3-4 4-3 3-5 4-4 3-6 4-5 3-26 4-31 3-27 4-32 3-28 4-33 3-29 4-34 3-30 4-35 3-31 4-36 3-32 4-37 3-33 4-38 3-34 4-39 3-35 4-40 4-1 6-1 4-7 6-2 4-8 6-3 4-9 6-4 4-10 6-5 4-11 6-6 4-13 6-7 4-17 6-8 4-18 6-9 4-19 6-10 4-66 6-45 4-67 6-46 4-68 6-47 4-69 6-48 5-1 10-1 5-2 10-2 5-3 10-3 5-4 10-4 5-5 10-5 5-6 10-6 5-7 10-7 5-8 10-8 5-10 10-10 5-11 10-11 5-12 10-12 6-2 14-1 6-21 14-22 6-22 14-23 6-23 14-24 6-24 14-25 6-25 14-26 6-28 14-27 6-30 14-28 6-31 14-29 6-35 14-30 6-36 14-31 6-37 14-32 6-38 14-33 6-39 14-34 6-40 14-35 6-41 14-36 6-42 14-37 6-61 14-62 6-62 14-63 6-63 14-64 6-64 14-65 6-65 14-66 7-1 16-1 7-5 16-2 7-6 16-3 7-7 16-4 7-8 16-5 7-9 16-6 7-10 16-7 7-12 16-8 7-13 16-9 7-31 16-37 7-32 16-38 7-33 16-39 7-34 16-40 7-35 16-41 7-36 16-42 8-46 8-19 8-47 8-20 8-48 8-21 8-49 8-22 8-50 8-23 8-51 8-24 8-121 8-52 8-122 8-53 8-123 8-54 8-124 8-55 8-125 8-56 8-180 8-86 8-185 8-116 8-186 8-117 8-187 8-118 8-188 8-119 8-189 8-120 8-190 8-121 8-191 8-122 8-192 8-143 8-193 8-144 8-194 8-145 8-195 8-146 8-196 8-147 8-197 8-148 8-200 8-180 8-201 8-181 8-202 8-182 8-203 8-183 8-204 8-184 8-205.1 8-209 8-205.10 8-243 8-205.11 8-244 8-205.2 8-210 8-205.3 8-211 8-205.4 8-212 8-205.5 8-213 8-205.6 8-214 8-205.8 8-215 8-205.9 8-216 8-205 8-185 8-266 8-267 8-267 8-268 8-268 8-269 8-269 8-270 8-270 8-271 8-271 8-272 8-272 8-273 8-273 8-274 8-274 8-275 8-275 8-276 8-276 8-277 8-277 8-278 8-278 8-279 8-296 8-307 8-297 8-308 8-298 8-309 8-299 8-310 8-300 8-311 8-301 8-312 8-303 8-313 8-304 8-314 8-305 8-315 8-306 8-316 8-331 8-336 8-332 8-337 8-333 8-338 8-334 8-339 8-335 8-340 8-346 8-369 8-347 8-370 8-348 8-371 8-349 8-372 8-350 8-373 8-351 8-374 8-361 8-392 8-362 8-393 8-363 8-394 8-364 8-395 8-365 8-396 8-366 8-397 8-367 8-398 8-368 8-399 8-370 8-400 8-372 8-401 9-1 30-1 9-2 30-2 9-3 30-3 9-4 30-4 9-5 30-5 9-8 30-6 9-9 30-7 9-10 30-8 9-13 30-9 9-15 30-10 9-16 30-11 9-17 30-12 9-36 30-43 9-37 30-44 9-51 30-62 9-52 30-63 9-53 30-64 9-54 30-65 9-55 30-66 9-57 30-67 9-58 30-68 9-59 30-69 9-60 30-70 9-64 30-71 9-81 30-103 9-82 30-104 9-83 30-105 9-84 30-106 9-85 30-107 9-86 30-108 9-87 30-109 9-88 30-110 9-89 30-111 9-90 30-112 9-91 30-113 9-92 30-114 9-93 30-115 9-94 30-116 9-95 30-117 9-96 30-118 9-97 30-119 9-99 30-120 9-100 30-121 9-101 30-122 9-102 30-123 9-103 30-124 9-105 30-125 9-106 30-126 9-107 30-127 9-108 30-128 9-109 30-129 9-110 30-130 9-126 30-161 9-127 30-162 9-128 30-163 9-129 30-164 9-130 30-165 9-131 30-166 9-132 30-167 9-133 30-168 9-134 30-169 9-135 30-170 9-136 30-171 9-137 30-172 9-138 30-173 9-139 30-174 9-140 30-175 9-146 30-204 9-148 30-205 9-149 30-206 9-150 30-207 9-166 30-238 9-167 30-239 9-168 30-240 9-169 30-241 9-170 30-242 9-171 30-243 9-173 30-244 9-174 30-245 9-175 30-246 9-176 30-247 9-177 30-248 9-178 30-249 9-179 30-250 9-182 30-251 9-184 30-252 9-185 30-253 9-186 30-254 9-187 30-255 9-188 30-256 9-189 30-257 9-190 30-278 9-191 30-279 9-192 30-280 9-193 30-281 9-194 30-282 9-195 30-283 9-196 30-284 9-197 30-285 9-198 30-286 9-199 30-287 9-200 30-288 9-201 30-289 9-202 30-290 9-203 30-291 10-4 20-1 10-5 20-2 10-6 20-3 10-7 20-4 10-8 20-5 10-12 20-6 10-13 20-7 10-14 20-8 10-15 20-9 10-16 20-10 10-17 20-11 10-18 20-12 10-20A 28-167 10-20B 28-168 10-21 28-169 10-22 28-170 10-23 28-171 10-24 28-172 10-25 28-173 10-26 28-174 10-27 28-175 10-28 28-176 10-29 28-177 10-30 28-178 10-32 20-13 10-33 20-14 10-34 28-179 10-35 20-15 10-37 20-16 10-38 20-17 11-1 22-1 11-3 22-2 11-4 22-3 11-5 22-4 11-6 22-5 11-7 22-6 11-8 22-7 11-9 22-8 13-1 18-1 13-2 18-2 13-3 18-3 13-4 18-4 13-6 18-5 13-7 18-8 13-8 18-6 13-9 18-7 14-1 26-1 14-2 26-2 14-3 26-3 14-4 26-4 14-5 26-5 14-6 26-6 14-7 26-7 14-8 26-8 14-9 26-9 14-10 26-10 14-11 26-11 15-1 28-1 15-2 28-2 15-3 28-3 15-4 28-4 15-5 28-5 15-6 28-6 15-21 28-31 15-22 28-32 15-23 28-33 15-24 28-34 15-25 28-35 15-26 28-36 15-27 28-37 15-28 28-38 15-29 28-39 15-30 28-40 15-31 28-41 15-51 28-71 15-52 28-72 15-53 28-73 15-55 28-74 15-76 28-92 15-77 28-93 15-78 28-94 15-79 28-95 15-80 28-96 15-81 28-97 15-82 28-98 15-83 28-99 15-84 28-100 15-85 28-101 15-86 28-102 15-87 28-103 15-88 28-104 15-89 28-105 15-90 28-106 15-91 28-107 15-92 28-108 15-101 28-130 15-102 28-131 15-103 28-132 15-110 28-163 15-111 28-164 15-112 28-165 15-113 28-166 16-1 32-1 16-2 32-2 16-3 32-3 16-4 32-4 16-5 32-5 16-6 32-6 16-7 32-7 16-8 32-8 16-10 32-9 16-11 32-10 16-12 32-11 16-13 32-12 16-31 32-43 16-35 32-44 16-36 32-45 16-37 32-46 16-38 32-47 16-41 32-100 16-42 32-101 16-43 32-102 16-44 32-103 16-45 32-104 16-46 32-105 16-47 32-106 16-48 32-107 16-49 32-108 16-50 32-109 16-51 32-110 16-52 32-111 16-53 32-112 16-54 32-113 16-55 32-114 16-56 32-115 16-61 32-144 16-62 32-145 16-63 32-146 16-64 32-147 16-65 32-148 16-66 32-149 16-67 32-150 16-68 32-151 16-69 32-152 16-70 32-153 16-71 32-154 16-72 32-155 16-73 32-156 16-74 32-157 16-75 32-158 16-76 32-159 16-77 32-160 16-78 32-161 16-79 32-162 16-80 32-163 16-81 32-164 16-82 32-165 16-83 32-166 16-84 32-167 16-85 32-168 16-110 32-190 16-111 32-191 16-112 32-192 16-113 32-193  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. of 4-10-1973 4-10-1973 3 1-8 Ord. No. 1983-20 10-24-1983 - 2-43 Ord. No. 1985-21 11-26-1985 - 30-256 Res. of 12-9-1986(1) 12-9-1986 1 32-144 2 32-145 3 32-146 4 32-147 5 32-148 6 32-149 7 32-150 8 32-151 9 32-152 10 32-153 11 32-154 12 32-155 13 32-156 14 32-157 15 32-158 16 32-159 17 32-160 18 32-161 19 32-162 20 32-163 21 32-164 22 32-165 23 32-166 24 32-167 25 32-168 Res. of 12-9-1986(2) 12-9-1986 1 32-100 2 32-101 3 32-102 4 32-103 5 32-104 6 32-105 7 32-106 8 32-107 9 32-108 10 32-109 11 32-110 12 32-111 13 32-112 14 32-113 15 32-114 16 32-115 Ord. No. 1987-03 4-14-1987 - 20-13 Ord. No. 1987-05 5-12-1987 - 30-245 Ord. No. 1987-20(a) 8-27-1987 - 30-257 Ord. No. 1987-21 9-8-1987 1 28-4 2 28-5 3 28-6 Ord. No. 1987-22 9-8-1987 - 30-238 Ord. No. 1988-08 4-12-1988 - 30-240 Ord. No. 1989-05 3-23-1989 - 6-47 Ord. No. 1989-07 4-27-1989 - 10-5 Ord. No. 1990-04 3-13-1990 - 30-239 Ord. No. 1990-11 9-27-1990 1 20-17 Ord. No. 1990-11 9-27-1990 2 20-17 Ord. No. 1991-13 7-25-1991 - 4-31-4-39 Ord. No. 1991-14 7-25-1991 1 30-161 2 30-162 3 30-163 4 30-164 5 30-165 6 30-166 7 30-167 8 30-168 9 30-169 10 30-170 11 30-171 12 30-172 13 30-173 14 30-174 15 30-175 Ord. No. 1991-16 8-22-1991 (a) 28-130 (b) 28-130 (c) 28-131 (d) 28-132 Ord. No. 1991-17 8-22-1991 - 30-252 Ord. of 8-22-1991 8-22-1991 1 30-174 Ord. No. 1991-18 9-10-1991 1 18-6 Ord. No. 1991-19 9-10-1991 1 30-130 2 30-130 3 30-130 4 30-130 5 30-130 Ord. No. 1991-22 10-24-1991 - 14-1 Ord. No. 1992-01 1-14-1992 - 2-1 Ord. No. 1992-02 3-10-1992 - 30-256 Ord. No. 1991-06 4-28-1992 - 30-174 Ord. No. 1992-07 4-28-1992 - 30-242 Ord. No. 1992-13 7-28-1992 I 8-336 II 8-337 III 8-338 IV 8-339 V 8-340 Ord. No. 1992-11 8-11-1992 1 32-108-32-110 2 32-159 Ord. No. 1992-12 9-29-1992 - 14-62-14-64 Ord. No. 1992-20 10-27-1992 - 32-12 Ord. No. 1992-22 11-24-1992 - 20-14 Ord. No. 1992-23 11-24-1992 - 30-11 Ord. No. 1993-08 4-13-1993 - 32-12 Ord. No. 1993-29 8-10-1993 - 30-256 Ord. No. 1993-36 10-12-1993 - 30-103 Ord. No. 1993-39 10-12-1993 - 16-8 Ord. No. 1994-07 2-8-1994 - 30-239 Ord. No. 1994-30 6-28-1994 - 30-251 Ord. No. 1994-31 6-28-1994 - 30-253 Ord. No. 1994-33 7-26-1994 - 10-3 - 10-5 Ord. No. 1994-43 10-25-1994 - 30-128 Ord. No. 1995-04 3-14-1995 - 2-62-2-68 Ord. No. 1995-10 4-11-1995 - 32-12 Ord. No. 1995-19 7-11-1995 - 32-10 Ord. No. 1995-28 8-29-1995 - 32-12 Ord. No. 1995-35 11-14-1995 - 20-17 Ord. No. 1995-37 11-28-1995 - 32-111 Ord. No. 1995-38 11-28-1995 - 32-113 Ord. No. 1995-39 11-28-1995 - 32-166 Ord. No. 1995-34 12-12-1995 - 2-81, 2-82 Ord. No. 1996-07 1-30-1996 - 2-42 Ord. No. 1996-42 10-29-1996 - 10-7 Ord. No. 1996-41 11-5-1996 - 10-6 Ord. No. 1996-45 12-10-1996 - 30-240 Ord. No. 1996-48 12-10-1996 - 30-107 Ord. No. 1996-49 12-10-1996 - 30-238 Ord. No. 1996-50 12-10-1996 - 30-243 Ord. No. 1996-51 12-10-1996 - 30-245 Ord. No. 1996-52 12-10-1996 - 30-247 Ord. No. 1996-53 12-10-1996 - 30-249 Ord. No. 1996-54 12-10-1996 - 30-250 Ord. No. 1996-57 12-10-1996 - 30-251 Ord. No. 1996-58 12-10-1996 - 30-255 Ord. No. 1996-59 12-10-1996 - 30-242 Ord. No. 1996-63 12-10-1996 - 30-1 Ord. No. 1997-05 2-25-1997 1 30-256 2 30-256 Ord. No. 1997-09 3-11-1997 - 32-110 Ord. No. 1997-10 3-11-1997 - 32-161 - 32-163 Ord. No. 1997-32 9-9-1997 - 1-7 Ord. No. 1997-34 9-9-1997 - 30-128 Ord. No. 1997-35 9-9-1997 - 30-103 Ord. No. 1997-39 9-30-1997 - 30-238 Ord. No. 1997-40 9-30-1997 - 30-243 Ord. No. 1997-41 9-30-1997 - 30-251 Ord. No. 1997-33 10-14-1997 - 8-52-8-54 - 8-56 Ord. No. 1998-01 1-13-1998 - 30-239 Ord. No. 1998-10 4-28-1998 - 32-190-32-193 Ord. No. 1998-15 4-28-1998 - 26-1-26-11 Ord. No. 1998-16 5-12-1998 - 32-111 Ord. No. 1998-23 6-9-1998 - 30-238 Ord. No. 1998-24 6-9-1998 - 20-14 Ord. No. 1998-30 6-30-1998 - 28-92-28-108 Ord. No. 2000-24 6-27-2000 1 8-369 2 8-370 3 8-371 4 8-372 5 8-373 6 8-374 Ord. No. 2000-28 6-27-2000 - 26-3 Ord. No. 2000-36 10-10-2000 - 22-1-22-5 Ord. No. 2000-44 11-28-2000 - 2-1 Ord. No. 2000-46 12-12-2000 - 16-9 Ord. No. 2001-32 8-4-2001 - 28-179 Ord. No. 2002-22 5-14-2002 1 UDO 4-32 Ord. No. 2002-21 7-9-2002 1 UDO 16-13 Ord. No. 2002-31 8-13-2002 - 22-6 Ord. No. 2002-30 10-8-2002 1 UDO 9-12 2 UDO 11-3 3 UDO 12-2 4 UDO 13-1 6 UDO 20-1 - UDO 14-20 Ord. No. 2002-35 10-8-2002 1 UDO 12-2 Ord. No. 2002-37 11-12-2002 - 30-251 Ord. No. 2003-02 1-14-2003 1 UDO 16-8 Ord. No. 2003-10 3-11-2003 - UDO 22-2-UDO 22-4 Ord. No. 2003-11 3-11-2003 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 14-34, UDO 14-35 Ord. No. 2003-15 3-11-2003 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2003-17 3-31-2003 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2003-23 5-13-2003 - 30-245 Ord. No. 2003-28 6-18-2003 1 UDO 2-2 - UDO 18-1-UDO 18-6 Ord. No. 2003-29 6-18-2003 1 UDO 13-1 Ord. No. 2003-34 6-18-2003 1 UDO 13-1 Ord. No. 2003-38 8-13-2003 1 UDO 14-9 2 UDO 14-9 Ord. No. 2003-41 11-20-2003 1 UDO 8-3 Ord. No. 2003-42 11-20-2003 - 10-2 - 10-5 Ord. No. 2003-45 11-20-2003 - 18-5 Ord. No. 2004-06 3-9-2004 1 UDO 20-3 Ord. No. 2004-05 4-22-2004 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 11-3 3 UDO 14-36 Ord. No. 2004-14 4-22-2004 1 16-37 2 16-38 3 16-39 4 16-40 5 16-41 6 16-42 Ord. No. 2004-31 8-10-2004 - 30-245 Ord. No. 2004-32 8-10-2004 - 30-239 Ord. No. 2004-33 9-14-2004 1 UDO 20-3 Ord. No. 2004-35 9-14-2004 - 8-55 Ord. No. 2004-44 12-14-2004 1 UDO 11-3 2 UDO 14-37 Ord. No. 2004-45 12-14-2004 - 30-238 Ord. No. 2004-39 1-11-2005 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2005-21 6-14-2005 - 30-278-30-291 Ord. No. 2005-22 6-14-2005 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 2-2 3 UDO 4-30 4 UDO 4-37 5 UDO 5-4 6 UDO 5-4 7 UDO 6-2 8 UDO 12-1 9 UDO 14-15 11 UDO 16-2 12 UDO 16-5 13 UDO 18-4 14 UDO 18-5 15 UDO 18-5 16 UDO 18-5 19 UDO 20-1 20 UDO 20-3 21 UDO 22-2, UDO 22-3 22 UDO 22-10 23 UDO 24-5 Ord. No. 2005-29 9-13-2005 - 32-12 Ord. No. 2005-39 11-1-2005 - 14-1 Ord. No. 2006-06 1-10-2006 - UDO 16-13 Ord. No. 2006-07 1-10-2006 1 UDO 1-2 2 UDO 1-4 3 UDO 1-13 4 UDO 2-2 5 UDO 2-2 6 UDO 4-20 7 UDO 5-3 8 UDO 10-2 9 UDO 24-3 10 UDO 24-4 11 UDO 24-5 12 UDO 24-8 Ord. No. 2006-24 4-12-2006 - 30-256 Ord. No. 2006-25 4-12-2006 - 20-11 Ord. No. 2006-31 4-12-2006 1 UDO 2-2 Ord. No. 2006-32 4-12-2006 1 UDO 2-2 Ord. No. 2006-33 4-12-2006 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 14-38 Ord. No. 2006-38 5-17-2006 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2006-40 6-13-2006 - 8-55 Ord. No. 2006-43 6-13-2006 - 30-242 Ord. No. 2006-44 6-13-2006 - 30-251 Ord. No. 2006-41 7-11-2006 1 UDO 11-3 2 UDO 14-26 Ord. No. 2006-61 9-19-2006 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2006-62 9-19-2006 1 UDO 12-2 Ord. No. 2006-63 9-19-2006 1 UDO 13-1 Ord. No. 2006-64 9-19-2006 1 UDO 4-29 - UDO 13-2 - UDO 24-3 Ord. No. 2006-71 9-19-2006 1 UDO 13-2 Ord. No. 2006-72 9-19-2006 1 UDO 20-1 Ord. No. 2006-73 9-19-2006 1 UDO 12-2 Ord. No. 2006-73 9-19-2006 2 UDO 12-2 Ord. No. 2007-09 2-13-2007 1 UDO 9-12 2 UDO 9-12 3 UDO 9-12 4 UDO 9-12 5 UDO 11-3 6 UDO 11-3 7 UDO 11-3 8 UDO 11-3 9 UDO 12-2 10 UDO 12-2 11 UDO 13-1 12 UDO 13-1 13 UDO 14-20 14 UDO 14-20 15 UDO 14-22 16 UDO 14-26 17 UDO 14-26 19 UDO 16-7 Ord. No. 2007-08 3-13-2007 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 2-2 3 UDO 13-2 Ord. No. 2007-10 3-13-2007 1.a. UDO 13-1 1.b. UDO 13-1 1.c. UDO 13-1 1.d. UDO 12-2, UDO 13-1 1.e. UDO 12-1, UDO 13-1 Ord. No. 2007-11 3-13-2007 1 UDO 14-39 2 UDO 14-39 Ord. No. 2007-13 3-13-2007 1 UDO 14-2 Ord. No. 2007-12 4-10-2007 1 UDO 10-2 2 UDO 10-2 3 UDO 10-2 4 UDO 10-2 5 UDO 10-2 6 UDO 10-2 Ord. No. 2007-15 4-10-2007 - 30-256 Ord. No. 2007-33 7-10-2007 - 30-243 Ord. No. 2007-34 7-10-2007 - 30-240 Ord. No. 2007-35 7-10-2007 - 30-256 Ord. No. 2007-36 7-10-2007 - 30-242 Ord. No. 2007-37 7-10-2007 - 30-251 Ord. No. 2007-38 7-10-2007 1 UDO 14-3 2 UDO 14-3 3 UDO 14-3 Ord. No. 2007-40 9-11-2007 1 UDO 12-1 2 UDO 12-1 3 UDO 13-2 4 UDO 13-2 9 UDO 20-3 10 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2007-42 9-11-2007 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 14-41 3 UDO 14-41 4 UDO 14-41 5 UDO 11-3 6 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2007-53 11-7-2007 1 UDO 4-32 Ord. No. 2007-50 12-11-2007 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 4-31 3 UDO 11-3 4 UDO 13-1 7 UDO 20-3 Ord. No. 2007-57 12-11-2007 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2008-02 1-8-2008 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 2-2 3 UDO 2-2 4 UDO 2-2 5 UDO 2-2 6 UDO 2-2 7 UDO 2-2 8 UDO 2-2 9 UDO 2-2 10 UDO 2-2 11 UDO 2-2 12 UDO 2-2 13 UDO 2-2 14 UDO 2-2 15 UDO 2-2 16 UDO 2-2 17 UDO 2-2 18 UDO 2-2 19 UDO 2-2 20 UDO 2-2 21 UDO 2-2 22 UDO 2-2 23 UDO 2-2 24 UDO 2-2 25 UDO 2-2 26 UDO 2-2 27 UDO 2-2 28 UDO 22-1 29 UDO 22-1 30 UDO 22-1 31 UDO 22-1 32 UDO 22-1 33 UDO 22-1 34 UDO 22-1 35 UDO 22-1 36 UDO 22-1 37 UDO 22-1 38 UDO 22-1 39 UDO 22-2 40 UDO 22-2 41 UDO 22-3 42 UDO 22-3 43 UDO 22-3 44 UDO 22-3 45 UDO 22-3 46 UDO 22-3 47 UDO 22-3 48 UDO 22-3 49 UDO 22-4 50 UDO 22-5 51 UDO 22-6 52 UDO 22-7 53 UDO 22-7 54 UDO 22-8 55 UDO 22-10 56 UDO 22-10 57 UDO 22-10 58 UDO 22-10 59 UDO 22-10 60 UDO 22-10 60 UDO 22-10 62 UDO 22-10 63 UDO 22-10 64 UDO 23-10 65 UDO 23-10 Ord. No. 2008-03 1-8-2008 - 30-1 - 30-103 - 30-117, 30-118 - 30-122, 30-123 Ord. No. 2008-27 6-10-2008 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 2-2 3 UDO 2-2 4 UDO 11-3 5 UDO 14-40 6 UDO 14-40 7 UDO 14-40 8 UDO 14-40 9 UDO 14-40 10 UDO 14-40 11 UDO 14-40 12 UDO 14-40 13 UDO 14-40 14 UDO 14-40 15 UDO 14-40 16 UDO 14-40 17 UDO 14-40 18 UDO 14-40 19 UDO 14-40 20 UDO 14-40 21 UDO 14-40 22 UDO 14-40 23 UDO 14-40 24 UDO 14-40 25 UDO 14-40 26 UDO 20-3 27 UDO 20-3 Ord. No. 2008-28 6-10-2008 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2008-26 7-8-2008 1 UDO 16-13 2 UDO 16-13 3 UDO 16-13 4 UDO 16-13 Ord. No. 2008-42 7-8-2008 - 28-167 Ord. No. 2008-52 10-7-2008 1 8-392 2 8-393 3 8-394 4 8-395 5 8-396 6 8-397 7 8-398 8 8-399 10 8-400 12 8-401 Ord. No. 2008-55 11-4-2008 2 UDO 4-29 3 UDO 4-29 4 UDO 12-1 5 UDO 4-29 6 UDO 4-32 Ord. No. 2008-56 11-4-2008 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 14-1 3 UDO 14-1 4 UDO 14-1 5 UDO 14-1 6 UDO 14-1 7 UDO 14-1 8 UDO 14-1 9 UDO 14-1 10 UDO 14-1 11 UDO 14-1 12 UDO 14-1 13 UDO 14-1 14 UDO 14-1 15 UDO 14-1 16 UDO 14-1 17 UDO 14-1 18 UDO 14-1 19 UDO 14-1 20 UDO 14-1 21 UDO 14-1 22 UDO 14-1 23 UDO 14-1 24 UDO 14-1 25 UDO 14-1 26 UDO 14-1 27 UDO 14-1 28 UDO 14-1 29 UDO 14-31 Ord. No. 2009-02 1-13-2009 1 UDO 1-7 2 UDO 2-2 3 UDO 2-2 4 UDO 2-2 5 UDO 2-2 6 UDO 2-2 7 UDO 2-2 8 UDO 2-2 9 UDO 4-29 10 UDO 4-29 11 UDO 10-2 12 UDO 10-2 13 UDO 10-2 14 UDO 11-3 15 UDO 12-1 16 UDO 12-1 17 UDO 14-6 18 UDO 14-38 Ord. No. 2009-07 3-10-2009 - 28-32 Ord. No. 2009-09 3-10-2009 - 30-64 Ord. No. 2009-16 5-12-2009 - 28-163-28-166 Ord. No. 2009-19 6-9-2009 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2009-21 6-9-2009 - 30-256 Ord. No. 2009-30 7-14-2009 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2009-35 8-11-2009 - 8-271 - 8-279 Ord. No. 2009-29 9-8-2009 1 UDO 14-42 2 UDO 14-42 3 UDO 14-42 Ord. No. 2009-38 9-8-2009 1 UDO 4-32 2 UDO 14-37 3 UDO 14-37 Ord. No. 2009-39 9-8-2009 1 UDO 11-3 2 UDO 14-43 Ord. No. 2009-40 9-8-2009 1 UDO 12-2 2 UDO 13-1 Ord. No. 2009-42 9-8-2009 - 4-32, 4-33 Ord. No. 2009-43 9-8-2009 - 30-256 Ord. No. 2009-41 10-13-2009 1 UDO 9-12 2 UDO 9-12 3 UDO 11-3 4 UDO 13-1 Ord. No. 2009-45 10-13-2009 1 UDO 22-7 Ord. No. 2010-03 1-25-2010 1 UDO 14-32 2 UDO 14-32 3 UDO 14-32 4 UDO 14-32 5 UDO 14-32 6 UDO 14-32 7 UDO 14-32 8 UDO 14-32 9 UDO 14-32 10 UDO 14-32 11 UDO 14-32 12 UDO 14-32 13 UDO 14-32 Ord. No. 2010-07 3-9-2010 1 UDO 10-2 2 UDO 13-1 3 UDO 13-1 4 UDO 13-1 5 UDO 13-1 6 UDO 13-1 8 UDO 18-5 9 UDO 22-7 10 UDO 2-2 11 UDO 2-2 12 UDO 2-2 13 UDO 9-11 14 UDO 9-11 15 UDO 11-3 16 UDO 14-6 17 UDO 14-14 18 UDO 14-14 19 UDO 14-14 20 UDO 14-14 21 UDO 14-14 22 UDO 14-14 23 UDO 14-14 24 UDO 14-14 25 UDO 14-14 26 UDO 14-14 27 UDO 14-14 28 UDO 14-14 29 UDO 14-14 31 UDO 14-15 33 UDO 20-3 34 UDO 20-3 35 UDO 23-7 Ord. No. 2010-08 3-9-2010 - 8-270 Ord. No. 2010-11 3-9-2010 - 32-110 Ord. No. 2010-14 4-13-2010 - 22-4 - 22-7 Ord. No. 2010-16 5-11-2010 1 UDO 14-14 Ord. No. 2010-30 7-13-2010 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2010-29 9-14-2010 -- 20-12 Ord. No. 2010-37 9-14-2010 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 2-2 3 UDO 2-2 4 UDO 2-2 5 UDO 2-2 6 UDO 2-2 7 UDO 2-2 8 UDO 2-2 9 UDO 2-2 10 UDO 2-2 11 UDO 2-2 12 UDO 11-3 13 UDO 11-3 14 UDO 11-3 15 UDO 11-3 16 UDO 11-3 17 UDO 11-3 18 UDO 11-3 19 UDO 11-3 20 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2010-41 9-14-2010 -- 30-243 Ord. No. 2010-43 12-14-2010 1 UDO 2-2 Ord. No. 2011-04 3-8-2011 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2011-08 3-8-2011 - 30-251 Ord. No. 2011-12 5-10-2011 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 2-2 3 UDO 11-3 4 UDO 12-2 5 UDO 12-2 10 UDO 16-3 11 UDO 16-5 Ord. No. 2011-20 7-12-2011 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2011-21 7-12-2011 1 UDO 4-29 2 UDO 4-29 3 UDO 4-29 4 UDO 12-1 5 UDO 13-2 6 UDO 24-3 Ord. No. 2011-22 8-9-2011 1 UDO 4-28, 4-29 2 UDO 4-29 Ord. No. 2011-24 10-11-2011 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 11-3 3 UDO 14-44 4 UDO 14-44 5 UDO 14-44 6 UDO 14-44 7 UDO 14-44 8 UDO 14-44 9 UDO 14-44 10 UDO 14-44 Ord. No. 2012-18 6-12-2012 - 30-244 Ord. No. 2012-20 6-12-2012 1 30-103 2 30-128 3 30-128 Ord. No. 2012-24 7-10-2012 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 9-13 3 UDO 9-13 4 UDO 9-13 5 UDO 11-1 6 UDO 11-3 7 UDO 11-3 8 UDO 11-3 9 UDO 11-3 10 UDO 11-3 11 UDO 11-3 12 UDO 11-3 13 UDO 11-3 14 UDO 11-3 15 UDO 11-3 16 UDO 11-3 17 UDO 11-3 18 UDO 11-3 19 UDO 11-3 20 UDO 13-1 21 UDO 13-1 22 UDO 14-12 23 UDO 14-12 24 UDO 14-15 25 UDO 14-35 Ord. No. 2012-29 7-10-2012 - 32-103 - 32-109 Ord. No. 2012-30 8-14-2012 - UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2012-31 8-14-2012 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 14-31 3 UDO 14-31 4 UDO 14-31 5 UDO 14-31 6 UDO 14-31 7 UDO 14-31 8 UDO 14-31 9 UDO 14-31 10 UDO 14-31 Ord. No. 2012-33 8-14-2012 - 32-12 Ord. No. 2012-34 8-14-2012 - 20-13 Ord. No. 2012-35 8-14-2012 - 30-240 Ord. No. 2012-32 9-11-2012 - 22-8 Ord. No. 2012-39 9-11-2012 8.210 8-209 8.211 8-210 8.212 8-211 8.213 8-212 8.214 8-213 8.215 8-214 8.217 8-215 8.218 8-216 8.221 8-243 8.222 8-244 - 8-86 - 8-116-8-122 - 8-143-8-148 - 8-180-8-185 Ord. No. 2012-41 10-9-2012 - 8-144 Ord. No. 2012-48 11-13-2012 1 UDO 14-1 Ord. No. 2012-43 12-11-2012 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 11-3 3 UDO 14-31 4 UDO 14-45 5 UDO 14-45 6 UDO 14-45 7 UDO 14-45 8 UDO 14-45 9 UDO 14-45 10 UDO 14-45 11 UDO 14-45 12 UDO 14-45 Ord. No. 2012-51 12-11-2012 1 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2012-52 12-11-2012 -- 30-244 Ord. No. 2013-07 2-12-2013 - 14-65 Ord. No. 2013-08 2-12-2013 - 14-66 Ord. No. 2013-09 2-12-2013 - 32-12 Ord. No. 2013-13 3-12-2013 1 UDO 12-2 2 UDO 12-2 3 UDO 12-2 4 UDO 12-2 5 UDO 12-2 6 UDO 12-2 7 UDO 12-2 8 UDO 12-2 9 UDO 12-2 10 UDO 12-2 11 UDO 12-2 12 UDO 12-2 13 UDO 12-2 14 UDO 12-2 15 UDO 12-2 16 UDO 12-2 17 UDO 12-2 18 UDO 12-2 19 UDO 12-2 20 UDO 12-2 21 UDO 12-2 22 UDO 12-2 23 UDO 12-2 24 UDO 12-2 25 UDO 12-2 26 UDO 12-2 27 UDO 12-2 28 UDO 12-2 29 UDO 12-2 30 UDO 12-2 31 UDO 12-2 Ord. No. 2013-21 6-11-2013 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 2-2 3 UDO 2-2 4 UDO 2-2 5 UDO 2-2 6 UDO 2-2 7 UDO 2-2 8 UDO 2-2 9 UDO 2-2 10 UDO 2-2 11 UDO 2-2 12 UDO 5-3 13 UDO 9-16 14 UDO 11-3 15 UDO 12-2 16 UDO 12-2 17 UDO 12-2 18 UDO 12-2 19 UDO 14-31 20 UDO 14-38 23 UDO 18-4 25 UDO 20-1 26 UDO 20-3 Ord. No. 2014-02 1-14-2014 1 UDO 11-3 2 UDO 2-2 Ord. No. 2014-03 1-14-2014 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 2-2 3 UDO 2-3 4 UDO 3-5 5 UDO 3-6 6 UDO 3-7 7 UDO 3-7 8 UDO 3-7 9 UDO 4-8 10 UDO 4-17 11 UDO 5-2 12 UDO 5-2 13 UDO 5-2 14 UDO 5-2 15 UDO 5-2 16 UDO 5-2 17 UDO 5-3 18 UDO 5-3 19 UDO 5-3 20 UDO 5-3 21 UDO 5-3 22 UDO 5-3 23 UDO 5-3 24 UDO 5-4 25 UDO 5-4 26 UDO 5-4 27 UDO 5-4 28 UDO 5-4 30 UDO 6-1 31 UDO 6-1 32 UDO 6-1 33 UDO 6-2 Ord. No. 2014-06 2-11-2014 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 11-3 3 UDO 20-3 Ord. No. 2014-07 2-11-2014 1 UDO 12-2 2 UDO 12-2 3 UDO 12-2 4 UDO 12-2 5 UDO 12-2 6 UDO 12-2 7 UDO 12-2 Ord. No. 2014-09 3-11-2014 - 18-7 Ord. No. 2014-11 4-8-2014 1 UDO 4-32 2 UDO 12-1 3 UDO 12-2 4 UDO 14-1 5 UDO 14-11 7 UDO 23-19 Ord. No. 2014-12 4-8-2014 1 UDO 22-3 Ord. No. 2014-16 5-13-2014 1 UDO 16-2 Ord. No. 2014-25 6-10-2014 1 UDO 14-9 Ord. No. 2014-28 7-8-2014 - 20-4 Ord. No. 2014-29 9-9-2014 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2014-34 9-9-2014 - 8-120 Ord. No. 2015-01 2-10-2015 - UDO 11-3 - UDO 14-20 Ord. No. 2015-05 2-10-2015 - 32-149 Ord. No. 2015-18 6-9-2015 1 UDO 14-31 2 UDO 14-31 3 UDO 14-31 4 UDO 14-31 5 UDO 14-31 6 UDO 14-31 7 UDO 14-31 8 UDO 14-31 9 UDO 14-31 10 UDO 14-31 11 UDO 14-31 12 UDO 14-31 13 UDO 14-31 14 UDO 14-31 15 UDO 14-31 16 UDO 14-31 17 UDO 14-31 18 UDO 14-31 19 UDO 14-31 20 UDO 14-31 21 UDO 14-31 22 UDO 14-31 23 UDO 14-31 Ord. No. 2015-19 6-9-2015 1 UDO 12-2 2 UDO 12-2 3 UDO 12-2 4 UDO 12-2 5 UDO 12-2 6 UDO 12-2 7 UDO 12-2 8 UDO 12-2 9 UDO 12-2 10 UDO 12-2 Ord. No. 2015-24 7-14-2015 - 30-247 Ord. No. 2015-26 8-11-2015 - 30-247 Ord. No. 2015-39 11-10-2015 10-20.B 28-168 10-25 28-173 Ord. No. 2016-02 1-12-2016 - 32-111 Ord. No. 2016-13 5-10-2016 - 8-86 - 8-181 - 8-213 Ord. No. 2016-15 5-10-2016 - 4-40 Ord. No. 2016-22 7-12-2016 - UDO 2-2 - UDO 19-1-UDO 19-24 Ord. No. 2016-31 10-11-2016 - 2-44 Ord. No. 2017-05 1-10-2017 - 30-256 Ord. No. 2017-06 2-14-2017 - UDO 11-3 Ord. No. 2017-20 6-13-2017 - UDO 2-2 - UDO 4-32 - UDO 12-1 - UDO 13-4 - UDO 15-1-UDO 15-8 Ord. No. 2017-28 7-12-2017 - 8-431 Ord. No. 2017-O-29 9-12-2017 1       Added App. VII, [185] Ord. No. 2017-O-32 10-10-2017 Adopt. Ord., pg. x Ord. No. 2017-O-33 10-10-2017 1 UDO 11-1 2       Added UDO 14-46 3-10       Added UDO 14-46.1(A)-(G) Ord. No. 2017-O-34 10-10-2017 -       Rpld 32-12 -       Added 32-12 Ord. No. 2017-O-37 1-10-2018 1       Added App. VII,[186] Ord. No. 2018-O-01  3-13-2018 1       Added App. VII, [187] Ord. No. 2018-O-02  3-13-2018 1 UDO 11-1 2 12-2.4(C) 3 UDO 13-1 Ord. No. 2018-O-03  3-13-2018 1-4       Added UDO 2-2.76.1(A)-(C) 5 UDO 11-1 Ord. No. 2018-O-09  6-18-2018 1       Added UDO 2-2.48.1 2 UDO 2-2.98 3       Added UDO 2-2.98.1 4       Added UDO 2-232.1 5 UDO 14-1.1(C) 6 UDO 14-1.2(C) 7       Added UDO 14-1.2(D) 8 UDO 14-1.3(C) 9 UDO 14-1.3(D)(1) 10 UDO14-1.3(E)(1) 11       Added UDO 14-1.3(F)       Rnbd UDO 14-1.3(F)       as UDO 14-1.3(G) 12       Added UDO18-5.2(I) Ord. No. 2018-O-10  6-18-2018 - 30-256(c) -       Rpld 30-256(e)(6), (8), (9) Ord. No. 2018-O-12 8-14-2018 1       Added App. VII,[188] Ord. No. 2018-O-13 8-14-2018 1       Added App. VII,[189] Ord. No. 2018-O-15  8-14-2018 1 UDO 4-30 2 UDO 4-30.1 3 UDO 4-30.2(A) 4       Added UDO 4-30.2(A)(1) 5       Added UDO 4-30.2(A)(2) 6       Added UDO 4-30.2(A)(3) 7 UDO 4-30.2(B) 8 UDO 4-30.2(C) 9 UDO 4-30.2(D) 10       Added UDO 12-1.1(F) 11 UDO 2-2.82 Ord. No. 2018-O-17 11-13-2018 UDO 14-6 Ord. No. 2018-O-22 12-11-2018 1       Added 2-2.67.5 2 UDO 11-1 (table) 3       Added UDO 20-3.2(Q)       Rnbd UDO 20-3.2(Q)-(Y)       as UDO 20-3.2(R)-(Z) Ord. No. 2018-O-23 12-11-2018       Added 30-292-30-296 Ord. No. 2019-O-01  2-12-2019 1       Added App. VII,[190] Ord. No. 2019-O-07  4- 9-2019 1 UDO 2-2 2 UDO 11-1 (table) 3       Added UDO 14-47 4       Added UDO 14-47.1 5       Added UDO 14-47.2 Ord. No. 2019-O-08  4- 9-2019 1       Added UDO 11-3.3 2       Added UDO 14-48 Ord. No. 2019-O-09  4- 9-2019 30-293(a) 30-295(a), (e)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the North Carolina General Statutes. 
G.S. 
Section Section 

this Code 1-46 et seq. Char. Art. XI 1-539 Ch. 16 (note) 1-539.16 Char. § 11.1 1-593 1-2 1A-1, rule 6(a) 1-2 ch. 7A UDO § 18-4 7A-227 S.L. 2005-305 - UDO § 23-25 - UDO § 23-26 7A-228 S.L. 2005-305 - UDO § 23-25 - UDO § 23-26 12-3 1-2 ch. 14 Ch. 20 (note) 14-4 1-7 - 12-3 - 16-8 - Ch. 20 (note) - 20-12 - 28-167 - 32-193 - UDO § 23-1 - UDO § 23-24 14-4-1 8-56 14-28 et seq. 20-3 14-34.1 20-4 14-34.2 4-5 - 20-1 14-58 14-31 14-68 Ch. 14 (note) 14-113.8(1a) 20-12 14-127 20-9 14-132 20-9 14-132.1 20-6 14-136 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 14-144 20-9 14-146 20-9 14-148 Ch. 10 (note) 14-149 Ch. 10 (note) 14-151 et seq. 20-9 14-159 20-9 14-160 20-9 14-190.1 8-22 - 20-5 14-202.10 UDO § 2-2 14-221 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 14-234 Ch. 2 (note) 14-269 20-4 14-288.1 et seq. 20-3 14-288.4 20-3 - 20-8 14-318 Ch. 14 (note) 14-360 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 14-366 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 14-399 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) - 26-9 14-399 28-178 14-401.13 8-53 15-27.2 Ch. 6 (note) - 16-41 - UDO § 23-26 15A-401 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 15A-501 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 18B-101(9) 20-17 18B-101(12a) UDO § 12-2 18B-101(15) 20-17 18B-300(c) 20-17 18B-401 Ch. 8, Art. IV 18B-1001 8-431 - UDO § 12-2 ch. 19A Ch. 4 (note) 19A-36 4-5 19A-45 et seq. 4-5 ch. 20 8-184 - 8-271 - Ch. 30 (note) 20-4.01 8-271 - 30-1 20-4.01(12b) 30-293 20-4.01(32) 30-130 20-10 Ch. 8, Art. IV 20-37 Ch. 8, Art. IV 20-77 UDO § 2-2 20-87 Ch. 8, Art. IV 20-122 et seq. 30-70 20-123 Ch. 8, Art. V 20-125 30-68 20-130.2 8-274 20-134 30-110 20-138.1 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) - Ch. 30, Art. III 20-140.4 30-10 20-141 30-71 20-153 30-62 20-154 30-294 20-156 30-4 20-157 Ch. 14, Art. II - 14-35 - 14-37 - 20-10 20-161 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. IV 20-162 30-122 20-168 30-2 20-169 Ch. 30 (note) - Ch. 30, Art. II 20-171 30-3 20-171.1 et seq. 30-8 20-176 30-103 20-201 Ch. 8, Art. IV 20-219.11 UDO § 22-10 20-280 Ch. 8, Art. IV - 8-122 25A-38 8-53 25A-45 8-53 42-29 S.L. 2005-305 - UDO § 23-25 - UDO § 23-26 42-30 S.L. 2005-305 - UDO § 23-25 - UDO § 23-26 44A-2(d) 30-129 47-30 UDO § 4-28 - UDO § 4-29 50B-1 UDO § 2-2 58-27.20 et seq. 4-5 60-4 Ch. 6 (note) ch. 62 Ch. 32 (note) 62-260 8-86 ch. 65 Ch. 10 (note) - UDO § 14-8 65-37 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) ch. 66 Ch. 8 (note) ch. 67 Ch. 4 (note) 67-2 4-35 67-12 4-35 67-30 et seq. 4-5 ch. 68 Ch. 4 (note) 68-15 4-2 ch. 69 Ch. 14 (note) 69-1 14-31 69-1 et seq. 14-29 69-2 14-31 69-4 14-32 69-8 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 69-26 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 69-39 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) - Ch. 14, Art. II 69-39 14-33 69-40 Ch. 14 (note) - 14-30 ch. 74D Ch. 8, Art. VI - 8-308 - 8-311 - 8-314 ch. 75A Ch. 22 (note) ch. 75B Ch. 8 (note) ch. 79 Ch. 4 (note) 80-45 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) ch. 85B 8-54 ch. 87 Ch. 6 (note) ch. 90, art. 5 28-130 90-5 28-130, 28-131 ch. 93 Char. § 7.2 ch. 93B Ch. 8 (note) ch. 95 Ch. 8 (note) 103-4 8-267 104E-1 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) ch. 105 Ch. 8 (note) ch. 105, art. 5 8-399 105-103 et seq. UDO § 2-2 105-163.010 8-394 105-164.3(17) 8-392 105-187.1(3) 8-392 105-187.1(7) 8-392 ch. 106 Ch. 4 (note) 106-50.28 et seq. 16-6 106-655 et seq. 16-6 113-127 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) 113A-100 et seq. UDO Art. 21 113A-113 et seq. 16-4 113A-117 UDO Art. 21 - UDO § 21-7 113A-120 UDO § 21-3 113A-120(a)(1)-(8) UDO § 21-3 113A-121 UDO § 21-3 113A-122 UDO § 21-5 113A-126 UDO § 21-6 115C-523 20-7 ch. 118 Ch. 14 (note) 121-34-121-42 UDO § 15-7 121-42 UDO § 15-7 122C-21 et seq. UDO § 2-2 128-16 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) ch. 130A Ch. 16 (note) - UDO § 14-8 130A-184 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 130A-185 4-34 130A-186 4-34 130A-189 4-34 130A-190 4-34 130A-192 4-35 130A-193 4-34 130A-194 4-35 130A-227 16-4 130A-230 et seq. 16-5 130A-247 UDO § 12-2 130A-251 et seq. 16-2 130A-258 16-2 130A-290 et seq. Ch. 26 130A-290(a)(6) UDO § 2-2 130A-311 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 130A-333 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 130A-390 10-2 ch. 131A Ch. 16 (note) ch. 131E Ch. 16 (note) 132-1 8-371 ch. 133 Ch. 28 (note) ch. 136 Ch. 28 (note) ch. 136, art. 2A UDO § 16-13 136-18.3 Ch. 26 (note) 136-91 Ch. 26 (note) 136-93 Ch. 28, Art. III 136-102.6 UDO § 16-2 136-131.2 UDO § 19-3 136-141 et seq. 30-174 - UDO § 22-10 136-143 30-174 - UDO § 22-10 143-128 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II - Ch. 6 (note) 143-136 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 143-143.8 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 143-143.15 UDO § 18-5 143-151.8 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 143-151.26 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 143-211 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 143-215.112 14-64 143-318.9 et seq. Char. § 3.6 - Ch. 2 (note) - UDO § 3-4 143-355 Ch. 32, Art. V 143B-311 et seq. Ch. 22 144-202.10 UDO § 14-28 153A-344.1 UDO § 4-37 ch. 158, ch. 159 Ch. 2 (note) ch. 159 Ch. 2, Art. II 159-2 1-2 159-7 et seq. Char. § 7.1 - UDO § 3-4 159-24 et seq. 2-6 159-25 2-7 159-31 2-39 159-80 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) ch. 160, art. 9 Char. § 10.1 160-402 Char. § 7.3 160-452 App. VII ch. 160A Char. § 1.2 - Ch. 2 (note) ch. 160A, art. 10 UDO § 23-22 ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 3A UDO § 12-1 ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 5 UDO § 23-26 ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 6 6-5 - UDO § 23-2 160A-1 et seq. Char. (note) 160A-3 Char. § 3.5 160A-5 Char. § 7.3 - Char. § 10.1 160A-11 et seq. Char. § 1.1 160A-12 Char. § 1.3 160A-21 et seq. Char. § 2.1 160A-29 et seq. Char. § 2.2 - App. VII (note) 160A-31 UDO § 4-37 - App. VII 160A-58 App. VII 160A-58.1 UDO § 4-37 - App. VII 160A-58.1(b)(5) S.L. 1997-219 160A-58.2 App. VII 160A-58.4 S.L. 1997-219 160A-60 Char. § 6.7 - 14-23 160A-61 Char. § 3.5 160A-63 Char. § 3.3 160A-67 Ch. 2 (note) - 2-2 160A-69 Char. § 3.2 - 2-3 160A-70 Char. § 3.2 160A-71 Char. § 3.6 - 2-1 160A-74 Char. § 3.7 160A-75 et seq. Char. § 3.8 160A-76 Ch. 6 (note) - Ch. 32 (note) 160A-77 1-1 - 1-4 - 1-8 160A-78 1-1 160A-79 1-1 160A-83 Ch. 2, Art. III 160A-101 Char. § 6.6 160A-106 Char. § 6.6 160A-146 Ch. 2 160A-78, 160A-79 1-1 160A-147 Char. § 6.6 160A-148(1)-(8) Char. § 6.8 160A-162, 160A-163 Ch. 2 (note) 160A-163 Ch. 14 (note) 160A-164 Ch. 2 (note) 160A-167 Char. § 5.1 - 4-5 160A-171 2-5 160A-173 Char. § 5.1 160A-174 1-1 - Ch. 2 (note) - 14-1 - Ch. 20 (note) - UDO § 1-2 160A-174 et seq. Char. § 1.2 - Char. § 3.8 160A-175 1-7 - 8-56 - 8-340 - 32-193 - UDO § 22-1 160A-175(c) 8-243 160A-176 Char. § 9.2 - Ch. 1 (note) - Ch. 32 (note) 160A-178 Ch. 8, Art. III 160A-181 Ch. 8 (note) 160A-182 Ch. 4 (note) 160A-183 Ch. 14 (note) 160A-184 20-13 160A-185 Ch. 32 (note) 160A-186 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 160A-186 4-2 160A-188 4-1 160A-191 Ch. 8 (note) 160A-192 Ch. 26 (note) 160A-193 S.L. 1997-219 - 14-1 - Ch. 16 (note) - 16-42 - Ch. 26 (note) - Ch. 30, Art. V - Ch. 32 (note) - UDO § 22-9 - UDO § 22-10 160A-194 Ch. 6 (note) - Ch. 8 (note) - 14-1 160A-200 1-2 160A-206 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 160A-208.1 8-395 160A-209 Char. § 7.3 160A-212 Ch. 4 (note) - 4-33 160A-215.1(l) 8-374 160A-215.2 8-400 160A-215.2(a)(1) 8-392 160A-215.2(a)(2) 8-392 160A-215.2(b) 8-398 160A-215.2(d) 8-399 160A-216 et seq. Char. § 10.1 - Ch. 28 (note) - Ch. 32 (note) - UDO § 23-22 160A-216-160A-237 32-168 160A-217 28-31 160A-217-160A-236 32-115 160A-223-160A-229 28-36 160A-251.1 8-369 160A-265 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 160A-265-160-280 Char. Art. VIII 160A-281 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 160A-282 18-5 160A-283 UDO § 24-4 160A-285 18-4 160A-291 14-23 160A-291 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 160A-292 Ch. 14, Art. II 160A-293 Ch. 14 (note) - 14-30 160A-296 14-1 - 28-31 - Ch. 32 (note) 160A-296 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) 160A-300 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 160A-300 14-1 160A-300.1 Ch. 30 (note) 160A-303 Ch. 30, Art. V - 30-162 - UDO § 2-2 - UDO § 22-10 160A-303(b) 30-126 160A-303(f) 30-129 160A-303.1 Ch. 26 (note) 160A-303.2 Ch. 30, Art. V - 30-162 - UDO § 2-2 - UDO § 22-10 160A-304 Ch. 8, Art. IV 160A-311 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) 160A-317 32-5 160A-317(b) Ch. 26 (note) 160A-319 Ch. 32 (note) 160A-340 et seq. UDO § 3-1 160A-341 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 160A-349.1 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 160A-350 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) 160A-353, 160A-354 Ch. 22 (note) 160A-360 S.L. 1997-219 - UDO § 1-3 - UDO § 3-4 160A-361 UDO (note) - UDO § 3-1 160A-362 UDO § 3-4 160A-363 UDO (note) - UDO § 1-2 160A-364 UDO § 4-35 - UDO Art. 24 160A-371 UDO (note) 160A-371 et seq. 1-8 160A-372 UDO § 4-22 160A-374 UDO § 4-21 160A-381 UDO (note) 160A-384(c) UDO § 24-5 160A-385 UDO § 3-4 - UDO Art. 24 - UDO § 24-8 160A-385.1 UDO § 2-2 - UDO § 4-33- 
UDO § 4-38 160A-387 UDO (note) - UDO § 3-4 160A-388 UDO (note) 160A-393(d) UDO § 5-2 160A-400.14(a) S.L. 2005-305 160A-400.50 et seq. UDO § 14-48 160A-400.50- 
160A-400.53 UDO § 14-45 160A-400.50- 
160A-400.57 UDO § 14-48 160A-411 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 160A-411.1 6-5 160A-412 6-5 160A-418 UDO § 4-36 160A-422 UDO § 4-36 160A-435 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 160A-439 UDO § 23-26 160A-441 S.L. 2005-305 - UDO § 23-2 160A-441 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 160A-443 S.L. 2005-305 - UDO § 23-19 160A-444 UDO § 23-2 160A-446(f) UDO § 23-19 - UDO § 23-26 160A-451 et seq. UDO § 3-8 160A-452 UDO § 3-9 160A-460 et seq. UDO § 3-1 160A-485 Char. Art. XI 160A-493 Ch. 4 (note) 160A-500 et seq. UDO § 3-4 ch. 163 Ch. 2 (note) 163-54 et seq. Char. § 4.5 163-279 et seq. Char. § 4.5 163-279 Char. § 4.1 163-292 Char. § 4.2 - 2-9 164-1 1-2 164-7 1-8 166A-19 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 166A-19.15 Ch. 12 (note) 166A-19.22 Ch. 12 (note) 166A-19.31 Ch. 12 (note) 166A-288.20A Ch. 12 (note) 168-21(2) UDO § 2-2 219-11 30-169  
